L1 .1 Introduction: Möbius syndrome (MBS) is a rare congenital neurological dis- Chromosome conformation and long-distance gene regulation order characterized by facial and abducens nerve paralysis. Additional con- N. Benabdallah1, S. Bhatia1, I. Williamson1, W. Bickmore2; genital anomalies are frequently associated. The etiology of this syndrome 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, IGMM, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, has been intensely debated and both teratogenic factors and genetic causes 2Edinburgh, United Kingdom. have been suggested. However, despite numerous clinical and molecular investigations since the description of the first patients in 1880 it has re- mained elusive. Long-range gene regulation first became apparent in mammalian genomes Material and Methods: We hypothesized that de novo mutations contribute through Mendelian disease genetics associated with extreme phenotypes to the MBS phenotype and therefore performed exome sequencing in eight in human, and developmental genetics in the mouse. It is now appreciated isolated MBS patients. All identified de novo variants were subsequently se- that long-range enhancers - found as far away as 1 megabase from their tar- quenced in a cohort of 103 MBS patients. The role of two candidate genes in get gene and located either in intergenic regions or in introns - are key in MBS was addressed by morphological analysis of the knockout mouse brain. controlling the precise spatial and temporal expression of genes. Deletion, Results: We report de novo mutations in two different genes PLXND1 and translocation or point mutations can abrogate the function of these ele- REV3L. Analysis of the Plxnd1 and Rev3l-knockout mice detected neuro- ments in Rare Disease. However, the majority of human genetic variation pathological findings similar to those found in MBS. Strikingly, both mouse associated with common and complex disease and quantitative traits also models exhibited a reduced number of motoneurons in the facial motor nu- maps to intergenic regions that are likely the site of enhancers. Therefore, cleus, caused by defective neural migration in the Plxnd1-mutant mice or lessons learnt from studying enhancer dysfunction in rare disease will be disrupted cellular proliferation in Rev3l-heterozygous mice. Conclusions: important for an understanding of milder phenotypes. Our study establishs for the first time a genetic cause for MBS. We show It is hard to envisage how distant enhancers function if one only considers morphological alterations in Plxnd1 and Rev3l mutant mouse models simi- the genome as a linear DNA sequence. Rather, three-dimensional chromatin lar to MBS patients clinical features. Although PLXND1 and REV3L are invol- folding must play a fundamental role in enhancer-promoter communication. ved in different pathways a protein defect of any of them result in a decrease I will describe our work using different experimental approaches to investi- of the number of motoneurons in the facial motor nucleus. gate the three-dimensional folding of the mammalian genome at genetically P
L2 .2 defined long-range regulatory elements important in development. Beyond the ACMG 56: Parental choices and initial results from a P
L1 .2 comprehensive WGS-based search for predictive secondary variants Deciphering Developmental Disorders in children M. Hurles; M. S. Meyn1,2, N. Monfared1, C. Marshall1, D. Merico1, D. J. Stavropoulos1,2, R. Z. Cambridge, United Kingdom. Hayeems1,2, M. Szego3,2, R. Jobling1, M. Gardia2,1, G. D. Bader2, M. Brudno1,2, R. D. Cohn1,2, R. Zlotnik-Shaul1,2, C. Shuman1,2, P. N. Ray1,2, S. Bowdin1,2; 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3St. Joseph‘s Health Centre and St. Michael‘s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. P
L1 .3 To pilot the implementation of paediatric genomic medicine we developed Ribonucleotides embedded in genomic DNA the SickKids Genome Clinic, a multidisciplinary project supporting research A. Jackson; into clinical whole genome sequencing (WGS). The Genome Clinic conducts The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. diagnostic WGS for 150+ children/year who are undergoing genetic eva- luations. With parents’ permission, we search childrens’ genomes for se- condary medically-actionable variants (MAVs) in 2800+ disease genes listed Our identification of biallelic hypomorphic mutations in three RNase H2 in the NIH Clinical Genomic Database. genes in the neuroinflammatory disorder, Aicardi-Goutières syndrome Of 321 families approached to date, 54% agreed to participate. 58% of par- led us to investigate enzyme complex they encode. We subsequently esta- ticipants chose to learn their child‘s secondary adult-onset MAVs. Among blished this is an important genome surveillance enzyme that removes over these parents, 68% decided to learn their own status for the same risk vari- 1,000,000 ribonucleotides embedded in the genomic DNA of every repli- ants. Parents declining secondary variants were most concerned about psy- cating mammalian cell. Such ribonucleotides represent the most common chological burdens and/or insurance discrimination. non-canonical nucleotides incorporated into the genome by replicative Bioinformatics analysis of the first 80 patient genomes yielded 2382 candi- polymerases and are an important potential source of genome instability. date variants in 1117 genes that then underwent manual assessment (~30 Furthermore, we have now exploited embedded ribonucleotides as a tool variants/genome.) While ~15% were novel, the large majority of candida- to trace the respective contribution of DNA polymerases, developing the tes were listed in HGMD or ClinVar. Most variants listed in HGMD as disease- technique emRiboSeq, and use this to implicate replicative polymerases as a causing failed manual assessment. E.g., >80% of variants found in the 56 determinant of local nucleotide substitution rates at functionally important ACMG genes and listed in HGMD as disease causing were rejected due to sites, shaping the mutational landscape of the genome. inadequate evidence of pathogenicity. P
L2 .1 We identified 7 reportable variants in the 56 ACMG genes in our first 80 De novo mutations in PLXND1 and REV3L cause Möbius syndrome patients (~9%). By expanding our search to 2800+ genes we are finding L. Tomas Roca1,2, A. Tsaalbi-Shtylik3, J. G. Jansen3, M. K. Singh4,5, J. A. Epstein4, U. secondary MAVs in >25% of children, ~40% of which lie in genes for adult Altunoglu6, H. Verzijl7, L. Soria1, E. van Beusekom1, T. Roscioli8, Z. Iqbal1, C. Gilissen1, A. Hoischen9, A. P. M. de Brouwer1, C. Erasmus7, D. Schubert10, H. Brunner1,11, A. Pérez onset disorders. We conclude that parental opinions vary widely regarding Aytés12, F. Marin2, P. Aroca Tejedor2, H. Kayserili6, A. Carta13, N. de Wind3, G. W. Padberg7, return of secondary variants, children may harbour more secondary MAVs H. van Bokhoven1; than adults, and disease prevalence and imperfect variant interpretation 1Radboud University Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics, Donders constrain the number of reportable secondary MAVs. Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University of P
L2 .3 Murcia, Murcia, Spain, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Department of Cell & Developmental Biology and Spotlight on the pathogenesis of Kabuki syndrome Cardiovascular Institute, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Signature Research N. Bögershausen1, I. Tsai2, E. Pohl1, P. Simsek Kiper3, F. Beleggia1, F. E. Percin4, K. Keupp1, Program in Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disorders, Duke, Singapore, 6Medical A. Matchan5, E. Milz1, Y. Alanay6, H. Kayserili7, Y. Liu1, S. Banka8, A. Kranz9, M. Zenker10, Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, D. Wieczorek11, N. Elcioglu12, P. Prontera13, S. Lyonnet14, T. Meitinger15, F. Stewart9, D. 7Radboud university medical center, Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Donnai8, T. M. Strom15, K. Boduroglu3, G. Yigit1, Y. Li1, N. Katsanis16, B. Wollnik1; Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Garvan Institute of Medical 1University of Cologne, Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 2Duke University, Research, Sidney, Australia, 9Radboud university medical center, Department of Human Center for Human Disease Modeling, Durham, NC, United States, 3Hacetteppe University, Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, Netherlands, Ankara, Turkey, 4Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 5Oxford Gene 10Radboud university medical center, Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Technology, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 6Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Istanbul Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 11Maastricht University, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Department of Genetic Medicine, St Mary‘s Hospital, University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Maatricht, Netherlands, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre (MAHSC), University of Manchester, 12Dysmorphology and Reproductive Genetics Unit. Moebius syndrome Foundation of Manchester, United Kingdom, 9Genomics, BioInnovationsZentrum, Dresden University Spain. University Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 13Ophthalmology Unit, Department of of Technology, Dresden, Germany, 10University of Magdeburg, Institute of Human Biomedical, Biotechnological & Translational Sciences (S.Bi.Bi.T.), University of Parma, Genetics, Magdeburg, Germany, 11University of Essen, Institute of Human Genetics, Essen, Parma, Italy. Germany, 12Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, 13Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital and University of Perugia, Perugia, 4 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS PLENARY LECTURES Back to index Italy, 14Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, INSERM U781, Hoischen1, J. Shendure2, E. A. Boyle2, E. J. Kamping1, I. D. Nagtegaal1, B. B. J. Tops1, F. M. Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 15Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Nagengast1, A. Geurts van Kessel1, J. H. J. M. van Krieken1, R. P. Kuiper1, N. Hoogerbrugge1; Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 16Center for Human Disease Modeling and 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University of Washington, Department of Cell Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States. Seattle, WA, United States. KabKuMkTi 2syDn (dMroLm
L2 e) (KS) is a genetic disorder characterized by developmental Introduction: Patients diagnosed with adenomatous polyposis, i.e., the con- delay and multiple cKonDgMe6nAital anomalies. KS is caused primarily by mutations stitutive development of multiple colorectal adenomatous polyps, are at an in , a methyltransferase that promotes active transcription increased risk to dMeUveTlYoHp colorectal cancer (CRC). Currently, two adenoma- and, more rarely, in , a demethylase of the KMT2D complex. Although tAoPuCs polyposis-associated syndromes are known: familial adenomatous po- the functions of chromatin modifying proteins have been well studied, the lyposis (FAP) and -associated polyposis (MMAPU)T. YWHhereas monoallelic physiological systems regulated RbyA Pth1eAm are largely unknown. Usindge wnohvoo- germline mutations underlie FAP, MAP is caused by biallelic germline le exome sequencing we found a mutation conRveArPt1edB to homozygosity by mutations in the base excision repair (BER) gene . No other causati- uniparental isodisomy (UPD) in R iAnP a1 paRtAiePn1tA with KRSA, Pan1Bd a KMT2D ve genes have been identified and, therefore, a considerable fraction of ade- domKinDaMnt6 Amutation in the closely related gene ina second patient. nomatous polyposis patients remains unexplained We show that suppression of each of ( and ), RA
P1 , Materials and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing was applied to germline and leads to defectKivMe Tc2oDnvergent-exRtAePn1siBon (CE) movements and to DNA derived from 51 individuals (from 48 families) with multiple colonic context-depenkmdetn2td MAPK signaling dysfunction. We further show that adenomas. After candidate gene selection, co-segregation analyses were interacts genetically with and that expression is downregu- performed. The somaticA PmCutation spectrum of carcinomas and adenomas lated in both morphant zebrafish (zf) embryos and KMT2D deficient was determined by sequencing of 409 cancer-related genes and by targeted patient cells. Regarding the frequent skeletal abnormalities in KS, we de- deep-NseTqHuLe1n cing of the gene, respectively. monstrate that depletion of KS genes affects the layout oifn t vhiev opharyngeal Results: We identified a homozygous germline nonsense mutation in the BER skeleton in zf by disturbed F-actin polymerization and cell-cell intReArcPa1laAtion. gene in seven affected individuals from three unrelated families. All IRnAtPer1eBstingly, the CE and skeletal defects could be rescued by a small three families showed recessive inheritance of the adenomatous polyposis molecule MAPK inhibitor. Taken together, this study (i) identifies and phenotype, which was consistently and exclusively encountered in homozy- as two novel genes for KS, (ii) reveals the first evidence that defective gous carriers, indicating a high-penetrant predisposing effect. In controls, MEK-ERK signaling is a common molecular driver for KS, (iii) suggests that this germline mutation was only found in a heterozygous state (MAF 0.0036, KGSra ins tas member of the RASopathy spectrum, and (iv) provides a potential n=2,329). Sequence analysis of carcinomas and adenomas from different af- direction for treatment design. fected homozygous carriers revealed a non-hypermutated profile enriched for C-to-T transitions, in linNe TwHitLh1 a germline BER defect. BMBF: 01GM1211A, 01GM1109C, 01GM1211B; NIH: R01DK075972, Conclusions: We show for the first time that a homozygous loss-of-function 
P50 DK096415. germline mutation in the gene predisposes to a novel subtype of P
L2 .4 BER-associated adenomatous polyposis and CRC. Disruptions of topological chromatin domains cause pathogenic P
L2 .6 rewiring of gene-enhancer interactions The genetic handicap principle: a severely deleterious mutation can D. G. Lupiáñez1, K. Kraft1, V. Heinrich2, P. Krawitz1,2, F. Brancati3, E. Klopocki4, D. Horn5, be tolerated if the genome-wide mutation load is sufficiently low H. Kayserili6, J. Opitz7, R. Laxova7, F. Santos-Simarro8, B. Gilbert-Dussardier89, L. Wittler1, K. Popadin1, S. Peischl2, R. Sailani3, A. Letourneau1, F. Santoni1, M. Garieri1, S. Nikolaev1, M. Borschiwer1, S. Haas1, M. Osterwalder10, M. Franke1, B. Timmermann1, J. Hecht1,11, M. D. Meyer4, L. Excoffier2, S. Antonarakis1; Spielmann1,5,11, A. Visel10,12,13, S. Mundlos1,5,11; 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute of 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2 Institute for Medical and Ecology and Evolution, Bern, Switzerland, 3Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Medical Genetics United States, 4University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paolo, Brazil. Unit, Policlinico Tor Vergata University Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Julius Maximilian University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 5Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Department Every human genome harbors hundreds of slightly-deleterious mutations. of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, Even though most of these mutations have each a small effect, their cumu- 8Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario lative effect (mutation load) could substantially reduce the fitness of an in- La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 9Service de Génétique, C.H.U. de Poitiers, Poitiers, France, dividual. Here we investigate an interaction between a severely deleterious 10Genomics Division, MS 84-171, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, mutation and the mutation load, formulating the genetic handicap principle: United States, 11Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité an individual bearing a severely deleterious variant (genetic handicap) is Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 12U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome viable only if the genome-wide mutation load is sufficiently low. We deve- Institute, Walnut Creek, CA, United States, 13School of Natural Sciences, University of lop a population-genetic model, which predicts that live-born individuals California, Merced, CA, United States. carrying a handicap mutation (causing, for example, 50-90% probability of miscarriage) show a reduction (5-20%) in their number of slightly-delete- rious mutations as compared to controls. To test this prediction, we used Mammalian genomes are organized into megabase-scale topologically as- data on trisomy of chromosome 21 (T21), a frequent chromosomal abnor- sociated domains (TADs) that have been proposed to partition the genome mality in humans which is associated with high miscarriage rates. Three evi- into large regulatory units. Here we demonstrate that the disruption of TAD dences support the view that live-born T21 individuals have lower mutation structure can cause rewiring of functional interactions between genes and load than the euploid population: (i) there is a deficit of homozygotes for distant-acting enhancers, resulting in pathogenic phenotypes in humans rare derived alleles in the T21 cohort (N=338); (ii) the T21 cohort shows on and mice. We show that distinct limb malformations in human patients are chromosome 21 a deficit of gain-of-expression and an excess of loss-of-ex- caused by deletions, inversions or duplications altering the structure of the pression regulatory variants that can partially compensate the effect of tri- extended WNT6/IHH/EPHA4/PAX3 locus. To examine these variants in de- somy; (iii) inter-individual whole-transcriptome variation in fibroblasts of tail, we adapted CRISPR genome editing to generate mice with correspon- the live-born T21 individuals (N=8) is lower than it is in the control cohort ding large rearrangements. 4C-seq in mouse limb tissue and patient-derived (N=8), reflecting potential selection against T21 fetuses with non-optimal fibroblasts showed that the structural changes result in ectopic interactions pattern of expression. We conclude that the negative fitness consequences between promoters and non-coding DNA across adjacent TADs. On the di- of severe mutations such as trisomy can be partially compensated by a re- sease alleles, a cluster of limb enhancers normally associated with Epha4 is duced mutation load. misplaced relative to TAD boundaries, causing it to interact with and drive ectopic limb expression of Wnt6, Ihh or Pax3, respectively. Taken together, P
L3 .5 our results demonstrate the critical importance of TADs for the functional Should clinical geneticists have their genome sequenced during their orchestration of the genome in vivo and support their utility in predicting training? Of course not! the pathogenicity of human structural variants. Gijs W. Santen; Leiden, Netherlands P
L2 .5 A germline homozygous loss-of-function mutation in the base excision repair gene NTH
L1  causes adenomatous polyposis and colorectal Even asking the question whether clinical geneticists should have their ge- cancer nome sequenced would seem odd to any medical doctor: indeed, do we ask R. D. A. Weren1, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, C. M. Kets1, R. M. de Voer1, E. T. P. Verwiel1, L. Spruijt1, W. A. G. van Zelst-Stams1, M. C. Jongmans1, C. Gilissen1, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, A. of gastroenterologists to undergo a colonoscopy during their training? Do anesthesiologist undergo anesthesia? Do radiologists undergo total-body ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 5 MRI’s? However, there is an exception: psychoanalysts do have to undergoABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index SYMPOSIA a 3-year ‘training analysis’ during their training. One can imagine that opti- 
S01 .1 mal psychoanalysis does depend on having an in-depth knowledge of your Integrative analysis of 80,000 whole exome sequencing and the own psychological complexions and reactions to those of others. So the real Human Knock-out Project question is perhaps whether a clinical geneticist is more comparable to a D. McArthur; surgeon or a psychoanalysist. Does it help counseling a patient when you Boston, MA, United States. have in-depth knowledge of your own genome and the process that got you this knowledge? An argument in favor of asking geneticists to sequence their own geno- No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ me would be that personal understanding of the process that patients go abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. through will improve counseling skill. However, there are important diffe- 
S01 .2 rences between genome sequencing of patients and healthy individuals, Identification of a large set of rare complete human knockouts such as ourselves. In patients, we know that genome sequencing can be an P. Sulem; efficient method to determine the genetic cause of an illness, which has im- Reykjavik, Iceland. plications for the patients themselves and their family. Indeed, that is the whole point! Yes, there is a risk of incidental findings but for most patients the risk-benefit ratio is acceptable. This is a different prospect than to ask No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ a healthy individual to have their genome sequenced: what is the benefit abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. that can be expected? To illustrate this, I have asked my Dutch peers who 
S01 .3 would have their genome sequenced, and the response was overwhelmingly SISu project: 200,000 near complete sequences of Finns negative. I think this reflects that we realize that at this point in time not A. Palotie; much can be learned from the genome that would have major implications Helsinki, Finland. on our health, in the absence of symptoms in ourselves and a positive family history. There are also practical objections that could be raised. First of all: the law. No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ In the Netherlands at least, offering screening is bound to very strict laws abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. and therefore sequencing a healthy person’s genome might well be conside- 
S02 .1 red illegal! Cost is another one, but with sharply decreasing genome prices Whole genome sequencing in newborn screening? A Statement on the this may not be the most important hurdle. However, the data would have to continued importance of targeted approaches in newborn screening be interpreted as well, and psychosocial counseling should be available for programmes the geneticists who undergo sequencing. And who would analyze the data? H. C. Howard1, B. M. Knoppers2, M. C. Cornel3, E. Wright Clayton4, K. Sénécal5, P. Borry6, Can I ask my dear colleagues to look at my genome data but to withhold European Society of Human Genetics, the 
P3 G International Paediatric Platform, the information on late-onset untreatable disorders? And what if they find un- Human Genome Organisation, the PHG Foundation; classified variants in colon cancer genes? ‘How are you doing?’ coming from 1Centre for Research Ethics and Bioethics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, the person who analyzed your data will never sound the same again! 2Department of Human Genetics, Centre of Genomics and PolicyMcGill University, In conclusion, although I do not believe all geneticists should have their ge- Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Department of Clinical Genetics and EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Center nome sequenced during their training, I do think it might be interesting to for Biomedical Ethics and Society, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States, start a pilot to offer this to a few of us, monitor the consequences and the 5Department of Human Genetics, Centre of Genomics and Policy, McGill University, costs. But I am not sure I would volunteer⋯ Montreal, QC, Canada, 6Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of P
L4 .1 Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. The neurexin enigma - from synapse formation to schizophrenia T. Südhof; Stanford, CA, United States. The advent and refinement of sequencing technologies has resulted in a decrease in both the cost and time needed to generate data on the entire sequence of the human genome. This has increased the accessibility of using No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ whole-genome sequencing and whole-exome sequencing approaches for abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. analysis in both the research and clinical contexts. The expectation is that P
L5 .1 more services based on these and other high-throughput technologies will ESHG Award Lecture become available to patients and the wider population. Some authors pre- S. Pääbo; dict that sequencing will be performed once in a lifetime, namely, shortly Leipzig, Germany. after birth. The Public and Professional Policy Committee of the European Society of Human Genetics, the Human Genome Organisation Committee on Ethics, Law and Society, the PHG Foundation and the 
P3 G International No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ Paediatric Platform address herein the important issues and challenges sur- abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. rounding the potential use of sequencing technologies in publicly funded newborn screening (NBS) programmes. This statement presents the rele- vant issues and culminates in a set of recommendations to help inform and guide scientists and clinicians, as well as policy makers regarding the ne- cessary considerations for the use of genome-sequencing technologies and approaches in NBS programmes. The primary objective of NBS should be the targeted analysis and identification of gene variants conferring a high risk of preventable or treatable conditions, for which treatment has to start in the newborn period or in early childhood. 
S02 .2 The 2014 ASHG Statement on Genetic testing in Children and Adolescence J. Botkin; Salt Lake City, UT, United States. No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. 6 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S02 .3 Carrier testing in children and adolescents S. A. Metcalfe; sity in childhood, adolescence and adult life. In addition there are risks of Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and The University of Melbourne, Parkville metabolic disturbance in childhood and young adulthood including glucose Victoria, Australia. intolerance, hypertension and dyslipidaemia. In a record-linkage study we demonstrated that maternal obesity is associated with increased risk of pre- mature mortality and hospital admissions for cardiovascular events in her There are a number of circumstances in which a child or adolescent may be adult offspring. Animal models suggest the adverse effects of maternal obe- identified, either unintentionally or intentionally, as a carrier for a recessive sity on offspring outcomes are ‘programmed’ in utero. To investigate under- condition. These are: following newborn screening (NBS) when the test also lying mechanisms we have been carrying out a case-control study of very se- reveals carrier results; as a secondary or incidental finding from investiga- verely obese pregnant women (BMI>40kg/m2) vs. normal weight controls. tions into an existing unrelated condition; cascade testing when another fa- We characterise maternal weight, body composition, and metabolic profiles mily member, especially a sibling, is identified with a genetic condition (or through pregnancy and study infant growth and development at birth and as a carrier through NBS); as a result of prenatal testing by carrier parents; 3 and 6 months. Placenta and cord blood are collected at birth and we are population-based or ethnicity-targeted carrier screening of adolescents, comparing placental function and epigenetic modifications of candidate ge- most typically in high school. Since the purpose of carrier testing is to pro- nes in the lean and obese women. Our findings suggest early interventions vide information for future reproductive planning, guidelines have traditio- to improve weight and diet in obese pregnant women are urgently needed. nally recommended against carrier genetic testing of minors, yet testing in We have tested one such intervention in a randomised controlled trial in each of the above circumstances has occurred and, in some instances, for obese pregnant women using the insulin sensitiser metformin vs placebo many years. with the aim of improving birth outcome. Arguments against carrier testing include: not being in the best interest of the 
S03 .3 child because it denies the child’s future autonomy and removes their right Regional activation of the cancer genome by long range epigenetic to decide testing for themselves; the potential for psychological, emotional remodelling and social harms, such as stigma and discrimination; possibility for misun- S. Clark; derstanding the meaning of carrier status; uncertainty whether testing at a Sydney, Australia. young age would result in future reproductive behaviour. On the other hand, many parents have indicated they would want to know their child’s carrier status and arguments in favour acknowledge that parents make health care No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ decisions regularly for their child, and that the child’s interest is inevitably abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. intertwined with those of the parents and the family. Knowledge of a child’s 
S04 .1 carrier status from newborn screening could be used by parents for their Spliceosome biology: Understanding causes and consequences of own future reproductive decisions. Learning carrier status as a young child splicing mutations allows them to adapt to the information and, as an older child, the infor- M. J. Frilander; mation can increase reproductive options before they are sexually active. University of Helsinki, Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki, Finland. Proponents have also commented that there is a lack of evidence of harm to the child while others have called for more empirical research. These arguments will be further elaborated and research will be highlighted Removal of noncoding intron sequences from the primary transcripts by that has examined the ethical and psychosocial aspects of carrier testing in the spliceosome is an essential step in eukaryotic gene expression pathway. children and adolescents in the various circumstances described above. Spliceosome is a molecular machine composed of five small nuclear RNAs 
S03 .1 (snRNAs) and numerous integral protein components. Human cells contain Heritable germline epimutations in humans two separate spliceosomes, called as U2- and U12-dependent spliceosomes. B. Horsthemke; U2-type spliceosome excises 99.5% of all introns in humans, while the U12- Essen, Germany. dependent spliceosome concentrates of a highly conserved subset of introns (termed as U12-type introns) that are found from approximately 700-800 genes in humans. Phenotypic variation results from genetic variation, epigenetic variation, en- In addition to the essential role in generating functional mRNA molecu- vironmental variation and cultural variation. While it is well established that les, the pre-mRNA splicing reaction serves also an important regulatory we inherit our genes, our environment and our culture from our parents, it function. In a process called alternative splicing multiple mRNA isoforms is less clear whether we also inherit epigenetic information. There is good are formed from a single gene. Alternative splicing is regulated through a evidence for epigenetic programming of the fetus by the maternal environ- number of non-spliceosomal protein components that can bind to regula- ment (mainly maternal glucose and hormone levels), but the transmission tory sequences present in exon and intron sequences. Together with RNA of epigenetic information through germ cells is a matter of debate. Epigene- secondary structure and chromatin modifications this leads to formation tic inheritance has been observed in plants and lower animals, but in mam- multiple mRNA species from a single gene that increases protein diversity mals it faces two barriers: 1. the early separation of the soma and germ line but also provide important regulatory functions through regulating the sta- (Weismann barrier) and 2. the epigenetic reprogramming of the genome du- bility of mRNA molecules. ring germ cell development and during early embryogenesis. Studies on epi- A large number of human diseases are caused by defects in the pre-mRNA genetic inheritance are hampered by the problem to distinguish epigenetic splicing process. Most common are mutations in either the splices site se- variants that have been transmitted through the germ line from epigenetic quences located at intron-exon boundaries, or in the regulatory elements variants that arise anew in each generation as a consequence of inherited (splicing enhancers or suppressors) located in the exons or introns. Such genetic, environmental or cultural variants. In fact, several reports on he- mutations result in defects in pre-mRNA splicing that affect single gene only. ritable germline epimutations have failed to recognize the presence of an In contrast, mutations in the components of the pre-mRNA splicing machin- underlying genetic mutation. On the other hand, it has been shown in rare ery lead to complex pleiotropic effects and affect the pre-mRNA processing cases that epigenetic states can - by accident - survive reprogramming in in large number genes. the germline. In these cases heritable epigenetic variation is most probably In my presentation I will describe the basic mechanism of intron recognition random and not adaptive. Nevertheless, it can be subject of selection. and splicing process. I will use the human disease causing mutations in the 
S03 .2 U12-dependent spliceosome to illustrate the effects that splicing machinery Maternal obesity during pregnancy and offspring later life disease mutations have on pre-mRNA processing. R. Reynolds; 
S04 .2 University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Spliceosome and development in human J. Amiel; Institut Imagine, Paris, France. One in five women in the UK is obese (body mass index BMI>30kg/m2) at antenatal booking. Maternal obesity is associated with complications for the mother including increased risk of developing gestational diabe- Somatic and germline mutations of the spliceosomal machinery have first tes, pre-eclampsia and need for caesarean section. For the offspring short been described in cancers and retinitis pigmentosa. More recently, muta- term complications include risk of macrosomia and need for admission to tions in several genes involved in spliceosomal function or linked aspects the neonatal unit. It is now apparent that the effects of maternal obesity for of mRNA processing have been identified in human disorders with specific the offspring extend beyond the nEeSonHaGtal 2pe0r1io5d w| GithL iAncSreGaOsedW r,is Sk CofO oTbeL-ANcDra,n UiofKac |i aWl mWalfWor.mEaStiHonGs.. OAsR thGese gene products take part in widespr7eadABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index cellular events, the phenotypic restriction is surprising and not yet fully The discovery of the presence of fetal DNA in the plasma of pregnant women understood. The syndromes and the pathophysiological hypotheses will be has revolutionized the landscape of prenatal testing. In particular, the no- reviewed. ninvasive prenatal test for chromosomal aneuploidies through sequencing 
S04 .3 maternal plasma DNA has been rapidly adopted throughout the world over Spliceosome and cancer the last 5 years. It is estimated that over 1 million noninvasive prenatal tests P. A. Greif1,2,3; for chromosomal aneuploidies have been performed. The principle of this 1Department of Internal Medicine 3, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU), München, test is based on the detection of the increased amount of DNA released from Germany, 2German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany, 3German Cancer the extra copy of the aneuploid chromosome of the fetus. The chromosome Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. dosage can be accurately determined by counting the number of sequen- ced plasma DNA molecules mapping to the individual chromosomes. The sensitivities and specificities of this approach are remarkable for detecting The spliceosome machinery is a multi-subunit protein complex, responsible trisomies 13, 18 and 21 in large-scale studies. However, this approach is re- for mRNA processing. Recently, somatic mutations of genes encoding spli- commended as a screening test and further confirmation of positive results ceosome components, such as SF3B1, U2AF1 and SRSF2, were discovered by testing of fetal tissues obtained invasive procedures is recommended. In in haematological malignancies including myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) this lecture, the following questions as well as potential solutions will be and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). discussed: While genetic lesions of the spliceosome are initiating events in MDS, they 1. Will this approach be accurate enough to serve as a diagnostic test instead occur during disease progression in CLL. In acute myeloid leukemia (AML) of a screening test? spliceosome mutations seem to be rare and associated mostly with AML se- 2. Is it possible to differentiate chromosome aneuploidies coming from the condary to MDS, however, in the rare subgroup of AML with trisomy 13 the mother and from the fetus? frequency of spliceosome alterations is strikingly high, with 81% of the pa- 
S05 .3 tients habouring SRSF2 mutations. Of note, the mutational hotspot in SRSF2 Status and outcome of randomized trials for aneuploidy screening is not captured efficiently by standard exome enrichment protocols. Thus, preimplantation embryos the burden of SRSF2 mutations might be underestimated. J. Traeger-Synodinos; Spliceosome mutations may alter gene expression or function by aberrant Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Choremeio Research Laboratory, splicing, which could result in imbalance between alternatively spliced pro- St. Sophia‘s Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Greece. tein isoforms, non-physiological transcripts or haploinsufficiency due to nonsense-mediated RNA decay. The exact mechanism of spliceosome dysfunction and the consequences for The pinr-ivmitarroy aim of aneuploidy screening preimplantation embryos is to critical downstream genes during the onset and progression of neoplasia optimize outcomes in couples undergoing infertility treatment. Since the remain unclear. first fertilization (IVF) cycle performed in 1978, it is estimated that Pharmacological inhibition of the spliceosome is currently being tested in over 5 million babies have been born following IVF. However, only about one early stage clinical trials opening up potential therapeutic applications. third of IVF cycles result in the birth of a baby. Selection of IVF embryos most 
S05 .1 likely to implant is traditionally based on embryo morphology, although this Using XIST to Silence Trisomy 21: Implications for Cell and is relatively imprecise. Based on observations that aneuploidies in clinical Chromosome Therapy miscarriages increase with advanced maternal age (AMA), that aneuploidies J. Jiang1, Y. Jing1, G. Cost2, J. Chiang1, H. Kolpa1, A. Cotton3, D. M. Carone4, B. R. Carone4, M. are found in preimplantation IVF embryos and that most aneuploidies are Byron4, P. D. Gregory2, C. J. Brown5, F. D. Urnov2, L. L. Hall4, J. B. Lawrence6; incompatible with life, a rationale was developed to improve IVF pregnancy 1University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States, 2Sangamo rates through selecting chromosomally normal embryos for embryo trans- BioSciences, Richmond, CA, United States, 3University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, fer. This procedure, usually called Preimplantation Genetic Screening (PGS), Canada, 4Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts was initially applied 20 years ago for AMA, using FISH to analyze select chro- Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 61Department of Cell and mosomes in single blastomeres biopsied from 3-day embryos (PGS version Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, 1, PGS-1). Indications for PGS were subsequently widened to couples under- United States. going IVF for repeated implantation failure, spontaneous abortions and severe male infertility. However, following 10 years of clinical application, evidence from randomized trials did not support a clear benefit of PGS-1 Down syndrome, also known as trisomy 21, is theleading genetic cause of (FISH on blastomeres). Reasons likely include high rates of mosaicism in intellectual disabilities, occurring in 1 out of 1000 live births. The millions day-3 preimplantation embryos, the inability of FISH to analyse all chromo- of Down syndrome patients across the world also face multiple other health somes in a single cell and possibly a negative impact of blastomere biopsy issues, including congenital cardiac defects, high incidence of Early-onset itself. Subsequent PGS strategies use 24-chromosome array-CGH analysis Alzheimer disease, and hematopoietic disorders. Given that Down syndro- on biopsied polar-bodies or trophectoderm biopsies from blastocyst-stage me is caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21 that involves over-dosage embryos (PGS-2). Good randomized control trials are challenging, involving of 400 genes across a whole chromosome, it precludes any possibility of a stringent patient recruitment, satisfactory patient numbers, monitoring all genetic therapy. Our lab has long studied the naturalX dISoTsage compensati- procedures/protocols, time and expense. The few on-going or recently pu- on mechanism for X chromosome inactivation. To “dosage compensate” X- blished randomized trials have not yet clarified the optimum strategy and linked genes between females and males, the X-linked gene produces a specific benefits (if any) of aneuploidy screening preimplantation embryos. large non-coding RNA that silences one of the two X chromosomes in female Results of recent randomized trials will be presented. cells. The initial motivation of this study was to translate the natural mecha- 
S06 .1 nisms of X chrXoImSTosome inactivation into chromosome therapy for Down DECIPHER syndrome. Using zinc finger nuclease technology, we have successfully in- H. Firth; serted a large transgene into Chromosome 21 in Down syndrome iPS Cambridge, United Kingdom. cells, which results in chromosome-wide transcriptional silencing of the ex- tra Chromions voimtroe 21. Remarkably, deficits in proliferation and neural growth are rapidlcyh rreovmeorssoemd ue pthoenr saipleyncing one chromosome 21. Successful trisomy No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ silencing surmounts the major first step towards potential develop- abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. ment of “ ” for Down syndrome. The human iPSC-based 
S06 .2 trisomy correction system we established opens a unique opportunity to „Sharing Data in Cancer Genomics; Lessons from the International identify molecular networks driving different aspects of pathogenesis and Cancer Genome Consortium“ study transplantation therapies for Down syndrome. S. Grimmond; 
S05 .2 Glasgow, United Kingdom. Having developed an accurate noninvasive prenatal test for aneuploidies- What else can we work on? K. C. A. Chan; No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. 8 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S06 .3 
S07 .3 The Challenge of the Global Variome Deciphering the genetic and epigenetic role in metabolic diseases J. Burn; M. Hrabé de Angelis; Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. München, Germany. No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. 
S07 .1 
S08 .1 The International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium: New insights into Constitutional and somatic variations in telomerase reverse the genetic and molecular bases of disease transcriptase and human cancer S. Brown, International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium; R. Kumar; MRC Harwell, Harwell, United Kingdom. Heidelberg, Germany. A major challenge facing mammalian genetics over the next decade is the Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) encodes a rate limiting systematic and comprehensive annotation of mammalian gene function. As catalytic subunit of telomerase. We earlier described a disease segregating part of the International Knockout Mouse Consortium, several programmes causal mutation at the -57 bp from ATG start site of the TERT gene in a large are ongoing to generate conditional mutants for all mouse genes. An even melanoma family with early on-set and severe form of the disease. Scree- greater challenge will be the determination of phenotypic outcomes for ning of the TERT core promoter in tumors from unrelated melanoma pati- each mutation and the identification of disease models. The International ents showed mutually exclusive mutations at the -124 and -146 bp from the Mouse Phenotyping Consortium (IMPC, www.impc.org) will undertake the ATG site at a frequency higher than any other mutation in melanoma (Horn development of a comprehensive Catalogue of Mammalian Gene Function et al. Science, 2013, 339:959-61). The familial and somatic mutations create and proposes to build on the several pilot programmes that have explored de novo CCGGAA/T binding motifs for E-twenty six/ternary complex factors the feasibility of large-scale mouse phenotyping, such as the EUMODIC pro- (Ets/TCF) transcription factors with consequent increase in TERT expressi- gramme. The IMPC incorporates 16 major mouse centres around the world on. The TERT promoter mutations have now been shown to be widespread that will undertake mouse production and phenotyping. The IMPC envisages in many cancer types and have been regularly associated with an increased two phases to its programme: Phase 1, 2011-2016, is already well underway gene expression and adverse forms of the disease. In bladder cancer, we de- and is carrying out the phenotyping of around 5000 mouse lines; and Phase monstrated an association of the TERT promoter mutations with a poor pa- 2 from 2016-2021 which will undertake the analysis of 15,000 mouse lines. tient survival and an increased disease recurrence (Rachakonda et al. PNAS IMPC centres operate a core, standardised, broad-based adult phenotyping 2013, 110:17426-31). While in glioma, TERT promoter mutations also as- pipeline encompassing the major biological and disease systems, including sociated with poor progression free and poor overall survival; in melanoma gross pathology and tissue collection as a mandatory requirement. Many those mutations associated with parameters connected with poor outcome centres have also begun to employ a standardised embryonic phenotyping (Heidenreich et al. Oncotarget 2015; Heidenreich et al. Nature Communica- pipeline to analyse the many homozygous lethals, incorporating an assess- tions 2014; 5:3401). Germline TERT promoter mutations in carriers result ment of time of lethality and morphological defects. In addition, lacZ expres- in an increased leukocyte telomere length; however, tumors with somatic sion data is being collected for adult organs and 
E12 .5 embryos. All data TERT promoter mutations have shorter telomeres than tumors without from each production and phenotyping centre is uploaded to a central Data mutations (Hosen et al. International Journal of Cancer 2015). Those fin- Coordination Centre (DCC), and following QC and analysis is archived and dings have resulted in major conceptual advancements and have shown that disseminated to the wider biomedical sciences community along with ap- tumor specific changes in a non-coding region can initiate cancer through propriate annotation tools. In the first 3 years of the programme, over 7000 change in gene expression. The effects of the promoter mutations on TERT ES cell lines have been injected, close to 4000 mouse mutant lines generated transcription and telomere length emphasize the importance of telomere and phenotype data from nearly 2000 mutants collected at the DCC. We will biology in cancer genesis and outcome. describe many new insights into the genetic and molecular bases of disea- 
S08 .2 se, report the generation of numerous novel disease models, and elaborate The role of telomeres in aging a fundamental appraisal of the pleiotropic landscape of mammalian gene C. Bar; function. Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain. 
S07 .2 Investigating genetic diseases with intellectual disability in the mouse Y. Herault1,2, The GENCODYS Network; No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ 1INSTITUT CLINIQUE DE LA SOURIS, ICS, PHENOMIN, Illkirch, France, 2INSTITUT DE abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. GENETIQUE, BIOLOGIE MOLECULAIRE ET CELLULAIRE, IGBMC, Illkirch, France. 
S08 .3 Novel insights into the telomere syndromes Intellectual disability (ID) involved impairment of mental abilities that im- I. Dokal; pacts adaptive functioning in the conceptual, the social or the practical do- Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary main. ID can occur during the developmental period and is defined by an University of London, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. intellectual quotient below 70. Several genetic conditions, including Down syndrome, copy number variants, and more than 500 genes, have been now associated with ID. To better understand the physiopathology of the diffe- Dyskeratosis Congenita (DC) is a heterogeneous multi-system syndrome ex- rent causes of ID, we generated a large series of mouse mutants for ID genes hibiting marked clinical and genetic heterogeneity. In its classical form it is involved in different functions such as synaptic transmission or nuclear re- characterised by mucocutaneous abnormalities (abnormal skin pigmentati- gulation, during the GENCODYS program (www.gencodys.eu). Here we will on, nail dystrophy, leucoplakia), bone marrow failure and a predisposition report the characterization of several ID mouse models using standardized to malignancy. Bone marrow failure is the principal cause of mortality and behavioural and cognitive paradigms. We also took advantage of the Inter- patients displayD fKeCa1turTeEsR oCf pTrEeRmTatNuOreP 1a0ginNgH.
P2  TINF2 USB1,TCAB1, CT
C1  national Mouse phenotyping resource to get additional information on the SRtTuEdLie1s, ove rA tChDe last two decades have led to significant advances with 11 phenotypes of the ID models. Based on the new series of models and further disease genes ( , , , , , , , studies, several ID genes were found inducing key defects in the mouse con- and ) having been characterized. Ten of these are important in firming, even for some challenged candidates, their involvement in ID. In telomere maintenance. DC is therefore principally a disease of defective addition we went further investigating more complex genetic conditions, telomere maintenance and patients usually have very short/ and or abnor- such as copy number variant, and we were able to identify genes and their mal telomeres. impact on the behaviour and cognition. The data generated are challenging The genetic advances have also led to the unification of DC with a number our current knowledge on the role of ID genes, suggesting common outcome of other disorders. This includes the severe multi-system disorders Hoyer- for various genetic conditions. Such studies offer perspectives for a better aal-Hreidarsson and Revesz syndromes as well as a subset of patients with understanding of the ID and how the cognition and behaviour is affected aplastic anaemia, myelodysplasia, leukaemia, liver disease and idiopathic in human. pulmonary fibrosis. This wide spectrum of diseases ranging from classical DC to aplastic anaemia can be regarded as disorders of defective telomere ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANmDa,i nUteKn a|n Wce W- “tWhe. EteSloHmGer.eOopRaGthies”. 9ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S09 .3 Genomic medicine to tailor cancer drugs Some cases oPf ADRCN still remain uncharacterized. Using whole exome sequen- N. Normanno; cing we have identified novel biallelic mutations in the poly(A)-specific ri- Naples, Italy. bonuclease ( ) gene, in families exhibiting severe DC. PARN is an exo- nuclease whose deadenylation activity in part controls mRNA stability and therefore regulation of a large number of genes. The mutations identified No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ affect key domains within the protein and studies on patient cells show re- abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. duced deadenylation acPtAivRitNy. This deficiency causes an early DNA damage 
S10 .1 response, cell cycle arrest and reduced cell viability upon UV treatment. In- Genomics and Hypertension dividuTaElsR CwiDthK Cb1ialRleTlEicL 1 TmEuRtaFt1ions and cells that are depleted of PARN A. Dominiczak; have reduced RNA levels for several key genes associated with telomere bio- Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United logy ( , , and ). They also possess critically short telo- Kingdom. meres. Collectively, these results identify a role for PARN in telomere main- tenance and demonstrate that it is a new disease-causing gene in a subset of cases with severe DC. Human primary or essential hypertension is a complex, polygenic trait with 
S09 .1 some 50% contribution from genes and environment. Richard Lifton and The AML Genome(s) colleagues provided elegant dissection of several rare Mendelian forms of T. J. Ley, on behalf of the Genomics of Acute Myeloid Leukemia Program Project Grant, hypertension, exemplified by the glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism and The Genome Institute; and Liddle’s syndrome. These discoveries illustrate that a single gene muta- Departments of Medicine and Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. tion can explain the entire pathogenesis of severe, early onset hypertension Luis, MO, United States. as well as dictating the best treatment. The dissection of the much more common polygenic hypertension has pro- ven much more difficult. Early studies used a single polymorphic marker Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by clinical, morphologic, ge- such as the I/D polymorphism in the ACE gene and small numbers of ca- netic, genomic, and epigenomic heterogeneity. AML genomes are the most ses and controls. Candidate gene studies have been largely non-informative minimally mutated adult human neoplasms sequenced to date, with an ave- and non-reproducible. These were followed by linkage studies, which used rage of only 13 genic somatic mutations (of which only 5 are in recurrently approximately 300 microsatellite markers distributed across the genome. mutatedde AnoMvLo genes). The complexity of the mutational associations is so These studies resulted in large peaks covering regions with 50-100 genes, great that it has not yet been possible to create a new classification scheme with no easy way to quickly focus on a few genes of causal relevance. The for all AML patients based on the presence or absence of mutations real breakthrough came with the initiation of the genome wide associati- alone. on studies (GWAS) characterised by a much more thorough coverage of the Virtually all AML cases are clonally heterogeneous at presentation; this he- genome with thousands single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Typi- terogeneity is influenced by treatment, and usually evolves at relapse. Near- cally 500,000 - 2,5000,000 SNPs have been used for the big, collaborative ly all de novo AML genomes have a single founding clone, and one or more GWAS for hypertension. These studies resulted in several “hits” or signals subclones that are derived from it, or FfrLoTm3 KanITother sRuAbSclone. Although the with a genome-wide significance and a high level of reproducibility between genetic rules governing resistance and relapse are not yet clear, mutations studies. These “hits” have been used successfully to calculate genetic risk that activate signaling pathways (e.g. , , and mutations, among scores for cardiovascular complications such as left ventricular hypertrophy, others) are most often late mutations that occur in subclones, DwNhMerTe3 tAhey stroke and coronary artery disease. Intragenic signals, such as for example mTEaTy2 provide a signal for explosive outgrowth. These mutations are usually Uromodulin, are being used to examine new pathways for cardiovascular cleared by induction therapy, while initiating mutations (e.g. in or protection and possibly new targets for drug discovery. ) are not. The next steps in genomic medicine belong to a combination of the next ge- Since we do not yet know the mutations that are relevant for resistance and/ neration sequencing (NGS) and its linkage with electronic health records, or relapse, and since the clonal architecture of the tumor at presentation including preferably the real time clinical data, biochemistry, imaging, histo- may influence response and relapse, clinical sequencing will require not logy as well as longitudinal health outcomes. These modalities of stratified only an ability to identify the genes that are mutated in each sample, but or precision medicine are ready for the prime time now. also to an ability to define clonal architecture, and how subclones respond 
S10 .2 to induction therapy. The failure to clear all mutations after induction the- Ten Years Later : How The Pcsk9 Gene Discovery Affects the Diagnosis rapy significantly increases the risk of relapse, and reduces overall survival. and Treatment of Hypercholesterolemia Additional studies focusing on the epigenomes of AML cells will be required C. Boileau; to fully understand the pathways and mechanisms that underlie the patho- Paris, France. genesis of this disease. 
S09 .2 Reconstruction of clonal composition in cancer No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ V. Mustonen; abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 
S10 .3 Genetic variation in APO
C3 , plasma triglycerides and risk of ischemic cardiovascular disease Cells from a tumour are often not isogenic. The fraction of cancerous cells A. Jørgensen1, R. Frikke-Schmidt1, B. G. Nordestgaard2, A. Tybjaerg-Hansen1; rather consists of a collection of subclones, with private and shared muta- 1Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, tions, related by their joint evolutionary history. Such heterogeneity poses Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, Herlev University Hospital, a challenge to cancer therapies. There is substantial evidence that it can Herlev, Denmark. underpin the emergence of resistance and so adversely affects treatment outcomes. Therefore, the ability to track subclonal dynamics and changes in clonal composition can inform therapy. Background: High plasma levels of nonfasting triglycerides are associated The challenge is that it is still not possible to sequence individual cells rou- with increased risk of ischemic cardiovascular disease. Whether lifelong low tinely to capture the full information about their genotype. Instead, short- levels of nonfasting triglycerides, due to mutations in the gene for apolipo- read sequencing of cell populations is typically used in cancer genomics. protein 
C3  (APO
C3 ), associate with reduced risk of ischemic cardiovascular Therefore it is necessary to use computational methods to reconstruct the disease in the general population is unknown. This is important, because subclonal lineages from sequenced samples. APO
C3  is a potential drug target for reducing residual cardiovascular risk. Here we describe our work on the subclone reconstruction problem with Methods: Using 75,725 individuals from two general-population studies, we applications to chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, colorectal cancer and expe- first tested whether low levels of nonfasting triglycerides were associated rimental evolution. with reduced risk of ischemic vascular disease and ischemic heart disea- se. Second, we tested whether loss-of-function mutations in APO
C3 , which were associated with reduced levels of nonfasting triglycerides, were also associated with reduced risk of ischemic vascular disease and ischemic heart disease. During follow-up, 10,797 individuals developed ischemic vas- 10 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOcuTlaLr AdiNseDas,e U, oKf w |h WomW 7,W55.7E dSeHveGlo.pOedR iGschemic heart disease.ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index Results: Individuals with nonfasting triglyceride levels less than 1.00 Bace1 axis in presence of generalized impairment of microRNA processing mmol/L had significantly less cardiovascular disease than those with levels in ageing and obesity as a novel determinant of ageing- and obesity asso- of 4.00 mmol/L or higher (hazard ratio [HR] 0.43; 95% confidence interval ciated decline in BAT function. This may define in vivo Bace1-inhibition as [CI], 0.35-0.54 for ischemic vascular disease and HR 0.40; 95% CI, 0.31-0.52 an innovative therapeutic approach to not only target age-related neurode- for ischemic heart disease). Heterozygosity for loss-of-function mutations generative diseases but at the same time improving age-related impairment in APO
C3  was associated with mean reductions in plasma nonfasting trigly- of BAT-function and metabolism. cerides of 44% (P=2x10-54). The cumulative incidence of ischemic vascular 
S12 .1 disease and ischemic heart disease was reduced in heterozygotes (P=0.009 Mitochondria in neurodegeneration and 0.05, respectively), with corresponding risk reductions of, respectively, E. Schon; 41% (HR: 0.59; 95% CI, 0.41-0.86; P=0.007) and 36% (HR: 0.64; 95% CI, New York, NY, United States. 0.41-0.99; P=0.04). Conclusions: Loss-of-function mutations in APO
C3  are associated with low levels of triglycerides, and with reduced risk of ischemic cardiovascular di- No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ sease. This suggests that APO
C3  is an excellent drug target for reducing re- abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. sidual cardiovascular risk. 
S12 .2 
S11 .1 A localized autophagic filter prevents entry of mitochondria carrying Retrotransposons and human disease pathogenic Opa1 mutations in retinal ganglion cell axons J. Garcia-Pérez, S. Morell, E. Blanco-Jimenez, S. Amador-Cubero; L. Scorrano; GENYO, Granada, Spain. Dept. of Biology, University of Padova, Padua, Italy. Long Interspersed Element-1 (LINE-1 or 
L1 ) is a family of active non-LTR Optic Atrophy 1 (Opa1) is a multifunctional protein involved in mitochon- retrotransposons that comprise around a fifth of our genome. Despite this drial fusion, apoptosis and metabolism, but how its mutations affect retinal substantial representation, an average human genome only contains 80-100 ganglion cell (RGC) health and result in Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy actively mobile or retrotransposition-competent 
L1 s (RC-
L1 s). The mobili- (ADOA) remains unknown. Here we show that pathogenic Opa1 triggers ty of RC-
L1 s continues to impact germline and somatic genomes and can a localized accumulation of autophagosomes that filters mitochondria out lead to human genetic disease. 
L1  retrotransposition normally occurs by from RGC axons. Mitochondrial dysfunction caused by mutated Opa1 results a mechanism known as target site-primed reverse transcription (TPRT), in localized AMPK activation and downstream axonal hillock autophagoso- which requires both the 
L1 -encoded endonuclease and reverse transcripta- me accumulation. Pharmacological or genetic autophagy inhibition restores se activities. However, it has been reported that 
L1  can mobilize through an axonal mitochondrial entry and rescues RGCs from apoptosis caused by mu- endonuclease-independent pathway (ENi), in which the element inserts at tated Opa1. In vivo, genetic autophagy inhibition rescues visual loss caused sites of DNA disrepair. Notably, recent data from our lab has demonstrated by Opa1 ablation. Thus, localized mitochondria autophagy emerges as a me- that the mobilization of 
L1  is de-regulated in Fanconi Anemia (FA) patients, chanism of neuronal dysfunction. including the ENi pathway. FA is a rare disease characterized by infant mor- 
S12 .3 tality and genomic instability, suggesting that de-regulated LINE-1 retro- Gene therapy for mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal transposition may affect genomic fluidity in FA patients. encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) 
S11 .2 R. Martí; CNVs of noncoding cis-regulatory elements in human disease Vall d‘Hebron Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain. E. Klopocki; Institute for Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany. TYMP MNGIE (mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy) is a mi- tochondrial disease caused by mutations in the nuclear gene , enco- No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ ding thymidine phosphorylase (TP). In recent years, knowledge gained from abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. basic research on the biochemical mechanisms involved in this disorder has 
S11 .3 allowed us to design plausible therapy approaches. In MNGIE patients, TP A Novel Dicer1-miR328-Bace1 Signaling Axis Controls Ageing- and dysfunction leads to systemic overload of the nucleosides thymidine and Obesity-Induced Brown Fat Dysfunction deoxyuridine, which results in alteration of the homeostasis of mitochondri- M. Oliverio, J. C. Brüning, J. W. Kornfeld; al deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) pool. This imbalance interferes Max-Planck Institute for Metabolism Research, Cologne, Germany. the correct replication of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). As a consequence, mtDNA depletion, multiple deletions and somatic point mutations occur in several tissues in patients, ultimately leading to mitochondrial dysfunction. Activated brown adipose tissue (BAT) contributes to control of energy and As the clinical phenotype of MNGIE is the result of the toxic accumulation of glucose homeostasis in rodents and humans. Defining the cell-autonomous thymidine and deoxyuridine, therapy approaches have focused on clearing processes that underly BAT differentiation and activation may thus reveal the systemic overload of these nucleosides. First attempts to use hemodia- novel therapeutic targets for obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus interventi- lysis failed to reduce nucleoside overload because of the high rate of endo- on. Here we show that ageing- and obesity-associated demises in BAT func- genous production of these compounds by human metabolism. By contrast, tion coincide with coordinate down-regulation of mature microRNAs in BAT hematopoetic stem cell transplantation restored nucleoside homeostasis in in the presence of reduced expression of the microRNA processing enzyme patients with successful engraftment, and led to slow clinical improvement. Dicer1. To mimic this partial down-regulation of microRNA processing in However, the high morbidity and mortality rates associated to the proce- obesity and ageing, we inactivated one allele of Dicer1 selectively in BAT of dure encouraged us to find alternatives, anTdY MthPe most obvious one, gene mice. BAT-selective heterozygosity of Dicer1 caused glucose intolerance in therapy, has given very promising results in a murine model of the disease. lean mice and aggravated diet-induced-obesity (DIO)-evoked deterioration Two different vectors carrying the human gene (a lentiviral vector of glucose homeostasis. Using combinatorial analyses of altered microRNA- transduced to hematopoietic stem cells, and an adeno-associated virus vec- expression in BAT during in vitro brown preadipocyte commitment and tor with targeted expression in liver) have been tested in a murine model mouse models of premature ageing, longevity and DIO, we identified 23 mi- of the diseina sveiv. oIn both cases, successful and long-term stable expression of croRNAs dysregulated among these conditions. Of these, we identified miR- the transgene was achieved, resulting in permanent reduction of nucleoside 328 as a novel regulator of BAT differentiation. miR-328 over-expression overload . These results demonstrate that gene therapy is a feasible promotes BAT-differentiation and impairs muscle progenitor commitment, option for MNGIE patients; therefore, clinical trials should be implemented while reducing miR-328 expression blocks brown but not white adipocyte to investigate the safety and efficacy of this option. differentiation. We validated the ß-Secretase Bace1 as a target of miR-328, which is consequently over-expressed in BAT of obese and premature ag- eing mice. Reducing Bace1 expression enhances brown adipocyte, while impairing myogenic differentiation in vitro. In vivo small-molecule Bace1 inhibition in obese mice delayed DIO-induced weight gain, ameliorated obe- sity-associated deterioration of glucose metabolism and improved insulin sensitivity. Collectively, these expEerSimHeGnt s2 r0e1ve5a l| r GedLuAceSd GDiOceWr1,- mSiCRO-32T8L-AND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 11ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S13 .1 Nonsense suppression strategies to treat ocular malformations C. Y. Gregory-Evans1, X. Wang1, K. M. Wasan2, K. Gregory-Evans1; common cuase of mortality in FRDA. We recently showed that adeno-asso- 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2University of Saskatchewan, ciated virus (AAV) rh10 vector expressing human FXN injected intravenous- Saskatoon, SK, Canada. ly not only prevented the onset of the cardiac disease in a faithful FRDA car- diac mouse model, but also, when administered at the time of heart failure, reversed rapidly and completely cardiac disease at the functional, cellular The extensive genetic and allelic heterogeneity observed with congenital and molecular level in all treated animals. Our results also demonstrated eye diseases is a major barrier to the development of therapeutics. Leber the capacity of defective cardiomyocytes with severe energy failure and ul- congenital amaurosis is a typical example where more than 400 mutations trastructure disorganization to be rapidly corrected and remodeled by gene have been identified in at least 19 different genes. Conversely, more than therapy. These results established the primary proof-of-concept for develo- 600 mutations in a single gene (PAX6) cause aniridia. Developing treatments ping gene therapy of FRDA cardiomyopathy. We are currently performing for each affected gene remains a significant challenge and would have to dose-response study in the mice to estimate the percentage of cardiomyo- overcome the ethical and technical barriers associated with the delivery of cytes that need to be corrected to have a therapeutic effect. In addition, we a preventative prenatal treatment. To overcome these issues we have taken have recently generated a novel mouse model that recapitulates faithfully advantage of the observation that approximately 12% of all disease-causing the sensory ataxia associated to FRDA. These mouse models will be essen- mutations are nonsense mutations leading to premature stop codons. Our tial to dissect the pathophysiological pathway associated to the disease but approach has therefore focussed on pharmacological strategies that speci- also to test therapeutic approaches, including gene therapy. fically target nonsense mutations and are gene-independent. In our recent 
S14 .1 work we used systemic prenatal and postnatal nonsense suppression to cor- Chromatin organization and long-range control of gene expression rect the underlying genetic defects in choroideremia, ocular coloboma, ani- B. Ren; ridia, retinitis pigmentosa and most recently Leber congenital amaurosis. University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States. During these studies we developed a topical eye drop formulation (called START therapy) containing the nonsense suppression drug Ataluren that we tested in a mouse model of aniridia. Topical delivery not only reversed the Cell-type specific gene regulation is under the purview of enhancers. Great malformation defects it also restored the electrical and behavioral respon- strides have been made recently to characterize and identify enhancers ses of the retina. Further studies on the efficacy of this postnatal treatment both genetically and epigenetically for multiple cell types and species, but have shown that the eye responds to changes in Pax6 dosage over a specific efforts have just begun to functionally characterize these long-range con- time window. These studies suggest that the eye retains significant develop- trol elements. Mapping interactions between enhancers and promoters, and mental plasticity into the post-natal period and therefore postnatal thera- understanding how the 3D landscape of the genome constrains such inter- peutic strategies delivered early in life could now be considered as potenti- actions is fundamental to our understanding of enhancer function. I will ally practical for some congenital eye abnormalities. Not only would topical present recent findings related to 3D genome organization in mammalian drug delivery avoid the issue of systemic toxicity, but would likely lead to cells, with a particular focus on how chromatin organization contributes to high compliance in young children. Furthermore, this approach would be enhancer-mediated transcriptional regulation. I will describe higher-order relevant to new mutations that spontaneously occur without family history. organizational features that are observed at the level of both the whole chro- 
S13 .2 mosome and individual loci. I will highlight changes in genome organization Therapeutic targeting of the mTOR pathway that occur during the course of differentiation, and discuss the functional J. R. Sampson; relationship between chromatin architecture and gene regulation. Taken to- Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. gether, mounting evidence now shows that the genome organization plays an essential role in orchestrating the lineage-specific gene expression pro- grams through modulating long- range interactions between enhancers and target genes. Signalling through the mammalian (or mechanistic) target of rapamycin 
S14 .2 (mTOR) complex 1 (mTOR
C1 ) is hyperactivated in many sporadic cancers Biological consequences of regulatory variation and disease and in a family of inherited conditions such as tuberous sclerosis, PMSE E. Dermitzakis; syndrome and the DEPD
C5 -associated epilepsies that are characterised by University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. variable combinations of hamartomas and other tumours, epilepsy and neu- rodevelopmental disorders. Rapamycin and its derivatives (the “rapalogs”) inhibit mTOR
C1  and are being explored as therapies in these diverse clinical Molecular phenotypes inform us about genetic and environmental effects settings. Successful clinical trials have led to regulatory approvals in Europe on cellular and tissue state. The elucidation of the genetic basis of gene ex- and North America of Everolimus for the treatment of some sporadic can- pression and other cellular phenotypes is highly informative for the impact cers and tuberous sclerosis-associated renal and brain tumours. Promising of genetic variants in the cell and the subsequent consequences in the or- results from phase II trials have led to current phase III trials in epilepsy and ganism. In this talk I will discuss recent advances in key areas of the ana- phase II trials are assessing efficacy and safety of rapamycin and rapalogs in lysis of the genomics of gene expression and cellular phenotypes in human relation to neurocognitive and neurodevelopmental deficits. Pre-clinical re- populations and multiple tissues and how this assists in the interpretation search and early phase trials are also exploring opportunities for targeting of regulatory networks and human disease variants. I will also discuss how the signalling networks upstream and downstream of mTOR
C1  in sporadic the recent advances in next generation sequencing and functional genomics cancers and tuberous sclerosis. In this talk I will review progress to date in are informing us about the impact of regulatory variation in cancer. Finally, I translation to the clinic and discuss new therapeutic strategies that are in will present some perspectives on how these developments are bringing us development. closer to the promise of personalized medicine. J Sampson is Chief Investigator of the TRON trial which is funded significant- 
S14 .3 ly by Novartis Pharmaceuticals and has received modest lecture fees/Hono- Mutations in regulatory domains in human disease raria from Novartis Pharmaceuticals S. Lyonnet1, C. T. Gordon2, S. Benko2, A. Pelet2, J. Amiel2; 
S13 .3 1Paris, France, 2Imagine Institute, INSERM 1163, University Paris Descartes Hôpital Efficient AAV gene therapy in cardiac and neurological murine models Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. for Friedreich ataxia H. Puccio; Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire (IGBMC), Illkirch-Strasbourg, France. One of the key discoveries of vertebrate genome sequencing projects was the unexpected amount of DNA that remained evolutionarily conserved un- der selective pressure (or even non conserved despite likely functional; see Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA), the most common autosomal recessive ataxia, EnCode project). Two-thirds of it does not correspond to coding sequences is characterized by a sensory and spinocerebellar ataxia, hypertrophic car- (exons and UTRs), which have been named conserved non-coding sequences diomyopathy and increase incidence of diabetes. FRDA is caused by reduced (CNCs) and represent a vast amount of DNA (> 3% of the human genome). levels of frataxin (FXN), an essential mitochondrial protein involved in the Interestingly, enrichment for CNCs has been demonstrated within gene biosynthesis of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters. Impaired mitochondrial oxidative deserts nearest to physically isolated genes known or suspected to be im- phosphorylation, bioenergetics imbalance, deficit of Fe-S cluster enzymes portant developmental regulators. It has thus been suggested that, in these and mitochondrial iron overload occur in individuals with FRDA. To date cases, CNCs may represent regulatory elements (enhancers or suppressors) th1e2re are not effective treatment for FRDEA,S aHndG c a2r0di1ac5 f a| iGlurLeA isS tGheO mWos, tS COneTceLsAsaNryD fo, rU thKe |c oWrrWectW sp.aEtSioHteGmp.OorRalG expression of these genes neededABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index for embryonic development, and acting as modular, sometimes combinato- ciples similar to oncogenesis to explain why some paternally-derived muta- rial, tissue-specific enhancers of gene transcription. tions, such as those causing Apert (FGFR2) and Costello (HRAS) syndromes In that context, we will discuss a number of findings, following the seminal or achondroplasia (FGFR3), occur spontaneously at levels up to 1000-fold discovery of long-distance genomic alterations altering the expression of higher than the genomic background rate. The evidence - gathered original- the SHH (Sonic Hedgehog) gene. Recent examples involve mutation of non- ly through direct quantification of these ultra-rare pathogenic mutations in coding RNA genes (such as the deletions observed at the mir17-92 cluster human sperm - suggests that selfish mutations, although occurring rarely, in Feingold syndrome), but also regulatory DNA alterations that we will confer a selective advantage to mutant spermatogonial stem cells, leading to discuss as: their clonal expansion and progressive enrichment in sperm over time. - Enhancer variants located within or close to a gene, such as a genomic Our understanding of this process so far suggests that molecularly selfish variant in a highly conserved sequence located in a non-coding region of the selection relies on the activation of the growth factor receptor-RAS signal- RET gene, altering the binding of a transcription factor expressed in neu- ling pathway, which is a key regulator of stem cell homeostasis in the testis. ral crest cell precursors to the enteric nervous system, which predispose to As RAS is required in many different cellular contexts, we will discuss to Hirschsprung disease. which extend dysregulation of this pathway is likely to be relevant to the - Long-distance disruption of CNCs, whatever their function, such as those pathology of common disorders, including cancer predisposition and neu- observed on both side of the SOX9 gene coding sequences in either Pierre rodevelopmental disorders, such as schizophrenia and autism - for which Robin sequence (PRS), a common orofacial cleft anomaly with mandibular paternal age-effects have been described epidemiologically. hypoplasia, or isolated disorders of sex determination (DSDs). In these ca- 
S15 .3 ses, the disruption of distant tissue-specific regulatory elements, required Somatic mutations in monozygotic twins for the normal development of either the mandibula or the gonads, perturbs E. Slagboom; embryonic expression of SOX9 and could account for the PRS or DSD pheno- Leiden, Netherlands. types respectively, as these evolutionarily constrained regions may be dis- rupted in a modular fashion. Collectively, these observations suggest that the domains to study for ge- No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ nomic alterations, resulting in tissue-specific misregulation of a develop- abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. mental gene and a subsequent malformation, should be much broader than 
S16 .1 traditionally investigated. The human Y chromosome in evolution and disease 
S15 .1 C. Tyler-Smith; How much of de novo is meiotic? The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. P. Stankiewicz1,2; 1Dept. of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. 
S16 .2 Owing to the size and inherent instability of the human genome, more than Ancient pathogen genomics of re-emerging infectious diseases one mutation is estimated to a1r6ise per mitotic division, resulting in soma- J. Krause1,2; tic mosaicism. During the ~10 mitotic cell divisions required to generate 1Max Planck Institute, Jena, Germany, 2Department of Archeological Sciences, University an adult, mosaic mutations can go unnoticed, underlie genetic disease or of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. contribute to normal human variation, and may be transmitted to the next generation as constitutional variants. Early somatic mosaic mutations in the precursor somatic cells that will eventually constitute the germline can Genome wide data from ancient microbes may help to understand mecha- cause unexpected intergenerational recurrences of genetic and genomic dis- nisms of pathogen evolution and adaptation for emerging and re-emerging orders with multiple affected children born to unaffected parents, contrary infectious disease causing agents. UYseirnsgin hiaig phe tshtirsouMgyhcpoubta DctNeAri usmeq lueepnrcaien g in to Mendelian expectations. Using the sensitivity of individual-specidfiec nborveo- Mcoymcobbinaactteiorniu wmi tthu btaerrgceutleodsi sD NA enrichment protocols we have reconstruc- akpoint PCR, we prospectively screened 100 families with children affected ted medieval bacterial genomes of Y.pestis , and by genomic disorders due to rared ed enloevtoio n CNVs determined to be from ancient skeletal remains. Phylogenetic by clinical analysis of parental DNA. We found that an under-recognized and analysis indicate that the Ya.n pceisetnist strain from the Black Death pan- significant fraction of apparently CNVs are not meiotic in origin, but demic is ancestral to most extantstrains and falls very close to the ancestral rather arise during early post-zygotic mitoses and this can be identified eit- node of human infectious bacteria. Temporal estimates suggest that her in the affected patients or their healthy parents. Our probabilistic model tYh. ep eBsltaisck Death of 1346 - 1351 was the main historical event responsible of gametogenesis to consider parental mosaicism as a source of transmitted for the Yin. ptreosdtiusction and worldwide dissemination of currently circulating mutations predicts that despite the fact that maternally transmitted muta- strainMs . pleapthraoeg enic to humans, and further indicates that contem- tions are the minority of alleles, a greater proportion of somatically mosaic porary epidemics have their origins in the medieval era. In contrast transmitting mothers are at increased risk of recurrence. I will review the the medieval strainMs. tfuablle rwciutlhoisnis the current genetic diversity and influence of the developmental timing of mutations, the mechanisms by are found on at least two main branches in the pMh.ytulobgeercnueltoics itsree of leprosy which mutations arise, methods for detecting mosaic variants, and the risk bacteria. The reconstructed genomes from 1000 year old Pe- of mosaic mutations being passed on to the next generation. ruvian genomes, however, cluster together with strains found 
S15 .2 in modern mammalian species, suggesting a zoonotic origin for tuberculosis Selfish mosaicism: impact of somatic mutations occurring in the in the pre-coYl.upmesbtiisa,n M N.leewpr Waeo rld, likelMy .itnutbreordcuucloesdi si nto human populations paternal germline by contact to sea mammals. Dating analysis reveal a most recent common A. Goriely; ancestor of and all strains within the last Oxford, United Kingdom. 6000 years, suggesting that all three human pathogens may have a recent Neolithic origin. 
S16 .3 As mutations are at the origin of all genetic variations, understanding the Evaluating human genetic (and epigenetic) adaption to pathogen factors that influence the apparent rate at which de novo mutations occur is pressures crucial to the study of genome diversity, evolution and diseases. Although it L. Quintana-Murci; is well established that point mutations initially arise as random miscopying Pasteur Institute, CNRS, Paris, France. events, preferentially from the paternal germline, we have described a new mechanism which predicts that certain pathogenic mutations may hijack the way sperm production is controlled to their own advantage. In doing so, Different environmental, demographic and selective forces, together with these ‘selfish’ mutations become progressively enriched in the testis as men cultural and social characteristics of human lifestyle, shape the patterns of age and are therefore associated with an increased risk of transmission to variability of the human genome at the population level. In particular, in- the next generation. fectious diseases have been a major cause of human mortality, so natural The concept of selfish spermatogonial selection was originally proposed to selection is expected to act strongly on host defence genes. This is particu- account for the unusual presentation of a group of rare Mendelian diseases, larly expected for innate immunity genes, as they represent the first line of which we collectively called ‘pateErnSaHl aGge 2-e0ffe1c5t d |i sGorLdAerSs’G. ItO reWlie,s S oCn OprTinL-ANhDos, tU deKfe |n Wce WagaWin.sEt SpaHthGo.gOenRs.G I will present different cases of how s1om3eABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS of these genes and the pathways they trigger have been targeted by natural E
S1 .1 selection, in its different forms and intensities, helping to delineate genes Applications of CRISPR-Cas9 for Genome Engineering that are important for host defence, with respect to those exhibiting high- L. Cong; er immunological redundancy. I will also discuss how population-specific Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States. genetic variation can profoundly impact immune-related molecular pheno- types, such mRNA and miRNA expression upon infection (response eQTLs), and how these studies increase our understanding of immunological me- No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ chanisms under genetic control that have been crucial for our past and abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. present survival against infection. Finally, I will discuss how the differences E
S1 .2 in lifestyle and habitat of human populations, together with their distinct CRISPR-Cas9: biological roles, mechanisms, evolution and patterns of genetic diversity, affect the epigenetic landscape of the human applications genome. Specifically, our studies of populations of African rainforest hun- E. Charpentier1,2,3; ter-gatherers and sedentary farmers show that methylation variation as- 1Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Department of Regulation in Infection Biology, sociated with recent changes in habitat mostly involves immune functions, Braunschweig, Germany, 2The Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine Sweden whereas that associated with historical lifestyle primarily affects develop- (MIMS), Umeå Centre for Microbial Research (UCMR), Umea, Sweden, 3Hannover mental processes. Furthermore, methylation variation - particularly that Medical School, Hannover, Germany. correlated with historical lifestyle - shows strong associations with nearby genetic variants that, moreover, are enriched in signals of natural selection. Our work increases our understanding of whether and how populations are The RNA-programmable CRISPR-Cas9 system has recently emerged as a able to respond/adapt to environmental changes, including those related to transformative technology in biological sciences, allowing rapid and effici- pathogen pressures, and provides a resource for assessing the role of (epi) ent targeted genome editing, chromosomal marking and gene regulation in genetic mechanisms in human adaptation over different time scales. a large variety of cells and organisms. In this system, the endonuclease Cas9 or catalytically inactive Cas9 variants are programmed with single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) to target site-specifically any DNA sequence of interest given the presence of a short sequence (Protospacer Adjacent Motif, PAM) jux- taposed to the complementary region between the sgRNA and target DNA. The system is efficient, versatile and easily programmable. Originally, CRISPR-Cas is an RNA-mediated adaptive immune system that protects bacteria and archaea from invading mobile genetic elements (pha- ges, plasmids). Short crRNA (CRISPR RNA) molecules containing unique ge- nome-targeting spacers commonly guide Cas protein(s) to invading cognate nucleic acids to affect their maintenance. CRISPR-Cas has been classified into three main types and further subtypes. CRISPR-Cas9 originates from the type II CRISPR-Cas system that has evolveSdtr uenpitqoucoec mcuosl epcyuolgaern mesechanis- ms for maturation of crRNAs and targeting of invading DNA, which my labo- ratory has identified in the human pathogen . During the step of crRNA biogenesis, a unique CRISPR-associated RNA, tracrRNA, base pairs with the repeats of precursor-crRNA to form anti-repeat-repeat dual-RNAs that are cleaved by RNase III in the presence of Cas9 (formerly Csn1), generating mature tracrRNA and intermediate forms of crRNAs. Fol- lowing a second maturation event, the mature dual-tracrRNA-crRNAs guide the endonuclease Cas9 to cleave cognate target DNA and thereby affect the maintenance of invading genomes. We have shown that the endonuclease Cas9 can be programmed with sgRNAs mimicking the natural dual-tracrR- NA-crRNAs to target site-specifically any DNA sequence of interest. I will discuss the biological roles of CRISPR-Cas9, the mechanisms involved, the evolution of type II CRISPR-Cas components in bacteria and the applications of CRISPR-Cas9 as a novel genome engineering technology. E
S2 .1 Leveraging molecular networks to reveal pathways underlying complex diseases D. Marbach1,2; 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have successfully identified thousands of genetic loci associated with a broad range of complex traits and diseases. However, translating these associations into a functional un- derstanding of disease processes remains a difficult problem. One approach to address this challenge are network-based association strategies, which interpret genetic variants within the molecular circuits that sense and pro- pagate them. The premise is that, for a given trait or disease, causal variants tend to perturb genes that cluster in relevant pathways or network modu- les. Based on this premise, methods identify dysregulated pathways and/or prioritize candidate genes using network connectivity. In this educational session, I will: (1) review basic concepts as well as the latest developments in pathway and network-based GWAS analysis, (2) discuss different types of networks that are used by these methods and how they can be constructed, and (3) give a brief summary of our recent work. We inferred a unique compendium of ~400 cell type and tissue-specific en- hancer-gene regulatory networks and demonstrated their value for integra- tion with GWAS data across a broad range of traits and diseases. Our results suggest that cell type-specific regulatory circuits are key to understand the fine-scale mechanism of genes underlying complex diseases. Web resources: http://dream.broadinstitute.org, http://regulatorycircuits.org. 14 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index E
S2 .2 E
S4 .2 Gene co-expression networks European rare disease policies- what does it really mean for planning L. Serrano; services? Barcelona, Spain. K. Bushby; Newcastle University John Walton Centre for Muscular Dystrophy Research, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. Rare diseases are chronically debilitating conditions, mostly inherited, that E
S3 .1 affect less than 5 in 10000 people. It is estimated that in the EU 5,000-8,000 Inherited and acquired kidney cancers: opportunities for targeted rare diseases affect 27-36 million people (6-8% of the population). therapeutic approaches M. F. Di Renzo1,2; The EU objectives in the field of rare diseases have been defined in order 1Department of Oncology, University of Torino Medical School, Candiolo, Italy, 2Candiolo to assemble all the elements necessary for a global strategy to tackle rare Cancer Institute, Candiolo (Torino), Italy. diseases efficiently. The foremost aim is to improve patients’ chances of ob- taining the most appropriate and timely diagnosis, information and care on the assumption that this aim can be achieved more effectively through colla- Hereditary renal cell carcinoma (RCC) may account for 5% to 8% of kidney borative, European action than by the Member States individually. cancers. This approximation may be significantly underestimated. However, Most EU policies do not differ significantly from what most Member States the presentation will be focused on those inherited syndromes with kid- already have in place and these policies should not incur an extra burden for ney cancers, which have been associated to germline mutations in possibly the Member States, particularly those with greater economic challenges and “actionable” genes. Several hereditary RCC syndromes have been charac- less-developed health systems. terized, including von Hippel-Lindau (VHL), hereditary papillary renal cell In a nutshell, EU rare disease policies are aiming to make rare diseases more carcinoma (HPRC), Birt-Hogg-Dube´ (BHD), hereditary leiomyomatosis and visible through the promotion of an appropriate coding system that will RCC (HLRCC), succinate dehydrogenase kidney cancer (SDH-RCC), tuberous allow the correct and prompt identification of patients. Other key aspects sclerosis complex (TSC) and Cowden syndrome and have been shown to include the development and implementation of National Plans to ensu- be associated with germline mutations in VHL, MET, FLCN, FH, SDHB/C/D, re equal access to prevention, diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation for TS
C1 /2 or PTEN respectively. Although these syndromes have similarities, people with rare diseases. In general, the European rare diseases policies they vary in histology, aggressiveness, penetrance, and associated clinical ensure that common guidelines are developed and shared everywhere in manifestations. Understanding the genetic basis of cancer of the kidney, and Europe for areas such as research, centres of expertise, development of or- in particular of the inherited forms, has significant implications for diagno- phan drugs etc. sis and management of this disease and has provided the foundation for the The concept of European reference networks (ERNs) for rare diseases is one development of targeted therapeutics. VHL is the gene for clear cell kidney of the latest instruments provided by the EC to tackle rare diseases requiring cancer. The VHL protein forms a complex that targets the hypoxia-inducible specialised care. They should serve as research and knowledge networks, factors (HIFs) for degradation. Knowledge of this pathway resulted in the treating patients from other Member States and ensuring the availability of development of therapeutic approaches now approved for treatment of this subsequent treatment facilities where necessary. This concept will certainly disease. Clinical trials are ongoing with agents targeting the tyrosine kinase support the implementation of the “Cross-Border Healthcare Directive” and MET in type I papillary RCC. BHD is thought to be involved in energy and/or the equity of care for patients according to the state of the art; however, it nutrient sensing through the AMPK and mTOR signaling pathways. A here- will also be the measure that will likely inflict greater financial cost on Mem- ditary form of type 2 papillary renal carcinoma is caused by inactivation of ber States. To establish effective ERNs will require not only technical but a Krebs cycle enzyme (FH or SDH) due to mutation. Also in these cases HIF also financial resources coupled with an EU-wide spirit of cooperation. might have a pathogenic role, but also other metabolic and signaling altera- E
S5 .1 tions might be targeted for therapy. GeneConsult, Phenomizer, Face2gene with short presentations how E
S3 .2 they work and test cases to compare the tools From inherited breast/ovarian cancer to PARP inhibitors and beyond P. Robinson; W. Foulkes; Berlin, Germany. Dept Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ It is now 20 years since the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes were localized and abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. identified. We know a tremendous amount about how these genes work, E
S5 .2 and great strides have been made in applying this knowledge clinically, most Clinical Face Phenotype Space: Using standard facial imaging to aid notably in the development of novel therapeutic approaches to cancers ari- diagnosis of genetic syndromes sing in mutation carriers. In addition, detailed, large-scale epidemiological M. Alvi1, Q. Ferry1, J. Steinberg1, C. Webber1, D. R. FitzPatrick2, C. P. Ponting1, A. studies have resulted in accurate estimations of cancer risks, and modifier Zisserman1, C. Nellaker1; genes are likely to be useful in the future to help stratify mutation carriers 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, into clinically-useful risk categories. Despite these advances, 85% of the fa- United Kingdom. milial risk, and 60% of strongly heritable breast cancer remains unexplai- ned, and similarly, a significant fraction of the genetic causes of ovarian can- cer remains unexplained. Clinical dysmorphology is a key discipline within clinical genetics and re- In this presentation, I will discuss newer breast and/or ovarian cancer sus- quires an enormous breadth of experience to correctly classify and diagno- ceptibility genes such as PALB2, ATM, CHEK2 and newly identified candi- se ultra-rare diseases. There has been a significant amount of research into date genes such as RECQL, and others. First, I will discuss the genes, their developing objective quantification methods to leverage clinician expertise. key functions and their contribution to breast/ovarian cancer risk. Then I I will give a brief introduction to imaging based computational phenotyping will introduce gene panel testing for breast/ovarian cancer, and consider research, touching on the morphometrics, anthropometry, 3D imaging mo- the candidacy of these genes in the setting of testing unaffected women in dalities, and syndrome classification. the medical genetics clinic. Following on from this, I will debate the pros and Recent developments in computer vision research have begun to enable cons of population-based testing for BRCA1, BRCA2 and other related genes. analyses based on ordinary photographs to be performed for the purpose Finally, I will review data that relates to the use of germ-line genetic infor- of computational phenotyping. I will present Clinical Face Phenotype Space mation about breast/ovarian cancer genes in making therapeutic decisions. (CFPS), an algorithm to automatically detect faces in photographs, annotate locations of key anatomical parts and extract machine readable feature de- E
S4 .1 scriptions of the facial gestalt. The approach uses machine learning to create Patient perspective’s to rare diseases a multidimensional space shaped to account for spurious variations such as Y. Le Cam; Paris, France. lighting, pose, occlusions, and image quality. The CFPS locates patients in the context of known syndromes, and thus can help generating disease hypothe- ses. This holds promise as an impartial means of narrowing the search space to suspected rare diseases, and could augment the prioritisation of testing No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ in clinical investigations. Moreover, CFPS allows the clustering of patients by abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANpDhe, nUotKy p|e W evWenW wh.EenS nHoG kn.OowRnG syndrome diagnosis exists, thereby ai 1di 5ng disease identification.ABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index Finally, I will describe new approaches to learn the CFPS models and the 1. Silver Russell syndrome increased accuracies of facial phenotype representations, and how models chrm 7, 11p15 (Growth restriction, asymmetry) of phenotype variation can aid inferring causative genetic variants from cli- 2. Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus (TNDM) nical sequencing. 6q24 (Transient neonatal diabetes, intrauterine growth retardation, diabe- E
S6 .1 tes) The 100,000 Genomes Project, Bringing Personalised Medicine Into 3. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) Healthcare 11p15 (Overgrowth, omphalocoele, hypoglycaemia, tumour risk) M. Caulfield; 4. Wang-Kagami-Ogata syndrome (WKOS) London, United Kingdom. 14q32 (mild overgrowth, mental retardation) 5. Temple syndrome (TS) 14q32 (Growth retardation, early puberty, obesity) No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ 6. Angelman syndrome (AS) abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. 15q11q13 (Mental retardation, ataxia) 7. Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) E
S6 .2 15q11q13 (Growth retardation, mental retardation, obesity) My vision on genomic medicine A. Wojcicki; 8. Pseudohypoparathyroidism Ib (PH
P1 b) Mountain View, CA, United States. 20q13.2 (Overgrowth, parathyroid hormone resistance) The major overlapping features in most of these conditions (except Angel- man) are disordered fetal growth, either excessive or restricted growth, Consumer genetic testing and big data is a powerful combination proven neurodevelopmental delay and disordered metabolism. Diagnosis can be to have a significant impact on research. Large pools of genetic informati- difficiult as many of the features are non-specific. on - like that being collected in the UK, China and United States - can help Most patients with IDs either have uniparental disomy (inheritance of both find treatments for disease and fuel scientific discoveries. But it begins with chromosome homologues from one parent with no contribution from the people and their engagement. A people-powered research model is critical other), copy number variation involving imprinted loci, imprinted gene mu- to advancing research. tation or an epigenetic mutation. To be discussed: E
S7 .1 -examples of each phenotype together with the clinical challenges for dia- Imprinting and long noncoding RNAs in health and disease gnosis M. S. Bartolomei; University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States. -genetic counselling and risks to sibs and offspring dependent on the under- lying epigenetic or genetic mutation E
S8 .1 Imprinted genes are expressed from a single parental allele and are the main Wishes for the end of life in Huntington’s Disease reason why mammals require both a maternal and paternal contribution for S. Booij1, A. Tibben2, R. A. C. Roos2, D. P. Engberts2; normal development. Defects in imprinted gene expression or loss of a sin- 1CWZ, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2CWZ, Leiden, Netherlands. gle allele of an imprinted gene are responsible for a number of human syn- Introduction: dromes, including Prader-Willi Syndrome, Angelman Syndrome, Beckwith- Wiedemann Syndrome and Silver-Russell Syndrome. There are fewer than In the Netherlands euthanasia or physician assisted suicide 200 imprinted genes that have been described thus far in mice. The imprin- (PAS) is legal since 2002 under strict conditions. Euthanasia or PAS is ex- ted expression and regulation of these genes is largely conserved between empt from prosecution when the euthanasia or PAS is performed by a phy- rodents and humans, which allows mechanistic studies of this most unusual sician after a direct request from a patient or based on an advance directive. form of gene expression using both animal models and human tissues and Furthermore the physician must be convinced that the patient suffers unbe- cell models. Most imprinted genes reside in clusters that are located throug- arable and without prospect or relief. hout the mammalian genome. The clusters typically contain an imprinting Huntington’s Disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant progressive neuro- control region (ICR), which harbors allele-specific DNA methylation and degenerative disease, characterized by chorea and hypokinesia, psychiatric governs the imprinting of the entire domain. Deletion or inappropriate epi- symptoms and progressive cognitive decline leading to dementia. In The genetic modifications of the ICR causes deregulation of the entire cluster in Netherlands approximately 1,700 patients have HD and another 6,000- cis. Although most imprinted clusters use long non-coding RNAs to regulate 8,000 persons are at risk. Primary cause of death is pneumonia, second imprinted gene expression, a few are regulated by CTCF and allele-specific cause is suicide. Each year approximately 7 requests for euthanasia from insulator function. One such cluster harbors the H19 and Igf2 imprinted ge- a HD patient are granted. We have observed an increase in conversations nes, and is controlled by an ICR that contains multiple CTCF binding sites. aObbojuetc twiviesh: es for the end of life between physicians and patients, but this Gain of maternal methylation and loss of paternal hypermethylation of the was never investigated. H19/IGF2 ICR are associated with the human growth disorders Beckwith- to investigate presence and content of wishes for the end of life Wiedemann Syndrome and Silver-Russell Syndrome, respectively. Using aMmeothnogsdts :H D patients, and the relationship with demographic or disease gene targeting and genome editing, we have generated ES cells, iPS cell lines specific characteristics. and mice to study the mechanisms of imprinting for these imprinted loci First, 14 patients in different stages of the disease and 15 physi- and to model the epigenetic mutations in human syndromes. We have also cians were interviewed. Based on the qualitative research a custom made developed SNP-FISH to study the dynamics of allele-specific gene expression questionnaire was developed and sent to 242 Dutch patients registered in at the single cell level in cell lines and tissues exhibiting loss of imprinting. tRhees uLletisd:e n HD Registry Database. Information on demographic variables and clinical characteristics such as TFC, MMSE, UHDRS-M was collected. E
S7 .2 The interviews showed that most patients had strong ideas about Diagnosing imprinting-related disorders things they do not want for the end of their life because of their experiences K. I. Temple; University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, United Kingdom. with family members. Knowledge about how to effectuate the wishes ( for example the role of the physician or family and the value of the advance directive) was in some of them inadequate or lacking. In general, conversa- tions about wishes for the end of life were not initiated by physicians. Phy- Genomic imprinting is a good example of epigenetic regulation of gene ex- sicians reported problems how to deal with an advance directive especially pression. Imprinted genes are characterised by expression from only one in light of cognitive decline, psychiatric symptoms and signs and ‘response allele (of the pair) in a consistent parent of origin manner; often only in cer- shift’. tain developmental windows and in some tissues of the body. The pattern is The questionnaire was returned by 134 patients (55.4%) of whom 101 (75%) set by targeted methylation within the male or female germ line that resists reported to have some kind of thoughts for the end of life. These thoughts the post fertilisation waves of demethylation of the zygote. Imprinted genes concerned care (11%) and ; thoughts about euthanasia or PAS (64%). The play an important role in fetal growth and development. Their carefully re- pCroenscelnucsei oonf :t houghts about the end of life was related to being familiar with gulated expression is important for normal cellular metabolism and human HD but not to any other socio-demographic or clinical variable. behaviour. Thoughts about and wishes for the end of life are widely pre- Imprinting Disorders. sent amongst patients with HD and known gene carriers and these thoughts A genetic or epigenetic mutation that impacts imprinting expression can re1s6ult in one of eight clinically recognisablEe SdHisoGrd 2er0s:1-5 | GLASGOW, SCOorT wLiAshNesD co, nUceKr n| eWutWhanWas.iEaS oHr PGAS.O inR aG majority of the respondents. Kno-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index CONCURRENT SESSIONS wing if end-of-life wishes are indeed increasingly present and knowing the 
C01 .1 content of these wishes could be helpful for physicians. It Implementation of a non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for could help treatment and guidance of HD patients, especially in light of the aneuploidy service in an NHS diagnostic laboratory absence of any effective treatment. Based on this study it seems impossible L. S. Chitty1,2, F. J. McKay2, S. Mason2, C. Boustred2, K. Lo1, L. Jenkins2, R. Daley3,2, M. Hill2, to determine which patients will have thoughts or wishes for the end of life C. Lewis1, S. Drury2, J. Fisher4, T. Verhoef5, S. Morris5; and which patients do not. Therefore these questions should be addressed 1UCL Institute of Child Health, London UK, London, United Kingdom, 2North East Thames in every patient with HD. Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3UCLH, London, United Kingdom, 4Antenatal Results and Choices, London, E
S8 .2 United Kingdom, 5Department of Applied Health Research, University College London, End of life decision making in neonates London, United Kingdom. A. A. E. Verhagen; University Medical Center Groningen, Dept of Paediatrics, Groningen, Netherlands. Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for aneuploidies is widely available through commercial providers, but implementation into public sector ma- In the developed world, gone are the days were infants simply died. Now, ternity care requires detailed evaluation because of the likely changes in almost every death is preceded by some exposure to medical care, where care pathway, educational requirements and potential economic impact. diagnoses and prognoses are rendered and decisions are made. The same Here we report the results of a study where a massively parallel sequencing is true of infants who survive life-threatening illness: they have often been approach to aneuploidy was developed in our NHS Regional Genetics Labo- through a long gauntlet of medical interventions. As a result, keeping track ratory, along with health professional and patient educational materials be- of all the care and decisions that preceded the current moment in time is fore introducing it into the DSS pathway in eight UK maternity units. Before essential to understand how the population of infants being observed came the study we estimated that if NIPT cost ~£250 per case introduction as a into existence, and to what we can validly infer from comparisons of groups contingent test at a cutoff of 1:1000 would increase the DS detection, whilst of infants. And as our ability to intervene in the lives and deaths of these pa- decreasing invasive testing with slight overall increase in cost of the DSS and tients increases, and the decisions of what to do or not do hinge not only on diagnostic pathway. data but also diverse human values, the importance of understanding and Women with a DSS risk ≥1:1000 were offered NIPT for trisomies 21, 18, monitoring how infants die increases in equal measure. In this presentation, and 13. The study, in a population of ~40,000 women, resulted in over 2500 the most common decisions about life-sustaining interventions in sick new- undergoing NIPT with results reported within 10 days, demonstrated the born are being discussed. Special attention is given to recent developments feasibility of introducing NIPT into the DSS pathway in the NHS. Women in practices such as neonatal euthanasia (in some countries) and withdrawal were very positive about NIPT, invasive testing rates fell significantly and of artificial fluid and nutrition that have may rendered boundaries between the detection of aneuploidy increased subsequent to the detection of aneu- withholding and withdrawing life-saving treatments more complex. ploid cases in the intermediate (1:150-1:1000) risk group. The higher than E
S9 .1 expected uptake of testing, some for information only, indicates that for in- Functional prediction of DNA sequence changes troduction of NIPT to be cost neutral, a lower risk cut off will be required. S. Tavtigian; These data are informing a report to the UK National Screening Committee Salt Lake City, UT, United States. who are responsible for the UK DSS policy. 
C01 .2 TRIDENT: or monitored NIPT implementation in the Netherlands No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ E. A. Sistermans1, G. H. Schuring-Blom2, B. H. W. Faas3, E. M. J. Boon4, C. J. Bax5, A. B. C. abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. Coumans6, A. T. J. I. Go7, K. Huijsdens-van Amsterdam8, M. V. E. Macville9, D. van Opstal10, E
S9 .2 E. Pajkrt11, B. Sikkema-Raddatz12, R. F. Suijkerbuijk12, J. M. G. van Vugt13, M. M. Weiss1, G. Protein structures to advance therapeutic discoveries C. M. L. Page-Christiaens14, D. Oepkes15; W. Yue; 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Oxford, United Kingdom. Netherlands, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, LDGA, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 5Dept of Obstetrics, VU University Medical Center No abstract received as per date of production. Check http://www.eshg.org/ Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, abstracts2015.0.html for possible updates. Maastricht UMC+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht UMC+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 10Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 11Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 12Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 13Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 14Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 15Department of Obstetrics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands. In many countries, Non Invasive Prenatal testing (NIPT) has been introdu- ced commercially, without governmental guidance. In the Netherlands the Population Screening Act regulates the introduction of screening programs for untreatable diseases such as Down syndrome. The Dutch NIPT consorti- um, consisting of all relevant stakeholders, obtained a license for 2 years for a nationwide NIPT implementation study called TRIDENT (Trial by Dutch laboratories for Evaluation st of Non‐Invasive Prenatal Testing). The study started on April 1 2014. In- clusion criteria are an increased risk (>1:200) for trisomy (T) 21, 18 or 13 based on the first trimester combined test, or because of medical history. After nine months of study, 2439 pregnant women have been tested and 2425 (99,4%) reports issued. We found 70 cases of T21 (2,9%), 8 cases of T18 (0,3%) and 10 cases of T13 (0,4%). Follow-up was completed for 78 cases of which 72 were confirmed, 6 were false positives, presumably due to confined placental mosaicism. Median turnaround time was 13 working days. Data on pregnancy outcomes are currently being collected. An amend- ment to TRIDENT to offer NIPT to all pregnant women as a first tier test is momentarily pending. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANTDhe, UNeKth |e WrlanWdsW ar.eE tShHe fGir.sOt cRouGntry where NIPT is incorporated into a1 g7o-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index vernmentally supported and health care funded prenatal Down syndrome (2-3 patients per sequencing run) and capable of detecting recombination screening program. The incorporation of the test in a university hospital la- events within the DMD gene by splitting the RHDO analysis into multiple boratory and clinical service guarantees appropriate counselling and allows statistically independent haplotype blocks across the targeted region. for proper follow up including thorough exploration of biological causes of Funded by: Health Innovation Challenge Fund (HICF) (DoH, Welcome false positive and false negative findings including detailed placental exami- Trust). nation. 
C01 .5 
C01 .3 Incidental findings of genome wide non-invasive fetal aneuploidy Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis; expansion from de novo to detection (NIPT): presymptomatic identification of maternal cancers autosomal recessive disorders using congenital adrenal hyperplasia N. Brison1, K. Van Den Bogaert1, P. Brady1, L. Dehaspe1, I. Wlodarska1, F. Amant2, P. as an example Vandenberghe1, T. de Ravel1, H. Peeters1, H. Van Esch1, K. Devriendt1, E. Legius1, J. R. S. Drury1,2, K. Lo3, C. Boustred1, F. McKay1, S. Mason1, P. Twiss1, S. Edwards1,4, M. Hill1,4, C. Vermeesch1; Lewis1,2, R. Daley1,4, L. Jenkins1, L. Chitty1,2,4; 1Center for Human Genetics, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Obstetrics and 1NE Thames Regional Genetics, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, Gynaecology, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 2Genetics & Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 3UCL Genetics Institute, London, United Kingdom, 4University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for fetal aneuploidy detection is incre- asingly being offered in the clinical setting following studies demonstrating high sensitivities and specificities for trisomies 21, 18 and 13 detection. Introduction However, a baseline false positive and false negative rate remains. We in- Our public sector accredited laboratory offers non-invasive prenatal diagno- troduced an analysis pipeline which addresses some of the technical and sis (NIPD) but currently this is restricted to paternal exclusion and de novo biologically-derived causes of error. Importantly, it differentiates high z- mutations. Here we review our experience of NIPD and introduce congenital scores due to fetal trisomies from those due to local maternal CNVs causing adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) as a model for NIPD of autosomal recessive (AR) false positives. Following routine clinical analysis of over 5000 prospective disease. pregnancies, several other genomic imbalances were found in addition to Materials and methods detection of the common autosomal aneuploidies. These findings include (i) An audit of cases was carried out from our internal database for 2014. other (segmental) aneuploidies (0,3% of cases), 4 of which could be confir- Agilent Sureselect Custom enrichment assay, targeted at heterozygous SNPs med to be fetal (1 mosaic trisomy 16 and 1 mosaic trisomy 15 which contai- around CY
P21 A2 was designed. CffDNA was prepared using Kappa Hyper ned a uniparental disomy cell line, 2 partial trisomies 18 and 1 terminal 5p Prep Kit. Libraries were sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq and variants deletion) and (ii) maternal imbalances. Importantly, three aberrant genome called using BWA and Varscan. Parental and proband samples were used to representation profiles were observed that could not be attributed to the construct parental haplotype. Fetal inheritance was determined using the maternal nor the fetal genomic constitution. Whole body diffusion-weighted constructed haplotypes. magnetic resonance imaging and subsequent pathologic and genetic inve- Results stigation uncovered the presence of respectively an ovarian carcinoma, a In 2014 203/337 (60%) molecular prenatal tests in our laboratory were follicular lymphoma and a nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin lymphoma. non-invasive. NIPD for fetal sex determination accounted for 73%, 14% The copy number variations in those tumors were concordant with the NIPT were for achondroplasia, 13% thanatophoric dysplasia and around 0.5% for plasma profile. NIPT thus enables the accurate presymptomatic detection of other monogenic disorders. Of those giving a definitive diagnosis in a mono- maternal tumors. These incidental findings are an unsuspected added be- genic condition 63/197 (32%) were NIPD. nefit of NIPT. CAH analysis of two families to date has correctly identified fetally inherited 
C01 .6 alleles, consistent with either corresponding CVS sample or follow-up data Non-invasive prenatal testing for aneuploidy and beyond: challenges from the pregnancy. of responsible innovation in prenatal screening - an ESHG/ASHG Conclusions position statement Non-invasive referrals exceed invasive in our prenatal service. NIPD in our W. Dondorp1, G. de Wert1, C. G. Van El2, M. C. Cornel2; laboratory is considered diagnostic and confirmatory invasive testing is not 1Maastricht University, dept of Health Ethics & Society, and Research Schools CAPHRI recommended. We are validating non-invasive assays for other recessive & GROW, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2VU University Medical Center, section community conditions including cystic fibrosis, sickle cell and beta-thalassemia. genetics and EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Supported by International Fund Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Eu- ropean Society for Paediatric Oncology, NIHR and GOSH-UCL BRC and GOS- HCC Several professional societies have issued position statements on noninvasi- 
C01 .4 ve testing (NIPT) in prenatal screening for common autosomal aneuploidies. Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of Duchenne and Becker Ethical aspects have not been a main focus of those statements. This ESHG/ muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) by relative haplotype dosage ASHG document fills this lacuna. Emerging scenarios for introducing NIPT M. Parks, S. Court, S. Cleary, S. Clokie, J. Hewitt, D. Williams, T. Cole, F. MacDonald, M. into prenatal screening should not just be regarded as a matter of screening Griffiths, S. K. Allen; technology and health economics; the question is also how the trade-offs Birmingham Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom. involved enable or impede meaningful reproductive choices and how they affect the balance of benefits and burdens for pregnant women and their partners. With improving screening technologies and decreasing costs of As part of the NIPSIGEN project (Non-Invasive Prenatal diagnosis for Single sequencing and analysis, it will become technically possible to expand the Gene disorders), we are developing and validating a clinical test for NIPD scope of prenatal screening beyond common autosomal aneuploidies. This of DMD/BMD in at-risk pregnancies. Through highly targeted enrichment should be limited to serious congenital and childhood disorders, and only (200 Kb across a 2.4 Mb region on ChrX) and massively parallel sequencing following sound validation studies and a comprehensive evaluation of all (Illumina MiSeq) of cffDNA followed by relative haplotype dosage (RHDO) relevant aspects. In countries where prenatal screening for fetal abnormali- analysis, we were able to determine fetal inheritance of the dystrophin gene ties is offered as a public health programme, governments and public health in six male pregnancies: four healthy pregnant donors and two pregnant authorities should adopt a more active role to ensure the responsible inno- DMD carriers all undergoing invasive prenatal testing. Fetal genomic DNA vation of prenatal screening on the basis of ethical principles. This requires from CVS of healthy donors was used to identify the haplotype of interest guarantees of the quality of the screening process as a whole (including on ChrX. For the DMD pregnancies, the affected haplotype was identified non-laboratory aspects such as information and counseling), education of from genomic DNA from an affected sibling. Using RHDO analysis, the allelic professionals, systematic evaluation in the light of the aim of the practice, imbalance in 300-400 heterozygous SNPs was used to determine over /un- accountability to all stakeholders and promotion of equity of access. This der-representation of the reference haplotype in statistically independent document is the result of a unique collaboration between the ESHG Public haplotype blocks. For all healthy pregnancies, over-representation of the and Professional Policy Committee, and the ASHG Social Issues Committee. expected fetal haplotype was observed for all haplotype blocks. Both DMD The final version was approved by the Boards of both Societies in December pregnancies were correctly diagnosed and a recombination event was de- 2014. tected. The fetal portion of cfDNA inputted into the RHDO analysis was cal- culated using the same allelic imbalance. This new assay for NIPD of DMD/ BMD has shown great promise in the initial stages of validation with high se1n8sitivity and specificity on samples tesE teS dH sG o f2 ar0 . I1 t 5 is | h G ighL lA y S afG foO rdW abl, e S COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C02 .1 Leuven, Belgium, 6Jessa Hospital, Laboratory for Molecular Diagnostics, Clinical Biology, Single cell analysis “simplification” dramatically increases Hasselt, Belgium. complexity: considerations in technique, quality control, analysis, and possibilities for translation to the clinic L. D. White, J. D. Landua, L. Simon, M. T. Bernardi, D. Xavier, C. A. Shaw, M. T. Lewis; Tandem repeats are short DNA sequences that are repeated head-to-tail Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. with a propensity to be variable. They constitute a significant proportion of the human genome, also occurring within coding and regulatory regions. Va- riation in these repeats can alter the function and/or expression of genes al- Introduction: New technology platforms intended for single cell analysis lowing organisms to swiftly adapt to novel environments. Importantly, some (SCA) are bringing us to a new frontier in science and studies that were only repeat expansions have also been linked to certain diseases. Unfortunately, dreamt are very possibly within reach of researchers studying everything due to the nature of short read sequencing technologies, tandem repeats are from population dynamics, cell signaling, to cancer/metastases mutation not analyzed during whole genome or exome sequencing studies. We deve- detection, and eventual move of SCA into diagnostics/personalized medi- loped a novel capture assay for large-scale genotyping of tandem repeats cine. We report on the challenges involved in developing SCA for RNA NGS: (Duitama J., Zablotskaya A. et al., Nucl. Acids Research, 2014) and extended workflow, experimental design, techniques, quality control, analysis, and the assay for the identification of X linked disease-related repeats using long interpretation. read (averaging 12 kb) PacBio RS II technology. For 837 (83% of all) poten- Materials and Methods: Utilizing Fluidigm’s 
C1 ™ system, we captured 4 cell tially functional repeats, unique capture baits were designed, as well as for populations. cDNA was QCd with capillary electrophoresis. 96 single cells 1000 intronic and intergenic repeats. Of these, a full tandem repeat length were prepped for Illumina sequencing using a modified Nextera XT kit. sequence was obtained for 84-89% of the targets in male DNA samples. We Samples were sequenced on the HiSeq2500 Rapid (PE 100 base reads). are currently implementing this assay to screen for potentially causal varia- Results: Integrated workflow between flow sorting and 
C1  capture required tion underlying X-linked disorders that are not explained following array planning and a close relationship with the flow facility. Although cDNA, li- and exome sequencing. brary preparation, and the sequencing run QC measurements passed, we Grant references: Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (FWO)-Vlaande- had 14% failure (13/96 libraries). Data analysis (approximately 3 million ren [G.0795.11 to K.J.V., J.R.V., G.F.]; Marguérite-Marie Delacroix [GV/B-155 reads/cell) demonstrates that accumulation of unique RNA species across to A.Z., G.F]. multiple single cells yields coverage estimates for genomic expression, but 
C02 .4 that cell types can be differentiated. The value of long-read single molecule sequencing in diagnostics Conclusions: SCA has great potential, however, variance in expression of in- S. Y. Anvar1, H. Buermans1, R. Vossen1, M. Liem1, M. Losekoot2, T. van der Straaten3, H. dividual genes requires detailed consideration, and cluster analysis of single van der Klift1,2, J. Wijnen1,2, J. Swen3, D. Peters1, J. T. den Dunnen1,2; cells from multiple compartments should take mean-variance relationships 1Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Clinical of individual genes into account. Analysis and experimental design require Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Clinical Pharmacology a mind shift from the averaging method to which we have been chained and and Toxicology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. there remains an inordinate amount of work to be done before single cell clinical diagnostics is possible. Sanger sequencing is THE standard to scan disease-genes for deleterious 
C02 .2 variants. Although next generation sequencing is gradually taken over it will Large-scale genotyping of polymorphic inversions in the human not resolve all issues. A major limitation of both methods is their short read genome length (~1,000 nucleotides), making it impossible to study certain rearran- S. Villatoro1, R. Zaurin1, M. Gayà-Vidal1, C. Giner-Delgado1,2, D. Vicente-Salvador1, D. Izquierdo1, M. Oliva1, L. Pantano1, M. Puig1, M. Cáceres1,3; gements and/or resolve regions with repetitive sequences. We have applied 1Institut de Biotecnologia i de Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, long-read single molecule sequencing (Pacific Biosciences) to overcome this Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain, 2Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia, Universitat limitation and tackle some of the remaining diagnostic problems. Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain, 3Institució Catalana de Recerca i For targeted sequencing we apply a two-step procedure: target amplifica- Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. tion with gene-specific M13-tailed primers followed by barcoding using reusable M13-tailed barcode primers. Barcoded samples are then pooled and processed for smart-bell sequencing. Sequencing runs yield ~60,000 Inversions are known to be associated to phenotypic and functional diffe- sequences with ~15kb read lengths. rences between individuals. Unfortunately, their study has lagged behind Using this approach we have targeted several loci of interest. The CY
P2 D6 due to the technical difficulties of their analysis, especially when they are gene is amplified and sequenced as a 6.6kb fragment. Although homolo- flanked by highly identical inverted repeats (IRs). Here, we present a new gous sequences may co-amplify (e.g. the CY
P2 D7 gene) the full length se- method called inverse MLPA (iMLPA, patent pending) to genotype simul- quences simply their discrimination and recognition of both CY
P2 D6 alleles. taneously multiple inversions mediated by IRs in hundreds of individuals, The latter is important to accurately predict the drug dose to use. In PKD1 which is based on a combination of inverse PCR and probe hybridization. In long-reads allow us to start in unique 3‘ sequences and read far into highly particular, current developed assays are able to genotype more than 30 in- repetitive 5‘ sequences. In PM
S2  they help to discriminate the active gene versions using only 25 ng of DNA per inversion, although it should be easy to from several PM
S2  pseudogenes. When genomic structure complicates am- include additional inversions as they are identified. To test the performance plification or compromises analysis, we use RNA to synthesize full-length of the technique, we have genotyped 24 of these inversions in 550 individu- cDNA and perform long-read sequencing. Finally, we use long-read single als of seven diverse human populations from the 1000 Genomes Project with molecule sequencing to resolve individual alleles from repeat expansion dis- 98.5% genotyping success rate. In addition, by comparing with the results orders and to analyse complex disease-associated repeat structures (D4Z4 obtained by PCR for a subset of the samples, we have shown that iMLPA is in FSHD). We conclude PacBio-sequencing is a powerful diagnostic tool faci- highly accurate and most errors accumulate in specific inversions affected litating analysis of complex genomic loci. by restriction-site polymorphisms. Finally, we have established the popula- 
C02 .5 tion distribution and evolutionary history of the inversions, their functional Comparison of exome and genome sequencing technologies for the effects on genes, and we have observed that most inversions with IRs are complete capture of protein coding regions recurrent and are not linked to SNPs. Therefore, having a high-throughput S. H. Lelieveld1, M. Spielmann2,3, S. Mundlos2,3, J. A. Veltman1,4, C. Gilissen1; technique to genotype these inversions is crucial to shed light on their as- 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud sociation with complex phenotypes and disease susceptibilities, and could University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Institute for Medical Genetics and contribute to unravel the hidden heritability of the human genome. Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Max Planck Support: European Research Council (ERC) Starting Grant (INVFEST). Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands. 
C02 .3 Large-scale single-molecule sequencing of tandem repeats on the human X chromosome For next-generation sequencing technologies sufficient base-pair coverage A. Zablotskaya1,2, G. Peeters1,2, W. I. M. Meert2,3, K. J. Verstrepen4, G. Froyen5,2,6, J. R. Vermeesch1,2; is the foremost requirement for the reliable detection of genomic variants. 1Laboratory for Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Department of Human Genetics, KU We investigated whether whole genome sequencing (WGS) platforms offer Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU superior coverage of coding regions compared to whole exome sequencing Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Genomics Core, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, (WES) platforms, and compared single-base coverage for a large set of diffe- 4VIB lab for Systems Biology & CMPG Lab for Genetics and Genomics, KU Leuven, Leuven, rent exome and genome samples (24 Agilent V4 (at 78x and 160x coverage), Belgium, 5Human Genome Laboratory, Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, 12 Agilent V5 (100x), 12 NimbleGen V3 (95x), 24 Complete Genomics (44x ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANaDnd, U87Kx) ,| 1W1 IWlluWmi.nEaS HHiSGeq.O (2R8xG), 12 Illumina X-Ten (40x)). 19ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index We find that WES platforms have improved considerably in the last years, features including cortical dysplasia, hypotonia, movemenDt DdiXs3oXrders, beha- but at comparable sequencing depth, WGS outperforms WES in terms of viour problems and epilepsy. In seeming contrast with these observations, covered coding regions. At higher sequencing depth (95x-160x) WES suc- we additionally identified three families with variants in in sil iscuoggestive cessfully captures 95% of the coding regions with a minimal coverage of 20x, for a X-linked recessive inheritance pattern, in which males had mild to sdee- compared to 98% for WGS at 87 fold coverage. A comparison to published vneorveo ID while carrier females were unaffected. Intriguingly, predic- gene panel studies shows that these perform similar to WES and WGS in tion and protein modelling progrDaDmXs3 cXould not discriminate between the terms of coverage. Three different assessments of sequence coverage bias variants in affected females and the variants associated with X-linked showed consistent biases for WES but not for WGS. We found no clear dif- recessive inheritance. The gene encodes a multifunctional RNA heli- ferences for the technologies concerning their ability to achieve complete case and is particularly intolerant to genomic variation. To further explore coverage of 2,759 clinically relevant genes. the pathogenic mechanisms that might underlie the differences in disease We show that WES performs comparable to WGS in terms of covered ba- transmission and phenotypic outcomes, we have employed a combination ses if sequenced at 2-3 times higher coverage. This does, however, go at the of in vitro and in vivo assays grounded on the known roles of DDX3X on the cost of substantially more sequencing biases in WES approaches, which may regulation of β-catenin signaling. Preliminary studies indicate a dosage-de- impact applications such as the identification of copy-number variants and pendent effect of DDX3X on Wnt signaling that is altered by the introduction somatic variation. Our findings will guide laboratories to make an informed of the majority of the missense changes found in our cohort. This work was supported by the Netherlands Organization for Health Research decision on which sequencing platform and coverage to choose. and Development (ZonMw, 907-00-365). 
C02 .6 A significant proportion of de novo point mutations arise post- zygotically R. Acuna-Hidalgo1, T. Bo2, M. Kwint1, M. van de Vorst1, M. Pinelli3, J. A. Veltman1, H. 
C03 .2 Alexander1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, C. Gilissen1; De novo and recurrent PP
P2 R5D and PP
P2 R1A missense mutations 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2. State Key Laboratory cause protein phosphatase 2A dysfunction and intellectual disability of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, China, 3Telethon Institute of D. Haesen1, V. Janssens1, L. E. L. M. Vissers2, S. Mehta3, M. J. Parker4, M. Wright5, J. Vogt6, Genetics and Medicine, - Pozzuoli, Italy. S. McKee7, J. L. Tolmie8, N. Cordeiro9, T. Kleefstra2, M. H. Willemsen2, M. R. F. Reijnders2, S. Berland10, E. Hayman11, E. Lahat11, E. H. Brilstra12, K. L. I. van Gassen12, E. Zonneveld- Huijssoon12, C. I. de Bie12, A. Hoischen2, E. E. Eichler13, R. Holdhus10, V. M. Steen10, S. O. Døskeland14, M. E. Hurles15, D. R. FitzPatrick16, T. DDD-study17, G. Houge10; De novo mutations are recognized both as an important source of human 1University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, genetic variation and as a prominent cause of sporadic disease. Mutations Netherlands, 3Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Sheffield Children’s identified as de novo are generally assumed to have occurred during game- Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 5Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals, Newcastle, United togenesis and, consequently, be present as germline events in an individual. Kingdom, 6Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 7Belfast City However, Sanger sequencing does not provide the sensitivity to reliably di- Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, 8NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Glasgow, United stinguish somatic from germline mutations. Therefore, the proportion of de Kingdom, 9Ayrshire Central Hospital, Ayrshire, United Kingdom, 10Haukeland University novo mutations occurring somatically rather than in the germline remains Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 11Asaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zriffin, Israel, 12UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 13University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 14University unknown. To determine the contribution of post-zygotic events to de novo of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 15Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United mutations, we analysed a set of de novo mutations in 50 parent-offspring Kingdom, 16MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 17Welcome Trust trios using three sequencing techniques. We found that 8 out of 107 pre- Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. sumed germline de novo mutations (7.5%) were in fact present as mosaic mutations in the blood of the offspring and were therefore likely to have oc- curred post-zygotically. Furthermore, genome-wide analysis of de novo va- For the first time, inherited dysregulation of protein serine/threonine de- riants led to the identification of 5 de novo mutations in the offspring which phosphorylation is found to cause genetic disease. De novo missense mu- were also detectable in the blood of one of the parents. This implies parental tations in two different subunits of protein phosphatase 2A (P
P2 A) were mosaicism as the origin of these de novo mutations in 5 out of 50 trios. Re- identified in 15 individuals with mild to severe ID, long-lasting hypotonia, markably, none of the parental low-level mosaicisms detected by Whole Ge- epileptic susceptibility, frontal bossing, mild hypertelorism and downslan- nome Sequencing and validated by amplicon-based deep sequencing, were ting palpebral fissures. identified by Sanger sequencing. Our results show that a significant propor- The P
P2 A holoenzymes comprise catalytic (C), scaffolding (A) and regulato- tion of de novo mutations presumed to be germline in fact occurred either ry (B) subunits that determine subcellular anchoring, substrate specificity post-zygotically in the offspring or were inherited from low level mosaicism and physiological function. Nine patients had mutations (
E198 K, 
E200 K, in one of the parents. 
P201 R or W207R) that brought a basic charge into a highly conserved acidic 
C03 .1 loop of the PP
P2 R5D-encoded regulatory B56δ subunit, including six indivi- De novo and familial DDX3X mutations are associated with X-linked duals who had the same de novo 
E198 K mutation. Five others had de novo intellectual disability and a diverse phenotypic spectrum mutations (
P179 L, R182W and R258H, all also cancer-associated) in the L. Snijders Blok1, E. Madsen2, M. Reijnders1, H. Venselaar1, C. Helsmoortel3, C. Gillissen1, PP
P2 R1A-encoded scaffolding Aα subunit. Large ventricles causing macro- A. Hoischen1, L. Vissers1, T. Koemans1, W. Wissink1, E. E. Eichler4, C. Romano5, H. Van cephaly and suspicion of hydrocephalus were features in some cases, and all Esch6, C. Stumpel7, M. Vreeburg7, E. Smeets7, B. van Bon1,8, M. Shaw8, J. Gecz8, M. Bienek9, Aα cases had partial or complete corpus callosum agenesis. C. Jensen9, B. Loeys3, A. van Dijck3, A. M. Innes10, N. Di Donato11, S. G. Mehta12, K. Tatton- Functional studies showed that the mutant A and B subunits were stable Brown13, D. Baralle14, A. Henderson15, S. Dijkstra16, J. Schieving1, S. Haas9, H. Brunner1,7, F. Kooy3, C. van Roozendaal7, R. Pfundt1, V. Kalscheuer9, N. Katsanis2, T. Kleefstra1; and uncoupled from the C subunit: Mutant B56δ had deficient A and C subu- 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Duke University Medical nit binding, while mutant Aα had deficient binding of C, but not of B56δ. This Center, Durham, NC, United States, 3University and University Hospital of Antwerp, suggested that mutant B56δ or mutant Aα-B56δ complexes could hinder C Antwerp, Belgium, 4University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 5IRCCS subunit access to B56δ-anchored P
P2 A substrates. Such a dominant-nega- Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy, 6University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, tive effect was supported by our finding of hyperphosphorylation of B56δ- Belgium, 7Maastricht UMC+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 8The University of Adelaide, regulated substrates upon mutant subunit overexpression. This was also in Adelaide, Australia, 9Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, line with clinical observation indicating a correlation between the degrees 10University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 11Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 12Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation of ID and biochemical disturbance. Trust, Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 13St George‘s University 
C03 .3 of London, London, United Kingdom, 14University of Southampton and Southampton Mutations in genes encoding components of protein phosphatase 2A University Hospitals NHS Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom, 15Institute of Genetic (P
P2 A) cause human overgrowth and intellectual disability Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 16ORO, C. Loveday1, K. Tatton-Brown1, M. Clarke1, I. Westwood2, A. Renwick1, E. Ruark1, E. Organisation for people with Intellectual Disabilities, Deurne, Netherlands. Ramsay1, R. van Montfort2, N. Rahman1,3; 1Division of Genetics & Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom, 2Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, Institute of Cancer Research, Next generation sequencing studies have led to the identification of a large London, United Kingdom, 3Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United number of novel autosomal intellectual disability (ID) genes. However, the Kingdom. interpretation of disease causality of gdeen netoivco v ariants on the X chromosome has remained behind and up toD nDoXw3 Xhas been mostly dependent on segrega- tion analysis in families. We identified frameshift, missense, nonsen- Overgrowth syndromes comprise a group of heterogeneous disorders cha- se and splice site mutations in in 15 females within cohorts of spora- racterised by excessive growth parameters, often in association with intel- d2 ic0 ID patients. These females showed miE ldS tH o G se v2 er0 e1 ID5 a| nG d L vA arS ioG usO oW the, r S CO lecT tL uaA l dN isD ab, iU litK y. T| o W ideW ntW ify. nE eS wH cG au. sO esR oG f human overgrowth, we have beenABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index BAMBI WAC undertaking trio-based exome sequencing studies in overgrowth patients plicated in a microdeWleAtiCon syndrome also containing . Here, we used and their unaffected parents. Prioritisation of functionally relevant genes different strategies to idednet infyo vaodditional patients withW mAuCtations in to with multiple unique de novo mutations revealed four mutations in three establish the role of in ID. related genes encoding components of the protein phosphatase 2A (P
P2 A), Methods - We collected mutations affecting through routine a key cellular serine-threonine phosphatase. All four mutations clustered diagnostic procedures including genomic microarray analysis and/or WexAoC- within a highly conserved functional domain of 27 nucleotides shared by me sequencing, and supplemented these with mutations reported in (inter) all three genes. Analysis of exome sequencing data from a follow-up cohort national databases. Moreover, we performed targeted resequencing of of overgrowth probands identified a further mutation in the cluster regi- in 2,326 patients with unexplained ID. For patients with mutations, we per- on, bringing the total number of patients with P
P2 A-related mutations to formed a detailed phenotypic comparidsoe nn otovo the previously described phe- five. Mutation carriers shared some similar phenotypic features including WnoAtCype for 10p12p11 microdeletion syndrome. increased height, increased head circumference and intellectual disability. Results – We identified four additional loss-of-function mutations in We mapped the mutations onto the crystal structure of the P
P2 A holoenzy- , including three point mutations and one partial deletion. Clinical re- me complex to predict their molecular and functional consequences. These evaluation of our total cohort of five patients revealed phenotypic overlap studies suggest that the mutations may affect substrate binding, thus per- for mild ID, hypotonia, behavioral problems and distinct overlapping facial turbing the ability of P
P2 A to dephosphorylate certain protein substrates. dysmorphism, including a square shape of the face, deep set eyes, Kabuki- P
P2 A is a major negative regulator of V-akt Murine Thyoma Viral Oncogene like long palpebral fissures, broad mouth and broad chin. Notably, these cli- Homolog (AKT). Thus, our data further expands the list of genes encoding nical features are comparable to the main features observed in 10p12p11 components of the PI3K/AKT signalling cascade that are disrupted in hu- mdei cnroovdoeletion syndrome. WAC man overgrowth conditions. Conclusions –We defined a clinically recognizable ID syndrome, caused by This work was funded by the Wellcome Trust Grant 100210/Z/12/Z. lWosAsC-of-function mutations in , characterized by ID, hypotonia 
C03 .4 and distinctive facial features. In addition, our data suggest that haploinsuf- De novo mutations in BC
L11 A cause developmental delay: additional fiency of contributes to the phenotypic appearance of patients with the implications of the BAF SWI/SNF complex in intellectual disability 10p12p11 microdeletion syndrome. and autism 
C03 .6 C. Dias1,2, J. A. Hurst3, S. Joss4, S. E. Holder5, G. Sánchez-Andrade1, S. J. Sawiak6, S. Lee1, P. A novel syndrome of learning disability and obesity caused by 6q16 Liu1, M. E. Hurles1, D. D. D. Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study1, D. W. Logan1; deletions encompassing the essential neurogenesis factor POU3F2 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2St. John‘s (Brn2) helps to delineate the neuro-endocrine pathway for body-mass College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 32North East Thames control Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, S. Banka1,2, P. Kasher1, K. E. Schertz3, M. Thomas4, S. Annunziata5, M. Ballesta6, P. London, United Kingdom, 4West of Scotland Clinical Genetics Service, Southern General Campeau7, J. L. Eaton3,8, T. Granata5, E. Guillén-Navarro6, A. Jackson4, C. E. Laverriere3, A. Hospital, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom, 5North West Thames Regional Genetics Liedén9, O. V. Marcos10, A. Nordgren9, C. Pantaleoni5, C. Pebrel-Richard11, F. L. Sciacca5, C. Service, Kennedy-Galton Centre, North West London Hospitals NHS Trust, Harrow, Sarret11, R. Wright2, B. Kerr1,2, E. Glasgow3; London, United Kingdom, 6Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre, University of Cambridge, 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2St. Mary‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Georgetown University, Washington, DC, United States, 4Blackpool Victoria Hospital, Blackpool, United Kingdom, 5Fondazione I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Neurologico „C. Besta“, Milan, Italy, 6Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Mutations in chromatin remodelling and histone modification genes are El Palmar, Spain, 7University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 8Summa Health increasingly recognized as a major cause of intellectual disability (ID) and System, Akron, OH, United States, 9Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, other frequently overlapping neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism. 10Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, Barcelona, Spain, 11CHU - Estaing, BC
L11 A has recently been shown to be a stable subunit of the BAF SWI/SNF Clermont-Ferrand, France. complex in mammals. This evolutionary conserved complex is involved in transcriptional regulation through ATP-dependent modification of chroma- tin structure. BC
L11 A Studies of genetic causes of intellectual disability and identification of mo- The Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study (DDD) has identified de nogenic causes of obesity in humans have made immense contributions to- novo mutations in (previously linked to autism spectrum disorder) wards the understanding of the brain and control of body mass. Here we as a cause Bocf ln11oan-syndromic intellectual disability. We present the clinical describe a novel disorder of global developmental delay, intellectual disa- features of these patients, as well as Bmcol1d1eal organism studies that support bility and susceptibility to obesity caused by 6q16 deletions encompassing the role of in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. POU3F2 (Brn2 or N-Oct3 or OCT7) in nine patients from five families. The In mouse embryonic development, is expressed in the forebrain developmental delay and intellectual disability varied from mild to severe in and derivatives of the first and second pharyngeal arches. It maintains high our cohort. The body mass index (BMI) of all, but one patient, was above the expresBsicoln11 ian the central nervous system and craniofacial mesenchyme 99th centile and in the obese category. BMI of one girl in our study was on throughout postnatal stages. The study of the haploinsufficient mouse mo- the 91st centile putting her in overweight category. del of shows abnormal brain development, with overall decreased POU3F2 upregulates proneuronal genes, is required for production, migra- brain size, particularly in regions of the limbic system. Behavioural pheno- tion and positioning of neocortical neurons, is an essential factor needed to typing has identified impaired social behaviour in the haplBoCinLs1u1fAficient mice generate induced neuronal cells in vitro and is required for hypothalamic compared to littermate controls. development and function. Using zebrafish as model organism we show that Previously known for its role in lymphoid malignancies, now joins pou3f2 lies downstream of sim1 in the leptin>melanocortin>Sim1 pathway the increasing number of genes involved in neurodevelopment through a and controls oxytocin expression in the hypothalamic neuroendocrine pre- putative role in chromatin remodelling. optic area. Our zebrafish work, previous work on mouse models and the human phenotypes demonstrate that the molecular pathway linking the ge- 
C03 .5 nes in the central molecular pathway that regulates body mass is conserved De novo loss-of-function mutations in WAC in the 10p12p11 critical across multiple species. This is further supported by our analysis of expres- region cause intellectual disability sion pattern of POU3F2 and related genes in human brain. This work helps M. R. F. Reijnders1, D. Lugtenberg1, M. Fenckova1, E. K. Bijlsma2, B. W. M. van Bon1, A. T. Vulto- van Silfhout1, D. G. M. Bosch1, E. E. Eichler3,4, H. C. Mefford5, R. Pfundt1, H. to delineate the neuro-endocrine pathway for energy balance/food intake G. Yntema1, P. F. de Vries1, J. A. Veltman1, B. B. A. de Vries1, A. Hoichen1, A. Schenck1, T. and its role in monogenic obesity. Kleefstra1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1; 
C04 .1 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) in peripheral blood is associated Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, with smoking, shorter survival and increased risk of cancer Netherlands, 3Department Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, L. A. Forsberg1,2, C. Rasi1, M. Lönn3, H. Davies1, M. Ingelsson4, V. Giedraitis4, L. Lannfelt4, United States, 4Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 5Division N. N. C. Cross5, D. Absher6, P. K. E. Magnusson7, C. Lindgren8,9, A. P. Morris8,10, D. Cesarini11, of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, M. Johannesson12, E. Tiensuu13, L. Lind13, N. L. Pedersen12, E. Ingelsson13,2, J. Dumanski1,2; United States. 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Södertörn de novo WAC University, Huddinge, Sweden, 4Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Background – Trio-based exome sequencing in 100 patients with intellectu- Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 5Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, aWl AdCisability (ID) previously identified a mutation in , encoding Southampton, United Kingdom, 6HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, a protein regulating transcription-coupled histone H2B ubiquitination. The AL, United States, 7Department of Economics, Stockholm School of Economics, gene is located on chromosoEmSeH 10Gp 1210.2135 a n|d G hLasA pSreGviOouWsly, SbeCeOn iTmL-AND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 21ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Stockholm, Sweden, 8Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States, 10Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, integrative approaches. Cancers feature genomic alterations ranging from United Kingdom, 11Center for Experimental Social Science, New York University, New single-base changes to large-scale structural variation (SV) involving gains York, NY, United States, 12Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, and losses, and rearrangements. Having a complete catalogue of mutati- Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 13Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala ons in cancer is crucial for identifying key drivers and providing accurate University, Uppsala, Sweden. diagnosis, prognosis, and targeted therapy. Whole-genome sequencing has become more routine and affordable since the introduction of next-genera- tion sequencing (NGS) technologies. However, NGS platforms have limited Smoking is a major preventable environmental risk factor related to human power to decipher large, complex structural variants frequently observed health. Smoking killed about 100 million people during the 20th century in cancer. Genome mapping represents a complementary technology that and is projected to kill one billion people during this century, assuming provides critical structural information. It involves high throughput analysis that the current frequency of smoking is retained. Lung cancer is the prime of single molecules spanning hundreds of kilobases in nanochannels. Long- cause of cancer-associated death in relation to smoking. However, it is less range information is preserved and direct interrogation of complex structu- well appreciated that smoking also causes tumors outside the respiratory ral variants made possible. tract, which are predominant in men, and cumulatively roughly as common Here, we present our analysis of well-studied and highly rearranged can- as lung cancer. Moreover, it is known that males have a higher incidence cer genomes such as the near-tetraploid HC
C1143  cell line. We construc- and mortality from most sex-unspecific cancers, disregarding smoking ted completely de novo genome map assemblies with N50 lengths of more status, and this fact is largely unexplained by known risk factors. We have than 1 Mb. We derived multi-sample normalized copy number profiles of shown that a male specific risk factor, acquired mosaic loss of chromosome matched tumor-control pairs based on genome mapping data. We observed Y (LOY) in non-cancerous blood cells, is associated with an increased risk of that tumor samples had highly variable copy number profiles, correspon- non-hematological tumors among aging males (Forsberg et al. 2014 Nature ding to focal and chromosome-scale changes. We also present a pipeline to Genetics, PMID: 24777449). We have also recently shown that smoking is integrate NGS and genome mapping data to validate and refine translocati- associated with LOY in blood cells in three independent cohorts (TwinGe- on calls. Genome mapping data helped bridge and phase neighboring trans- ne: OR=4.3, 95% CI =2.8-6.7; ULSAM: OR=2.4, 95% CI=1.6-3.6; and PIVUS: location events. Finally, we present a computational approach to identify OR=3.5, 95% CI=1.4-8.4) encompassing in total 6014 men. Our data also translocations by clustering single molecules with abnormal alignment to support a transient and dose-dependent mutagenic effect from smoking on the reference and by performing local assemblies of these molecules. Over- LOY-status (Dumanski et al. 2015 Science, PMID: 25477213). Thus, smoking all, integrating NGS and genome mapping data provides a comprehensive may induce LOY, linking the most common acquired human mutation with view of a cancer genome. a severe preventable risk factor. Our results could explain the observed sex differences and why smoking seems a greater risk factor for cancer in men 
C04 .4 than women. Molecular classification of diffuse cerebral gliomas using genome- and transcriptomewide profiling. 
C04 .2 M. Weller1,2, R. G. Weber3, E. Willscher4, V. Riehmer3, B. Hentschel5, M. Kreuz5, J. Felsberg6, SNP-SNP interaction analysis of NF-kB signaling pathway on breast U. Beyer3, H. Wirth4, K. Kaulich6, J. Steinbach2,7, C. Hartmann8,9, D. Gramatzki1, J. cancer survival Schramm10, M. Westphal11, G. Schackert12, M. Simon10, T. Martens11, J. Boström10, M. Jamshidi1, R. Fagerholm1, S. Khan1, K. Aittomäki2, D. E. Easton3,4, P. Hall5, C. C. Hagel13, M. Sabel14, D. Krex12, J. C. Tonn15, W. Wick16, S. Noell17, U. Schlegel18, B. Blomqvist6, M. K. Schmidt7, H. Nevanlinna1, B. C.A.C (Breast Cancer Association Radlwimmer19, T. Pietsch20, M. Loeffler5, A. von Deimling8, H. Binder4, G. Reifenberger6, Consortium)8; German Glioma Network; 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 1Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Department Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki and of General Neurology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3Department Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 4Interdisciplinary Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Centre Institute for Bioinformatics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 5Institute for for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Center for Primary Health Care Germany, 6Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Research, University of Lund, Malmö, Sweden, 6Department of Oncology, University Germany, 7Dr. Senckenberg Institute of Neurooncology, University Hospital Frankfurt, of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 7Netherlands Cancer Frankfurt, Germany, 8Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Institute, Antoni van Leeuwenhoek hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8Breast Cancer Heidelberg, Germany, 9Department of Neuropathology, Hannover Medical School, Association Consortium, BCAC, United Kingdom. Hannover, Germany, 10Department of Neurosurgery, University of Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany, 11Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Hamburg- Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 12Department of Neurosurgery, Technical University Aberrant regulation of the NF-κB pathway has been shown in breast cancer, Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 13Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 14Department of Neurosurgery, Heinrich- however, the impact of the genetic variation in the pathway on patient pro- Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 15Department of Neurosurgery, Ludwig gnosis has been little studied. Possibly, for a complex disease such as breast Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany, 16Department of Neurooncology, cancer a single SNP is not independently critical in the biological function un- University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 17Interdisciplinary Division of derlying the initiation or progression of the disease but multiple loci might Neuro-Oncology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 18Department jointly exert a greater impact. We used an extensive data set of the Breast of Neurology, University Hospital Knappschaftskrankenhaus Bochum- Langendreer, Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC) with 30,431 cases to investigate the Bochum, Germany, 19Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center NF-κB activating pathway for association between 917 germline SNPs in 75 (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 20Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany. genes and breast cancer survival. Assessing two-way SNP-SNP interaction survival analyses, we found two pairs of genetic variations with interactive effect on breast cancer survival, i.e. rs5996080 and rs7973914 (HRinterac- Cerebral gliomas of World Health Organization (WHO) grade II and III re- tion 6.98, 95% CI 3.3-14.4, P=1.42E-07), and rs17243893 and rs57890595 present a major challenge in terms of histological classification and clinical (HRinteraction 0.51, 95% CI 0.3-0.6, P=2.19E-05). Based on in-silico functio- management. Here, we characterize genomic and transcriptional profiles in nal analyses, we hypothesize that the rs5996080 and rs7973914 may affect a prospective patient cohort of the German Glioma Network. We performed the BAFFR and TNFR1/TNFR3 receptors and breast cancer survival possib- microarray-based genome- and transcriptome-wide profiling of 137 prima- ly by disturbing both the canonical and the non-canonical NF-κB pathways ry glioma samples, including 61 WHO grade II and 76 WHO grade III tumors. or their dynamics, whereas rs17243893 and rs57890595 interaction on IntegrIDatHiv1e/ 2bioinformatic analyses were empTloEyReTd to define molecular sub- patient survival may be mediated through TRAF2 and TRAIL-R4 interplay. groups, which were then related to histology, molecular biomarkers, inclu- These results warrant further validation and functional analyses. BCAC is ding mutation, 1p/19q co-deletion, promoter mutation, and funded by Cancer Research UK [
C1287 /A10118, 
C1287 /A12014] and by the patient outcome. Genomic profiling identified five distinct glioma groups. European Community´s Seventh Framework Programme under grant agree- Expression profiling revealed evidence for eight transcriptionally different ment number 223175 (grant number HEALTH-F2-2009-223175) (COGS). tumor groups. Correlation of molecular stratification wIiDthH c1l/in2ical outcome 
C04 .3 defined three major prognostic groups withI DchHa1r/a2cteristic genomic aberra- Towards understanding the genomic architecture of cancer genomes tions. The best prognosis was found in patients with mutant and E. T. Lam1, A. R. Hastie1, M. B. Imielinski2, C. Zhang2, J. Wala2, Z. Dzakula1, H. Cao1; 1TpE/R1T9q co-deleted tumors. Patients with wild-type gliomas and 1BioNano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States, 2Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States. glioblastoma-like genomic alterations, including gain on 7IqD, Hlo1s/s2 on 10q, promoter mutation and oncogene amplification, displayed theID wHo1r/s2t outcome. Intermediate survival was seen in patients with mutant but 1p/19q intact, mostly astrocytic gliomas, and in patients with U2nd2erstanding the genetic architecture EofS cHanGc e2r 0r1eq5u i|r eGs LgAenSoGmOic Wan,d S COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG wild-type gliomas lacking the +7q/-10q genotype and TERT promoter mu-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C05 .1 MFA
P5  loss-of-function mutations underscore the involvement of tation. This molecular subgrouping stratified patients into prognostically matrix alteration in the pathogenesis of Familial Thoracic Aortic distinct groups better than histological classification. Addition of gene ex- Aneurysms and Dissections pression data to this genomic classifier did not further improve prognostic M. Barbier1, M. Gross1, M. Aubart1, N. Hanna1,2, K. Kessler1, D. Guo3, L. Tosolini1, B. stratification. In summary, molecular profiling of cerebraIlD gHl1io/m2as distin- Ho-Tin-Noe1, E. Regalado3, M. Varret1, M. Abifadel1, O. Milleron4, S. Odent5, S. Dupuis- guishes biologically distinct tumor groups and provides prognostically re- Girod6, L. Faivre7, T. Edouard8, Y. Dulac8, T. Busa9, L. Gouya4, D. Milewicz3, G. Jondeau1,4, C. levant information beyond histological classification and mutation Boileau1,4,2; 1INSERM U1148, Paris, France, 2AP-HP, Département de Génétique, Hopital Bichat, Paris, status. France, 3Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
C04 .5 Houston, Houston, TX, United States, 4AP-HP, Centre de référence pour les syndromes de Vaccination with monocyte-derived dendritic cells in Lynch syndrome Marfan et apparentés, Service de Cardiologie, Hopital Bichat, Paris, France, 5Service de patients: vigorous T cell responses to neoantigen frameshift-derived Génétique Clinique, Hopital Sud-CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 6Service de Génétique peptides. clinique, Hopital Louis Pradel, CHU de Lyon-GH Est, Lyon, France, 7Centre de Génétique N. Hoogerbrugge, H. Westdorp, G. Schreibelt, K. Bol, M. Welzen, J. Krieken, T. Bisseling, et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Hopital M. Ligtenberg, W. Gerritsen, C. Figdor, I. Vries; d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 8Pédiatrie - Endocrinologie, Génétique et Gynécologie médicale, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Hopital des enfants, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 9Département de Génétique médicale, Hopital de la Timone, CHU de Marseille, Marseille, France. BACKGROUND: Mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency in tumor DNA causes Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection (TAAD) is an autosomal-dominant shifts in the translational reading frame resulting in the production of alte- disorder with major life-threatening complications. Thedisease displays red peptides. Frame-shift peptides (FSP), such as Caspase-5 and TGF-bRII, great genetic heterogeneity with some forms allelic to Marfan and Loeys- are considered ‘foreign’ by the immune system. Dendritic cells are (DC) the Dietz syndrome, and an important numberof cases still remain unexplained professional antigen-presenting cells of the immune system and decisive at the molecular level. Through whole-exome sequencing of affected mem- in inducing immunity. This is the rationale for vaccination with monocyte- bers in a large TAAD-affectedfamily, we identified the c.472C>T (p.Arg158*) derived DC (moDC) loaded with FSPs to stimulate T-cells to combat Lynch nonsense mutation in MFA
P5  encoding the extracellular matrix component syndrome-associated tumors. MAGP-2.This protein interacts with elastin fibers and the microfibrillar net- PATIENTS AND METHODS: Lynch syndrome CRC patients (n=3) and healthy work. Mutation screening of 403 additional probands identifiedan additio- mutation carriers (n=20) were vaccinated with DC loaded with CEA and FSP nal missense mutation of MFA
P5  (c.62G>T [p.Trp21Leu]) segregating with MHC class I binding peptides. After each vaccination round (up to 3), anti- the disease in a second family. Functional analysesperformed on both affec- gen-specific CD8+ T cells were assessed in blood and challenged skin. Injec- ted individual’s cells and in vitro models showed that these two mutations tion of minute amounts of the DC vaccine resulted in infiltration of immune caused pure or partial haploinsufficiency.Thus, alteration of MAGP-2, a com- cells into the skin. Specificity of these lymphocytes was assessed by flow ponent of microfibrils and elastic fibers, appears as an initiating mechanism cytometry with tetrameric MHC complexes binding to T cells that recognize ofinherited TAAD. the indicated peptides. Grant references: Projet Hospitalier de Recherche Clinique (PHRC, AOM RESULTS: In most patients, after moDC vaccinations, both FSP- and CEA- 10108); Agence Nationale de Recherche (ANR, GDPM2); Fédération specific CD8+ T-cells were present. Additionally CD8+ T-cells specific for Francaise de Cardiologie, Société Francaise de Cardiologie, and Caspase-5 and CEA were detectable. The functionality of skin infiltrating T- DHU-FIRE (Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris). cells was demonstrated by their production of IFN-g upon stimulation with target cells loaded with CEA or one of the FSPs. 
C05 .2 CONCLUSIONS: DC vaccination against CEA and FSP-antigens appears fea- Mutations in a TGFβ ligand, TGFB3, cause syndromic aortic sible and immune responses towards Lynch syndrome tumor-specific pepti- aneurysms and dissections des are induced. Our data emphasize DC vaccination can enhance the host’s E. Gillis1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella2,1,3, H. Morisaki4, J. M. A. Verhagen2, E. Gallo5, B. P. T. Kruithof6, S. Laga7, A. J. Doyle5,8,9, G. Oswald5,8, M. Lammens10, C. Evers11, K. Devriendt12, antitumor immunity and underline consideration for cancer prevention in M. Dumoulein13, J. Timmermans14, I. Rodrigus7, G. Baynam15,16, M. Kempers17, J. Saenen18, Lynch syndrome. E. M. Van Craenenbroeck18, K. Minatoya19, R. Matsukawa20, T. Tsukube20, N. Kubo21, M. 
C04 .6 Goumans6, J. W. Roos-Hesselink3, I. M. B. H. van de Laar2, H. C. Dietz5,8,22, L. Van Laer1, T. Through the looking glass: the reversion of EMT Morisaki23, M. W. Wessels2, B. L. Loeys1,17; P. Oliveira1, J. Carvalho1, S. Rocha1, M. Azevedo1, A. Vieira1, D. Ferreira1, N. Mendes1, I. 1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Reis1, J. Vinagre1, A. Heravi-Moussavi2, J. Nunes1, J. Lima1, V. Maximo1, A. Burleigh2, C. Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of Clinical Roskelley2, F. Carneiro1, R. Seruca1, J. Paredes1, D. Huntsman2, C. Oliveira1; Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2BCCA, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Cardiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Departments of Bioscience and Genetics, and Medical Genetics, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan, 5McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 6Department of Molecular Reversible transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal cellular sta- Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 7Department of tes (EMT/MET) are considered dynamic processes relevant during cancer Cardiac Surgery, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 8Howard Hughes progression and metastatic spreading. Whereas EMT facilitates the initial Medical Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States, 9William Harvey Research Institute, steps of tumour cell detachment, promoting migration and invasion, MET Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 10Department of Pathology, is thought to be required for later on colonization at distant sites. However, Antwerp University Hospital, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 11Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 12Center for Human MET is generally perceived as a process mirroring EMT, devoided of its own Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 13Department of Cardiology, AZ Groeninge, Kortrijk, Belgium, signature. We hypothesize that MET entails its own set of novel and/or diffe- 14Department of Cardiology, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, rentially active molecular circuitries, generating cells with features distinct 15Genetic Services of Western Australia, Subiaco, Australia, 16School of Paediatrics and from the original epithelial state. Child Health, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia, 17Department Using an in vitro TGFβ1-induced EMT/MET model, we demonstrate that of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, MET is able to generate a heterogeneous population of cells (Reverted- 18Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, Epithelial or RE cells) with a biological signature not necessarily mirroring 19Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan, 20Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Japanese Red Cross Kobe Hospital, that of EMT. These RE-cells displayed novel functional properties, such as Kobe, Japan, 21Department of Pediatrics, Urakawa Red increased self-renewal potential and in vivo tumourigenesis ability. Moreo- ver, whole-transcriptome analysis revealed de novo activation of several pa- thways, such as Toll-like receptor signalling, further confirmed in RE-cells- Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAA) are a common condition associated with derived tumours. Considering the increasing evidences towards tumours as high mortality due to aortic dissection or rupture. Investigations of the pa- a heterogeneous entities, our model is a valuable tool for the discovery of thogenic mechanisms involved in syndromic types of TAA such as Marfan novel pathways of relevance for tumour progression. (MFS) and Loeys-Dietz syndromes (LDS), have revealed an important con- Grant References: This work has been supported by the Portuguese Founda- tribution of disturbed TGFβ signaling. Genes with mutations leading to TAA tion for Science and Technology (PTDC/SAU-GMG/110785/2009, Post-Doc syndromes include FBN1, TGFBR1/2, SMAD3, TGFB2 and SKI. Grant to PO: SFRH/BPD/89764/2012 and to JC: SFRH/BPD/86543/2012) To discover novel genes causing syndromic aortic aneurysms, we combi- ned genome wide linkage analysis, whole exome sequencing and candidate gene Sanger sequencing in a total of 470 index cases with thoracic aortic aneurysms. Extensive clinical, cardiologic and imaging examinations were ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANpDer,f oUrmK e|d W. WW.ESHG.ORG 23ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Presently, we report on 43 patients in 11 families with syndromic presen- most frequent indication for surgical repair of mitral regurgitation. We per- tations of aortic aneurysms caused by mutations in the TGFB3 gene. We formed a genome-wide association study to identify risk loci, which may demonstrate for the first time that TGFB3 mutations are associated with uncover novel pathogenic mechanisms. significant cardiovascular involvement, including thoracic/abdominal aor- Methods. We tested 4.8 million common genotyped/imputed variants in tic dissection and mitral valve disease. Other systemic features overlap cli- 1412 MVP cases and 2439 controls. Replication for 23 loci was performed nically with LDS, MFS and Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome, including cleft in 4 case control studies (Ncases=1442, NControls=6779). Candidate genes palate, bifid uvula, skeletal overgrowth, cervical spine instability and club were investigated for protein expression by immunohistochemistry on val- foot deformity. In line with previous observations in aortic wall tissues of ves in embryonic and adult mice and morpholino knockdown (KD) assessed patients with mutations in effectors of TGFβ signaling (TGFBR1/2, SMAD3 cardiac function in zebrafish. and TGFB2), we confirm a paradoxical upregulation of both canonical and Results. Six susceptibility loci were identified after replication (P<5×10-8). non-canonical TGFβ signaling in association with upregulation of expressi- Association was observed in LMCD1 (OR=1.32, P =1.3×10-11), a repressor on of TGFβ ligands. of GATA6 previously implicated in cardiac hypertrophy. KD of Lmcd1 in ze- Our findings emphasize the broad clinical variability associated with TGFB3 brafish induced significant atrioventricular (AV) valve defect with regurgita- mutations and highlight the importance of early recognition of the disease tion. Another signal on Chr2q35 (OR=1.25, P=3.1× 10-11) mapped upstream due to high cardiovascular risk. to TN
S1 , which encodes a focal adhesion and actin interacting protein. We 
C05 .3 found that tensin1 is expressed during valve morphogenesis in mice and Exome-chip meta-analysis identifies novel associations of coding maintained in the adult valvular interstitial cells. Nine months Tns1-/- mice variants with cardiac conduction in 62,251 adults of European exhibited enlarged posterior mitral leaflets compared to wild type. In addi- descent from the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic tion, zebrafish KD of Tns1 induced AV regurgitation. Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium. Conclusions. In this multidisciplinary study we discovered 6 loci with mo- Y. Jamshidi1, B. P. Prins1, C. Liu2, J. van Setten3, L. Hall4, F. Radmanesh5, CHARGE derate effect sizes (OR range: 1.22-1.33) and identified new actors in valve Consortium Exome-Chip EKG Working Group; development and biology. We provide genetic and functional evidence im- 1Genetics Unit, Cardiovascular and Cell Sciences Institute, St George‘s University of plicating LMCD1 and TN
S1  in valve development and function for the first London, London, United Kingdom, 2NHLBI and Boston University’s Framingham Heart time. This study reveals new pathways that can potentially be modified to Study, Framingham, MA Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public improve the natural history of MVP. Health, Boston, MA, United States, 3Experimental Cardiology Laboratory, Division Heart and Lungs, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Department of 
C05 .5 Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 5Center for Recessive mutations in matrix metallopeptidase 21 (MM
P21 ) cause Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. heterotaxy in humans A. Guimier1, G. Gabriel2, F. Bajolle3, M. Tsang2, M. Schwartz2, A. Noll4, L. Smith4, H. Yagi2, C. Saunders4, C. Baker5, M. Oufadem1, N. Miller4, K. Peterson5, I. Thiffault4, N. Introduction: Electrocardiogram measured QRS interval reflects ventricu- Klena2, C. Bole-Feysot1, P. Nitschke1, S. Lyonnet1, L. de Pontual1, S. Murray5, D. Bonnet3, S. Kingsmore4, J. Amiel1, P. Bouvagnet6, C. Lo2, C. Gordon1; lar depolarization and conduction time. Prolonged QRS is associated with 1Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 2Department of developmental biology, University of increased risk of sudden cardiac death and heart failure. In previous work, Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 3Unité Médico-Chirurgicale de Cardiologie we have identified common variants in loci associated with QRS interval du- Congénitale et Pédiatrique, Centre de référence Malformations Cardiaques Congénitales ration comprising non-coding regions of the genome. We hypothesized that Complexes - M3C, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 4Center for genes influencing this trait may harbour both common and rare variants in paediatric genomic medicine, Children‘s Mercy Hospitals, Kansas City, MO, United States, protein-coding regions. 5The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States, 6Laboratoire cardiogénétique - Methods: The Illumina HumanExome Beadchip (Ex-Chip) is an array focused Malformations cardiaques congénitales, CHU de Lyon, Bron, France. on rare and low frequency putative functional coding variation. We conduc- ted an Ex-Chip meta-analysis for QRS interval duration in 62,251 partici- pants from 17 studies collaborating in the CHARGE Ex-Chip EKG Consorti- Human heterotaxy syndrome results from a failure to establish normal left- um. Ex-Chip significance threshold was set at 2.37x10-7 (α=0.05/211,270 right asymmetry early in embryonic development and comprises visceral polymorphic markers passing QC) for single variant association analysis malformations among which congenital heart defects (CHDs) are the ma- and 3.06x10-6 (α=0.05/16,326 genes with more than 1 polymorphic mar- jor cause of morbidity and mortality. Mutations in several genes controlling ker passing QC) for gene-collapsed variant analyses (SKAT). early left–right patterning have been implicated in heterotaxy but account Results: In addition to confirming previously associated loci, we identified for a minority of cases. 10 new loci associated with QRS duration, and provide suggestive evidence We performed whole exome or genome sequencing in 2 families with re- for very rare coding variants in previously unknown QRS loci in ADAMT
S6 , currence of complex CHDs associated with laterality defects of abdominal ARID1B, FHOD3 and KRT15 (P<1x10-5, MAF ~0.0021-0.000016). oMrgManPs2.1 We identified com. pound heterozygous mutations (stop and mis- Using SKAT we identified four novel genes harbouring uncommon and rare sense or frameshift and exonic deletion) in matrix metallopeptidase 21 variants associated with QRS duration (PSKAT<3.06x10-6). ( ) in both faMmmilpie2s1 MMP family members are involved in extra-cel- Conclusion: This is the largest genetic association study for QRS duration lular matrix turmnomvper2. 1Interestingly, mice homozygous for ENU-induced mis- performed thus far. Replication studies are ongoing to validate the novel sense mutations in exhibit CHDs and heterotaxy. Also, we performed loci. Our study provides greater understanding of the genetic contribution knockdown of in zebrafish using an antisense morphoMliMnoP,2 w1hich to cardiac conduction and may ultimately lead to new approaches to diagno- resulted in abnormal cardiac looping, a consequence of disrupted left-right se, treat, and prevent SCD in humans. patterning. We then performed next generation sequencing of in a cohort MofM 1
P6281  index cases with CHDs and heterotaxy. From this cohort we 
C05 .4 identified 9 families with one or more affected siblings exhibiting variati- A genome-wide association study of nonsyndromic mitral valve ons in MoMnP b2o1th alleles, including a homozygous missense affecting prolapse and functional studies of risk loci provide insight into the start codon in one family and a homozygous frameshift in another. The underlying biological mechanisms frequency of -associated heterotaxy in this cohorMt MisP t2h1e refore po- N. Bouatia-Naji1, C. Dina2, N. Tucker3, R. A. Norris4, D. Milan3, S. Slaugenhaupt5, R. A. Levine6, J. Schott2, A. A. Hagège7, X. Jeunemaitre8; tentially as high as 6%, pending the validation of all missense mutations in 1INSERM U970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Center, Paris, France, 2Inserm UMR1087, functional assays in zebrafish. Our results indicate that is a novel CNRS UMR 6291, Institut du Thorax, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) Nantes,, gene implicated in heterotaxy and CHDs and suggest that the regulation of Nantes, France, 3Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, the extra-cellular matrix is key for the establishment of laterality. Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, 
C05 .6 Cardiovascular Developmental Biology Center, Children‘s Research Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, United States, 5Center for Human Genetic Somatic/mosaic mutations are an important cause of sporadic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, vascular anomalies. United States, 6Cardiac Ultrasound Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital and M. Vikkula, A. Mendola, J. Soblet, M. Schlögel, M. Amyere, P. Brouillard, N. Limaye, L. M. Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 7AP-HP, Department of Cardiology, Boon; Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, INSERM UMR970, Paris, France, 8AP-HP, de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium. Departement of Genetics, Hopital Europeen Georges Pompidou, INSERM U970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Center, Paris, France. Vascular anomalies are localized defects of the lymphatic or vascular system. They are most commonly cutaneous, but can affect any body part. They are B 2ac 4kground. Nonsyndromic mitral valve E Spr Hol Gap 2se 0 1(M 5V |P G) Lis A a S c Go Omm Wo ,n S COdiTviLdeAdN acDco, rUdiKng | tWo vWesWsel. EtySpHe Gint.oO aRrtGerial, capillary, venous, lymphatic (2-4%) degenerative valvulopathy, a risk factor for cardiac failure and the and combined malformations.ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index SMCHD1 Based on familial inheritance of some malformations, we have identified often caused by loss of function mutations in the structural maintenance of underlying germline changes, including in TI
E2  (mucocutaneous venous chromosomes hinge domain containing 1 ( ) gene. SMCHD1 is in- malformations; VMCM), in glomulin (glomuvenous malformations; GVM), volvSeMdC iHnD th1e maintenance of D4Z4 methylation and a repressed chromatin and RASA1 (capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation; CM-AVM). structure. SMCHD1 These patients are characterized by small multifocal lesions, which may An mutation screen in a large cohort of FSHD2 individuals revealed increase in number with time. We explained this by Knudson’s double-hit a mutation spectrum that ranges from large deletions causing he- theory and demonstrated somatic second-hits (intragenic or chromosomal mizygosity, to missense, nonsense and splice site mutations. In addSMitiCoHnD to1 anomalies, including acquired uniparental isodisomy) in all three entities. the autosomal dominant inheritance seen in most FSHD2 families, we also The frequency of somatic 2nd-hits made us study sporadic patients for so- identified a family with semidominant inheritance. Furthermore, matic changes. We screened resected tissues from >100 venous (VM), >70 mutations can also modify disease seSvMeCrHityD 1in FSHD1. lymphatic (LM) and >30 capillary (CM) malformations for mutations in can- TDh4iZs4 m utation spectruSmM CshHoDw1s that epigenetic sensitivity to disease pre- didate genes, either by RT-PCR or Ion Torrent PGM, for high sensitivity. We sentation depends on the nature of mutation in combination with frequently pinpointed somatic activating mutations: in +/-50% of VMs in array size with open reading frame preserving mutations TI
E2 , 80% of LMs in PIK3CA, 50% of CMs in GNAQ, and in some syndromic being more deleterious for the maintenance of repressive D4Z4 chromatin forms, like CLOVES syndrome, in PIK3CA. Interestingly, sporadic patients state, than open reading frame disrupting mutations. Collectively, our study with multifocal VMs were mosaic in blood with a somatic second-hit in tis- positions SMCHD1 central in the FSHD2 and FSHD1 disease mechanisms sues, whereas in Blue Rubber Bleb Nevus syndrome, somatic cis-mutations and warrants further studies into SMCHD1 as therapeutic target. in distant lesions were shared, without blood mosaicism. Grant references: We conclude that somatic mutations are a common pathophysiologic cau- Neuromics, Prinses Beatrix Spierfonds se of sporadic vascular anomalies. Wider mosaicism is evident in sporadic 
C06 .3 patients with multifocal lesions. Yet, migration of mutant “progenitor cells” Plastin 3, a human protective modifier is highly upregulated in iPSC- underlies multifocality in others. Similar scenario may hold true for various derived motoneurons in asymptomatic individuals and rescues spinal other disorders. muscular atrophy in mice 
C06 .1 M. Peters1, L. Heesen1,2, S. Hosseini Barkooie1, M. Peitz2,3, A. Kaczmarek1, E. Janzen1, O. Neurogenetic disease diagnostics by targeted capture and next Brüstle2,3, B. Wirth1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Genetics and Center for Molecular Medicine generation sequencing Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, LIFE & BRAIN N. G. Laing1,2, K. Yau1, R. Allcock1, R. Ong1, K. Mina1,2, G. Ravenscroft1, M. Cabrera1, R. Center, University of Bonn and Hertie Foundation, Bonn, Germany, 3DZNE, German Gooding2, C. Wise2, P. Sivadorai2, D. Trajanoski2, V. Atkinson1, S. Wagner1, K. J. Nowak1, R. Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn, Germany. M. Duff1, P. J. Lamont1, M. R. Davis2; 1University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Australia, 2Pathwest, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Australia. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a devastating motoneuron disorder caused by functional loss of SMN1. Previously, we identified Plastin 3 (PL
S3 ) Introduction: Two problems for molecular diagnosis of neurogenetic disor- as a strong candidate protective modifier using transcriptome differential ders are high levels of genetic heterogeneity and involvement of large genes, expression analysis in SMA discordant families. e.g. titin. PL
S3  was highly upregulated in lymphoblastoid cell lines of asymptoma- Materials and Methods: To offset these problems we developed a TargetSeq tic but not SMA siblings at both, RNA and protein level. Instead fibroblast (Life Technologies) capture panel containing 277 genes in which mutations cell lines from both SMA and asymptomatic siblings showed similar PL
S3  detectable by next generation sequencing (NGS) cause neurogenetic di- expression, suggesting a tissue-specific regulation. To investigate whether seases. The diseases range from foetal akinesia, through muscular dystro- PL
S3  is upregulated in motorneurons, the primary affected cells in SMA, we phies and peripheral neuropathies, to motor neuron disease. The targeted generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from fibroblasts of three genes were captured from pooled bar-coded patient DNA samples. Up to 24 asymptomatic and three SMA III-affected siblings. After full characterization patient samples were sequenced at a time using Ion Proton™ (Life Techno- of pluripotency, small molecule neural precursor cells (smNPCs) were gene- logies) sequencing. Variant analysis was by either custom Annovar or Carta- rated from iPSCs. Next, motoneurons were differentiated from smNPCs and genia (Cartagenia, Inc.) based pipelines. characterized for any possible changes including survival, gem counts, pro- Results: Testing the panel identified 88% of the known small-scale mutati- tein and RNA expression of SMN and PL
S3 . Most strikingly, PL
S3  was highly ons in 28 positive controls. Known mutations deliberately chosen in regions upregulated only in motoneurons from asymptomatic siblings pinpointing a not sequenced well by NGS were not detected. Using FishingCNV, we iden- tissue-specific regulation. tified 90% of CNV controls, including 100% of CMT1A/HNPP duplication/ To finally address the PL
S3  rescuing effect in SMA disorder, we generated deletion controls. Although one single exon CNV was detected, not all small PL
S3  overexpressing mice, which were crossed into a severe SMA mouse CNVs were detected. We have screened approaching 600 molecularly undia- model. By applying low amounts of exon 7 inclusion SMN antisense oligonu- gnosed probands, whose clinical diagnosis matched the diseases screened cleotides (ASOs), we improved the multi-organ dysfunction in these severe by the panel. We identified mutations in 68 genes, 40 of which were not SMA mice and increased their survival from 14 to 28 days. Most importantly, previously analysed at all by the diagnostic laboratory due to Sanger se- crossing the PL
S3  transgene homozygously into these mice led to a robust quencing costs. The overall success rate (Class 5 and 4 variants) was 34%, increase of survival (>60% survived >180 days). These combined data pro- varying from 20% in distal arthrogryposis and SMA/MND, to 57% in chan- vide strong evidence for PL
S3  as protecting modifier in humans and SMA nelopathies. mouse model. Conclusions: It is remarkable that analyzing only 277 genes provides the 
C06 .4 molecular diagnosis for 34% of the spectrum of neurogenetic patients. Analysis of the Gdap1 knockout mice reveals calcium homeostasis 
C06 .2 and mitochondrial dynamics defects in the Charcot-Marie-Tooth The SMCHD1 mutation spectrum in Facioscapulohumeral muscular disease pathogenesis dystrophy A. Civera-Tregón1,2, P. Juárez1,2, M. Barneo-Muñoz1, S. Fernández-Lizarbe1,2, D. Pla- M. L. van den Boogaard1, R. J. L. F. Lemmers1, P. J. van der Vliet1, J. Balog1, B. Bakker1, S. Martin2, J. Zenker3, C. Cuevas-Martín4,5,6, M. Sánchez-Aragó4,5,6, J. Forteza-Vila1,7, J. M. J. Tapscott2, S. Sacconi3, R. Tawil4, S. M. van der Maarel1; Cuezva4,5,6, R. Chrast3, F. Palau1,2; 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Fred Hutchinson Cancer 1Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain, 2CIBER de Enfermedades Raras Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States, 3University Hospital of Nice, Nice, France, (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, 3Department of Neuroscience and Department of Clinical 4University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, United States. Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 5Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, UAM- CSIC, Madrid, Spain, 6Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 7Instituto Valenciano de Patología, Catholic Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) predominantly affects University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain. the muscles in the face, trunk and upper extremities. FSHD is associated with partDiaUl Xc4hromatin relaxation of the D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat array localized on chromosome 4 and transcriptional derepression of the D4Z4- Definition of pathogenic mechanisms and druggable molecular targets in encoded gene in skeletal muscle. In the most common form, FSHD1, Mendelian disGeDaAsPes1 requires investigating the pathophysiological conse- this D4Z4 chromatin relaxation is caused by a D4Z4 repeat array contraction quences of gene mutations in both cellular and animal disease models. to 1-10 units (normal range 10-100 units). In the rare form of FSHD, FSHD2, Mutations in , which encodes a protein located in the mitochondri- D4Z4 chromatin relaxation occurEs SwHitGho u2t0 re1p5e a|t GcoLnAtrSacGtioOnW, an, dS iCs OmTosLtA N aD l o, uU teK r | m W emW brW an. eE , S caH usG e . aO xoR nG al recessive (AR-CMT2), axonal domi2 na5 ntABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index GDA
P1  (CMT2K) and demyelinating recessive (CMT4A) forms of Charcot-Marie- ning of corpus callosum, cardiac septal defects and undescended testes. Ho- Tooth (CMT) neuropathy. Loss of function recessive mutations in are mozygosity mapping identified a single disease-associated locus of 3.5Mb associated with decreased mitochondrial fission activity, while dominant on chromosome 3. Studies of a Bedouin consanguineous kindred with 4 mutationsG rdeasupl1t in impairment of mitochondrial fusion with increased pro- individuals affected with a similar recessive phenotype identified a single duction of reactive oxygen species and susceptibility to apoptotic stimuli. disease-associated 18Mb homozygosity locus containing the entire 3.5Mb Knockout mice show abnormal motor behaviour at early stage. Elec- locus of the Ethiopian family. Whole exome sequencing demonstrated one trophysiological and biochemical studies confirmed the axonal nature of the homozygous mutation in CCD
C174  (c.1404A>G, p.[*468Trpext*6]) within a neuropathy whereas histopathological studies showed progressive loss of shared identical haplotype of 0.6Mb, common to both Bedouin and Ethiopi- motor neurons (MNs) in the anterior horn of the spinal cord and defects in an affected individuals, suggesting an ancient common founder effect. The neuromuscular junctions. Cultured embryonic MNs neurons showed large mutation segregated as expected in both kindreds and was not found in 400 and defective mitochondria, changes in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) ci- Bedouin and 100 Jewish Ethiopian controls. Knockdown of the CCD
C174  sternae and increased autophagy vesicles. We observed defects in cytoskel- ortholog in Xenopus laevis embryos resulted in poor neural fold closure at etal α-tubulin acety2l+ation and in the axonal mitochon2d+ria transport. MNs the neurula stage with later embryonic lethality. Knockdown embryos ex- showed reduced Ca i2n+flow through store-operated Ca entry (SOCE) upon hibited a sharp reduction in expression of n-tubulin, a marker for differen- mobilization of ER-Ca , in association with an abnormal distribution of the tiating primary neurons, and of hindbrain markers krox20 and hoxb. The mitochondrial network when treated with theG EdRa ps1tress inducer thapsigar- Xenopus phenotype could be rescued by the human normal, yet not the mu- gin. tant CCD
C174  transcripts. CCD
C174  is ubiquitously expressed and was pre- The phenotypic and functional study of the KO mice revealed the viously shown to interact with EIF4a3 which is crucial for RYR1 formation in presence of an axonal neuropathy. We propose that lack of GDA
P1  induces frogs. In accordance, while maintaining normal mRNA level, RYR1 proteins changes in the mitochondrial netGwDoArPk1 biology and mitochondria-endoplas- in skeletal muscle of our patients were not detectable by immunohistoche- mic reticulum interaction leading to abnormalities in calcium homeostasis, mistry. Also, in-vitro model showed co-localization of CCD
C174  and EIF4a3 which may represent part of the -related CMT pathophysiology. in the nucleus while overexpression of mutant but not wild-type CCD
C174  
C06 .5 caused rapid cell death. Junctophilin-1 expression levels could modify the effects of GDA
P1  
C07 .1 mutations in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Does paternal imprinting of FOXF1 on 16q24.1 explain maternal E. Calpena1,2, V. Lopez1,2, V. Lupo1,2, T. Sevilla3,2, F. Palau1,2, I. Galindo1,2, C. Espinós1,2; UPD(16) phenotype? 1Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 2CIBER de A. V. Dharmadhikari1,2, B. Carofino1, J. J. Sun3, P. Szafranski1, R. Ray3, M. J. Justice4, M. E. Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, 3Hospital U. i P. La Fe, Valencia, Spain. Dickinson5, P. Stankiewicz1; 1Dept of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Program in Translational Biology & Molecular Medicine, Baylor College of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a hereditary sensory and motor Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 4The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, neuropathy with more than 60 genes associated. CMT type 2K (CMT2K) is Canada, 5Department of Molecular Physiology & Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, caused by mutations in the GDA
P1  gene and is characterized by incomplete Houston, TX, United States. penetrance and intrafamilial clinical variability. We have recently described the junctophilin1 (JPH1) as a genetic modifier of GDA
P1 . We characterized the combination of the JPH1 p.R213P and the GDA
P1  p.R120W mutation Trisomy 16 in humans, typically resulting from maternal meiosis I nondis- in one patient with a more severe clinical picture. Through cellular studies junction, is the most common prenatal trisomy and lethal unless rescued we established that the combination of these two mutations significant in- early embryonically. In one-third of such cases, children with maternal creases the basal cytosolic Ca2+ and reduces SOCE activity, and therefore, UPD(16) manifest IUGR (attributed to trisomic placenta) and multiple con- JPH1 contribute to the phenotypical consequences of GDA
P1  mutations. genital malformations, including heart defects, pulmonary hypoplasia, tra- Junctophilin genes are characterized by having a long 3’UTR (from 1861 nt cheosophageal fistula, gut malrotation, absent gall bladder, renal agenesis, of JP in Drosophila melanogaster to 2347 nt of JPH1 in humans) and that hydronephrosis, imperforate anus, and single umbilical artery. In contrast, is conserved in the case of JPH1. We searched for variants in the 3’UTR of relatively normal phenotype was reported in few patients with paternal JPH1 in CMT2K families with the GDA
P1  p.R120W mutation. We have iden- UPD(16), and imprinted gene(s) on chromosome 16 were suggested as tified the ENST00000342232.4:c.*1962G>A (rs57375187) variant in two causative for maternal UPD(16) phenotype. All the above clinical features, brothers with an unusual early onset and severe clinical picture. We have except IUGR, are observed in the vast majority of children with a neona- demonstrated that the c.*1962G>A increase the transcript levels by a luci- tally lethal lung developmental disorder Alveolar CapillFarOyX FD1yspl asia with ferase assay. Moreover, with the aim to gain insight into the disease mecha- Misalignment of Pulmonary Veins (ACDMPV). ACDMPV is caused by hetero- nisms, we have used a Drosophila models in order to investigate how altered zygous point mutations or genomic deletions involving FoOnX1F61q 24.1, junctophilin expression levels could modify the effects of the Gdap1 related previously shown to be paternally imprinted, incompletely and in a tissue- neural degeneration. Moreover, the Drosophila model has allowed us to dis- specific manner. Most recently, genomic duplications involvinFgo xf1 were cover new pathways related to junctophilin. assoRcOiaStAed2 6w ith pyloric stenosis, mesen tTeireiu2m-cr ceo mmune, and aplasia of the Funds: IRDiRC & ISCIII (Grant no: IR11/TREATCMT) aFpoxpfe1n dix [PMID: 25472632]. We knocked-in a Cre-inducible allele at 
C06 .6 the locus and activated it with to specifically overexpress CCD
C174  mutation underlies a syndrome of hypotonia and in endothelial and hematopoietic cells. Using timed-matings, microCT, psychomotor developmental delay with abducens nerve palsy and plethysmography analyses, we found that thesFe omxfi1ce exhibit hypopla- M. Volodarsky1, H. Lichtig2, T. Leibson3, Y. Sadaka3,4, K. Leibson1, L. Gradstein5, Z. stic lungs, abnormal breathing, gastrointestinal abnormalities, edema, skin Shorer6,7,8, R. Shaco-Levy9, D. Frank10, O. S. Birk1,11; hemorrhages, and die perinatally. We propose thatF OXF1 overexpression in 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for Biotechnology mice corroborates the clinical observations seen in patients with maternal in the Negev and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer- Sheva, Israel, 2Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 3Department UPD(16) and conclude that paternal imprinting of may be responsib- of Pediatrics, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 4Pediatric le for the key phenotypic features of maternal UPD(16). Neurology unit, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 5Department 
C07 .2 of Ophthalmology, Soroka University Medical Center and Clalit Health Servicees Ben Next-gen cytogenetics in prenatal diagnosis: lessons learned with Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 6Department of Pediatrics, Soroka University balanced de novo rearrangements Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 7Pediatric Neurology C. C. Morton1, Z. Ordulu1, T. Kammin1, C. Hanscom2, V. Pillalamarri2, J. L. Andujar1, B. B. unit, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, Currall1, J. F. Gusella2, M. E. Talkowski2; 8Zlotowski Center of Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, 1Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Massachusetts General Israel, 9Department of Pathology, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. Israel, 10Department of Biochemistry, The Rappaport Family Institute for Research in the Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 11Genetics Institute, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel. Specific identification of disrupted and dysregulated genomic regions is critical in precision diagnosis and in management of some individuals with constitutional and acquired rearrangements, especially considering the Two siblings of non-consanguineous Ethiopian Jewish ancestry presented accelerated increase in annotation of the human genome. Rapidly defining with congenital axial hypotonia, weakness of the abducens nerve, psycho- structural chromosome abnormalities that underlie these genomic regi- m2o6tor developmental delay with brain veEntSriHcuGlo m2e0g1al5y a| nGd LvAarSiaGblOe tWhin, -SCOonTsL aAt tNheD n, uUclKeo |ti Wde WlevWel .iEn SaH geGn.oOmRe-Gwide fashion has become feasibleABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index in recent years with ongoing improvements in sequencing technologies, 14.39 variants of unknown significance. Female donors were discarded in and is revolutionizing the discipline of cytogenetics. The capability of map- case of pathogenic variant was found in an X-linked gene. In our series 1.5% ping breakpoints precisely is the foundation of the Developmental Genome resulted positive (8 premutated in FMR1 gene and 5 for other X-linked con- Anatomy Project (DGAP, www.dgap.harvard.edu), in which more than 150 ditions). Twelve couples using their own gametes (8.7%) were positive for subjects with apparently balanced chromosome rearrangements have been pathogenic mutations, 8 for AR genes and 4 X-linked genes. These couples sequenced revealing a wide variety of genes in human development. In this received genetic counseling and PGD or gamete change was recommended. exciting era of “Next-Gen Cytogenetics,” in which traditional cytogenetic Conclusions: We have developed a carrier genetic test that constitutes a techniques and next-gen sequencing are used synergistically, integration of powerful clinical tool to avoid more than 600 diseases in the offspring in genomic sequencing intdoe t hneo vporenatal diagnostic setting is possible within infertile couples undergoing ART. an actionable time frame. To date, we have participated in the evaluation 
C07 .5 of 10 prenatal cases of balanced translocations and inversions for Non-manifesting AHI1 truncations indicate localized loss-of-function next-gen cytogenetic analysis, and nine cases are completed. With the ex- tolerance in a severe Mendelian disease gene ception of a complex case involving multiple chromosome rearrangements, S. M. Elsayed1,2, J. B. Phillips3, R. Heller4, M. Thoenes4, E. Elsobky1,2, G. Nürnberg5, P. all were interpreted by aCGH analyses to be without clinically significant Nürnberg5,6, S. Seland4, I. Ebermann4, J. Altmüller4,5, H. Thiele5, M. Toliat5, F. Körber7, X. gains or losses of DNA. Use of convergent genomic evidence and quantitative Hu8, Y. Wu8,9, M. S. Zaki10, G. Abdel-Salam10, J. Gleeson11, E. Boltshauser12, M. Westerfield3, assessment of transcripts in the breakpoint regions are employed in inter- H. J. Bolz13,4; 1Medical Genetics Center, Cairo, Egypt, 2Children’s Hospital, Ain Shams University, pretation of potential pathogenicity. In overview, each case has contributed Cairo, Egypt, 3Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, United uniquely to our experience in the evolution of this approach to a new stan- States, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, dard of care in prenatal diagnosis. 5Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG) and Centre for Molecular Medicine Cologne NIH/NIGMS 
P01  GM061354 (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6Cologne Excellence Cluster on 
C07 .3 Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7Department of Radiology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, Targeted prenatal screening as a successful and fast approach in cases 8Lab of Computational Chemistry and Drug Design, Lab of Chemical Genomics, Peking with increased nuchal translucency and/or abnormal ultrasound University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China, 9College of Chemistry, Peking P. Joset1, A. Baumer1, M. Papic1, S. Papuc2, M. Zweier1, S. Azzarello-Burri1, D. Niedrist1, L. University, Beijing, China, 10Department of Clinical Genetics, National Research Centre, Gogoll1, B. Oneda1, K. Steindl1, A. Rauch1; Cairo, Egypt, 11Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland, Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, CA, United States, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland. 12Department of Paediatric Neurology, University Children’s Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 13Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany. Since we have successfully established Next Generation Panel Sequencing of more than 4800 known Mendelian disease genes in postnatal cases re- Determination of variant pathogenicity represents a major challenge in the sulting in an overall diagnostic yield of more than 45% we investigated the era of high-throughput sequencing. Erroneous categorization may result if diagnostic yield of targeted Next Generation Sequencing on prenatal cases. variants affect genes which are in fact dispensable. We demonstrate that this Routine PTPN11 sequencing on 53 cases with increased nuchal translucen- also applies to rare, apparently unambiguous truncating mutations of an cy revealed in 4 (7.5%) pathogenic mutations. Sequencing of the “Mendeli- established disease gene. By whole-exome-sequencing (WEASH)I 1in a consan- ome” in so far 17 cases negative for PTPN11 and setting of specific in silico guineous family with congenital non-syndromic deafness, we unexpectedly filters for Noonan genes revealed one novel pathogenic mutation in KRAS identified a homozygous nonsense variant, p.Arg1066*, in , a gene as- (c.149C>T/= (p.Thr50Ile/=) in a case with increased nuchal translucency sociated with Joubert syndrome (JBTS), a severe recessive ciliopathy. None and multiple heart anomalies, giving a diagnostic yield of about 6% in PT- of four homozygotes expressed any signs of JBTS, and one of them had nor- PN11-negative cases. Moreover, an average yield of less than one rare (MAF mal hearing, which also ruled out p.Arg1066* as the cause of deafneAsHs.I 1Ho- < 2%) non-synonymous call per case allows a fast and straightforward ana- mozygosity mapping and WES in the only other reported JBTS family with a lysis. An average coverage of 200x and a 20x coverage in almost 96% of the homozygous C-terminal truncation (p.Trp1088Leufs*16) confirmed Ah ia1s targeted region assures also high sensitivity. disease gene, but based on a more N-terminal missense mutation impairing Additional analysis on further prenatal cases with intrauterine growth re- WD40-repeat formation. Morpholinos against N-terminal zebArHaIf1ish , tardation (2), hydrops fetalis (1), brain malformations (1), fetal bronchial orthologous to where human mutations cluster, produced a ciliopathy, but aplasia (1), or uniparental disomy 13 (1) unraveled one new possible di- targeting near human p.Arg1066 and p.Trp1088 did not. Most mutati- sease causing candidate gene in a case with complex brain malformations. ons in JBTS patients result in truncated protein lacking WD40-repeats and Furthermore, screening on 12 aborted samples achieved a diagnosis in 3 the SH3 domain; disease was hitherto attributed to loss of these protein- (25%) cases, i. e. autosomal recessive pathogenic mutations in the genes interaction modules. Our findings indicate that normal development does FRA
S1 , MK
S1  and C
C2 D2A. not require the C-terminal SH3 domain. This has far-reaching implications, We conclude that the fast workflow and the high sensitivity makes the ap- considering that variants like p.Glu984* identified by preconception scree- proach ideal for targeted screening on prenatal and aborted cases. ning (“Kingsmore panel”) do not necessarily indicate JBTS carriership. Ge- 
C07 .4 nomes of individuals with consanguineous background are enriched for ho- Comprehensive carrier genetic test using next-generation DNA mozygous variants that may unmask dispensable regions of disease genes, sequencing in infertile couples wishing to conceive trough assisted and unrecognized false positives in diagnostic large-scale sequencing and reproductive technologies (ART) preconception carrier screening. T. M. Alberola1, J. Martin1, A. Asan2, Y. Yuting2, B. Rodriguez-Iglesias1, J. Jimenez1, Y. Xin2,3, Marie-Louise Geissler-, Kusen-, Imhoff-Stiftung; Köln Fortune; D
C010447 , C. Simon1,4,5; HD22486; NSFC 21133002, KQTD201103 1IGENOMIX, Paterna (Valencia), Spain, 2BGI-Tianjin, Tianjin, China, 3BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 4Fundacion Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (FIVI), Valencia, Spain, 
C07 .6 5Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Valencia University, Valencia, Spain. How to design expanded carrier screening panels? Results of an interview study with European geneticists D. Chokoshvili1,2, S. Janssens2, D. Vears3, A. De Paepe2, P. Borry1; 1University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 3University Introduction: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) enables screening for a of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. wide range of conditions that a family history will never pick up. Here, we report the clinical results of a NGS-based preconception carrier genetic test (CGT) for mendelian conditions. Preconception carrier screening for recessive disorders makes it possible to Materials and Methods: Massive sequencing of 548 autosomal recessive (AR) identify couples who, although unaffected by the disorder themselves, are at and X-linked genes involved in severe childhood phenotypes reinforced with risk of having an affected child. Historically, carrier screening has been per- 5 non-NGS complementary tests, performed in ART patients. In case of ga- formed for a set of common pathogenic mutations associated with a limited mete donation, paired results (donor/patient) were blindly matched using number of disorders. However, recent advances in genetic technology have a proprietary software. enabled a more comprehensive coverage of both disorders and pathogenic Results: We performed a total of 2,559 CGT analysis: 1,158 tests for gamete variants at little additional cost. With the development of expanded carrier donors; 1,127 tests for patients using donation, and 274 CGT for 137 coup- screening (ECS) panels that screen for variants associated with hundreds of les undergoing ART with their own gametes. Positive results for at least one recessive disorders, it has become increasingly important to devise suitable pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were present in 92.5% samples burE dS enH pG 2 s0 am15 e| G waL sA 2S .9G O mW uta, tS ioC nsO aT nL dA NcDrit,e UriaK f o| rW thWe inWcl.uEsSioHn Gof .dOisRorGders and specific pathogenic mutation2s 7on (2,368). The average carrier er pl 4ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index screening panels. but was partly due to differences in cell types. We inferred cell-type-specific We conducted in-depth interviews with 16 geneticists from 8 EEA coun- eQTLs, and observed that lymphocyte-specific eQTLs replicated well in LCL, tries to investigate their views on the composition of ECS panels. Most par- but neutrophil-specific eQTLs didn‘t. We also observed that higher order ticipants favored limiting carrier screening to disorders that, due to their effects (e.g. differences in proliferation, differentiation or metabolism) can severe nature, would clearly justify altering reproductive plans by at-risk induce, abrogate or inverse eQTLs. We observed several examples where couples. Notably, when discussing severity of the disease, some geneticists genetic risk factors affect gene expression only in a specific context. We con- considered the impact of the disease on the family as a whole, suggesting clude that the effect of SNPs on gene expression depends on the cell and the screening should also be performed for severe conditions with effective yet cellular state. Since eQTL data is not available for every tissue, cell or cellular burdensome therapeutic interventions. There was disagreement on the in- state (and their specific combinations), predictions of the effect of genetic clusion of adult-onset and X-linked disorders, with some geneticists favoring variation on gene expression should be carefully interpreted. screening under certain conditions, while others supported active exclusion The BIOS project is funded by the BBMRI-NL, a research infrastructure fi- of such disorders. Regarding the selection of specific pathogenic mutations, nanced by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO pro- all 16 participants were strongly in favor of limiting screening to the best- ject 184.021.007). studied variants with clearly established genotype-phenotype associations. 
C08 .3 
C08 .1 Pedigree-Associated Genetics and Recent Environment Make Context-specific eQTLs identify hormonal effects in obese Finnish Important Contributions to Metabolic Syndrome Traits. men C. Xia1, C. Amador1, J. Huffman1, H. Trochet1, A. Campbell1, G. Scotland2, D. Porteous1, N. A. Ko1,2, R. M. Cantor1, B. Pasaniuc1,3,4, E. Nikkola1, M. Alvarez1, A. J. Lusis1,5, M. Civelec5, M. Hastie1, C. Hayward1, V. Vitart1, P. Navarro1, C. S. Haley1,3; Boehnke6, F. S. Collins7, K. L. Mohlke8, J. Kuusisto9, M. Laakso9, P. Pajukanta1,2,4; 1MRC IGMM, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2A collaboration between the University 1Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, Medical School and NHS in Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow, Edinburgh, CA, United States, 2Molecular Biology Institute at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, United Kingdom, 3The Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Bioinformatics Interdepartmental Program, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5Department of Medicine, David Geffen School Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have successfully identified thou- of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 6Department of Biostatistics sands of loci for a range of human complex traits and diseases but explain and Center for Statistical Genetics, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 7National Human Genome Research Institute, National only a limited proportion of trait variation. Mixed linear model analyses cap- Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 8Department of Genetics, University of ture a greater proportion of phenotypic variance than GWAS single-SNP ana- North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 9Department of Medicine, University of lyses and provide insight into the genetic and environmental architecture of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland. traits. Using this approach we analysed 18 traits related to metabolic syn- drome in a Scottish cohort of ~14,000 individuals genotyped for ~550,000 common autosomal SNPs. Trait variation was partitioned into genetic ef- Introduction: Obesity is a serious risk factor for cardiovascular and metabo- fects associated with SNPs, genetic effects associated with pedigree, shared lic disease. Considering the steady increase in obesity prevalence and that family environment, shared couple environment and shared full-sibling GWAS variants explain <5% of body mass index variance, gene-environment environment. On average across traits SNP-associated and pedigree-asso- interactions may contribute to obesity. We hypothesized that expression ciated genetic effects each explained around half the genetic variance with profiles in adipose tissue may reflect the molecular consequences of envi- recently-shared environment of couples accounting for ~10% of the pheno- ronmental changes underlying obesity. Accordingly, in an obese cellular en- typic variance on average, all of the three being important sources of variati- vironment, context-specific expression quantitative trait loci (cseQTL) vari- on in metabolic syndrome traits. On the other hand, the environment shared ants might regulate gene expression distinctly from non-obese conditions. largely in the past by members of a nuclear family or by full-siblings, had a Materials and Methods: We performed eQTL mapping (FDR<1%) using limited impact on trait variation. Our findings point to appropriate models 7,932,277 SNPs with adipose RNA-sequence data on 17,210 expressed ge- to use in future studies as pedigree-associated genetic effects and couple en- nes in 582 men from the Finnish METSIM cohort. We considered the eQTLs vironmental effects have seldom been taken into account in genotype-based only observed in the obese group, but not in the non-obese or overall groups analyses. In samples of unrelated individuals pedigree-associated effects as obese eQTLs (OB), and vice versa for non-obese (NOB). We tested the cannot be captured, explaining at least part of the missing heritability, but OB and NOB eQTL genes for replication in an independent METSIM cohort even in such studies it may be necessary to account for unrelated couples (n=771) using microarray data (FDR<5%). included in the sample to appropriately model the variation and hence make Results: We discovered 2,450 OB eQTL genes regulated by 28,267 cis accurate predictions and inferences. (+/-1Mb) variants; and 1,455 NOB eQTL genes regulated by 10,814 vari- 
C08 .4 ants, respectively. Of these 55% of the OB and 41% of the NOB genes were Genome-wide study for metabolic phenotypes identifies 62 loci and consistent across RNA-seq and microarrays in independent cohorts. When elucidates the metabolic context of LPA in coronary heart disease searching for potential drivers of context-specificity, we observed that J. Kettunen1,2,3, A. Demirkan4,5, H. H. M. Draisma6,7,8, T. Haller9, R. Rawal10,11, A. estrogen signaling genes were enriched among OB versus NOB eQTL genes Vaarhorst12, A. J. Kangas1, L. Lyytikäinen13, M. Pirinen14, R. Pool6,7, A. Sarin2,14, P. (P=0.001), including HSD17B12, which converts estrone into the most acti- Soininen1,3, T. Tukiainen15,16,17, Q. Wang1, P. Würtz1, N. Amin5, M. Beekman12, J. Deelen12, K. ve estrogen, estradiol. van Dijk4,18, J. Hottenga6,7, E. M. van Leeuwen5, T. Lehtimäki19, E. Mihailov9, R. J. Rose20,21, A. J. M. de Craen22, L. Bogl20, C. Gieger10,11, M. Kähönen23, M. Perola2,9,14, M. J. Savolainen24,25, A. Conclusion: OB eQTL genes exhibit genetic-dependent transcriptional regu- Verhoeven26, J. Viikari27, G. Willemsen6,7, D. I. Boomsma6,7, C. M. van Duijn5, J. Eriksson2,28,29, lation mediated by obesity and involve genes in the estrogen pathway as A. Jula2, M. Järvelin25,30,31, J. Kaprio14,20,32, A. Metspalu9, O. Raitakari33,34, V. Salomaa2, P. E. regulators of male obesity. Slagboom12, M. Waldenberger10,11, M. Ala-Korpela1,35,36, S. Ripatti2,14,37; 
C08 .2 1Computational Medicine, Institute of Health Sciences, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, Genetic variants affect expression of nearly all genes, but only in a 2National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3NMR Metabolomics Laboratory, School of Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland, specific context 4Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, D. V. Zhernakova, The BIOS consortium; 5Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, 6Department of Biological Psychology, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Groningen, Netherlands. Netherlands, 7The EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 10Research Unit of Molecular The expression of nearly all genes is subject to genetic regulation. This is a Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 11Institute of first conclusion from the largest population-based RNA-sequencing project Epidemiology II, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 12Department executed so far, including 4,000 total blood mRNA samples from five Dutch of Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, biobanks. The large sample size, unprecedented resolution of this study 13Department of Clinical Chemistry, Fimlab Laboratories and University of Tampere School of Medicine, Tampere, Finland, 14Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland and the comparison with other large population-based studies revealed (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 15Analytic and Translational Genetics that SNPs affecting expression (eQTLs) act in a context-dependent manner. Un Whereas microarray-identified blood eQTLs (Westra et al., Nature Genetics, 2013) replicated well in our study (87%, including 6.8% with opposite al- lelic direction), eQTLs identified by RNA-seq in lymphocyte cell lines (LCL) Metabolic phenotypes are highly heritable and have great potential in provi- (Lappalainen et al., Nature, 2013) replicated less well (78%, including 12% ding insight into genetic variation influencing both metabolism and complex with opposite allelic direction). This wasn‘t due to differences in data pro- 28 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOdiTseLaAseNs. DW,e UprKe s|e Wnt WtheW la.rEgSesHt Gev.aOluRatGion of genetic variance in human cessing as we analyzed all RNA-sequencing data with a common pipeline,ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index metabolism so far. We combined 123 metabolic phenotypes from blood previously associated to lipid levels were available for all subjects. We deve- samples of 24,925 individuals from fourteen European cohorts and asso- loped the 2-part analysis model to account for both binary and qualitative ciated 62 loci with blood metabolite concentrations. 8 of the loci were new. features of microbiome. The variation of lipids explained by host genetics For 15 loci the lead SNP was low frequency, for 8 a coding variant and 22 risk and microbiome were estimated using 80% random samples as disco- involved transcription factor binding sites. We showed that two loci, known very and 20% as validation set. for Mendelian amino acid metabolism disease with severe neurological ma- After adjusting for age and gender we identified 66 bacterial operational nifestations, also harbor low-frequency variants affectin g the same circu- taxonomic units (OTUs) to be associated with BMI, 114 with TG, and 34 with lating amino acid in healthy population samples. Moreover, we show new HDL at false discovery rate (FDR)<0.05. No significant associations were de- evidence that the biosynthesis of lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)),a known coronary tected for LDL or TC at FDR<0.05. Microbiome composition could explain up heart disease (CHD) biomarker, is associated with very-low-density lipo- to 6.0% of the variation in TG level, 4.0% in HDL and 4.5% in BMI, but only protein metabolism and other lipoprotein particles. Causality of metabolite 1.5% in LDL level and 0.7% in TC level. We did not observe strong interac- associations was shown with a genetic risk score (GRSLp(a)) for Lp(a), which tion between genetics and microbiome in the respect to human lipid levels. composed of 18 SNPs independently associated with circulating Lp(a) le- Mendelian randomization analysis suggested that the microbiome is an in- vels at genome-wide significance in a discovery cohort. GRSLp(a) SNPs were dependent, causal determinant of BMI and lipid levels. Overall, age, gender, confirmed in a replication cohort, where GRSLp(a) explained 45% of Lp(a) genetics and gut microbiome could collectively explain 9.6% variation in variance. Linking GRSLp(a) to electronic health records of over 17 000 popu- BMI, 17.1% variation in TG and 25.9% variation in HDL cholesterol. These lPation-based persons showed that the risk score was associated with CHD results provide rational for developing microbiome-targeting therapy. outcomes- 1b0ut not with any other disease-category. (ICD10:I20-I25 category, 
C09 .1 =6.4×10 , Nevents=1251, OR=1.28 per one unit increment in LGPRASLp(a))). We High yield of causative mutations by whole exome sequencing in present a new hypothesis for the biosynthesis of Lp(a) and our results to- selected individuals with childhood cancer gether with previous findings reinforce the observation that -targeting M. Jongmans1, E. Waanders1, M. Ligtenberg1, E. Kamping1, P. Hoogerbrugge2, M. treatment has great potential for CHD risk reduction in humans. Oldenrode-Berends3, D. Koolen1, G. van Santen4, M. van Belzen4, D. Mordaunt5, A. Kattamis6, E. de Bont3, R. Kuiper1, N. Hoogerbrugge1; 
C08 .5 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Princess Maxima Center Systematic identification of downstream trans-effects for 1,300 for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Groningen, known disease associated SNPs Groningen, Netherlands, 4Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, M. Bonder1, R. Luijk2, BBMRI-NL BIOS Consortium; 5University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 6University of Athens, Athens, Greece. 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Childhood cancer predisposition shows extensive genetic heterogeneity with currently over 100 conditions described, and likely many to be iden- Genetic risk factors identified in genome-wide association studies are mostly tified. Recognition of genetic predisposition in a child with cancer may lead non-coding, making it difficult to understand their functional consequences. to better treatment choices and surveillance options. We applied whole exo- So far, large-scale trans-eQTL analyses have identified such downstream me sequencing on germline DNA of children, and their parents, with cancer functional consequences for only 233 SNPs (Westra et al, NG 2013). To in- and at least one of these features: intellectual disability, congenital anoma- crease this, we used methylation-QTL mapping in peripheral blood of 4,000 lies, adult type of cancer, a family history for childhood cancer or multiple population based samples from the Dutch BBMRI-NL BIOS consortium. We primary malignancies. All cases remained undiagnosed after consultation observed that 1,300 different GWAS SNPs affect methylation of over 10.000 by a clinical geneticist and often multiple genetic teTsPt5s.3 AnalyDsiIsC EoRf 1th e first unique CpGs sites in trans (FDR <0.05), representing a six-fold increase in 15 patients resulted in a high yield of causative mutations. Three patients the number of disease-associated SNPs for which downstream functional carried mutations in the well-kEnPo3w0n0 cancer genes and (n=2). effects can be detected. In three children, exome sequencing rAevReIaDl1eAd syndromes that possibly con- To address the question in what particular biological processes these spe- tribuAteCdT Bto their malignancy ( based Rubinstein Taybi syndrome in cific CpGs are involved, we also generated RNA sequencing data for 2,000 a girl with acute myeloid leukemia; based Coffin Siris syndrome of the samples, permitting us to empirically relate CpG methylation to gene and based Baraitser Winter syndroMmAeM iLn2 b oys with acute lymphatic expression effects (eQTMs) for over 18,500 CpG sites (FDR <0.05). By using leuTkYeKm2i a (ALL)). I ,n addition, we identified novel candidate genes like a different genomic annotations we could accurately predict (AUC = 0.8) wh- NOTCH1 pathway activating mutation in (p.
P319 T) and a mutation ether these methylation-gene expression relationships were positive (35%) in TYK2 (p.
P760 L) both in children with two primary ALL occurrences. The or negative (65%). latter finding is particularly interesting since we previously found p.G761V By finally integrating the trans-meQTLs and eQTMs and adapting pathway in in a patient with recurrent T-ALL. Both mutations were shown to enrichment method DEPICT, we obtained insights in the downstream func- activate STAT signaling, an important pathway in ALL. Our study shows the tional effects of many genetic risk factors: rs3774959 (mapping close to value of exome sequencing in childhood cancer predisposition, both to fa- NFKB1 and associated with ulcerative colitis) significantly affects methyla- cilitate the diagnosis of known syndromes as well as to trace novel cancer tion levels of 355 different CpG sites, of which many map within genes of the susceptibility genes. NF-kappaB cascade. These results indicate that large-scale meQTL mapping permits discovery 
C09 .2 of previously unknown downstream molecular effects for many genetic risk Integration of somatic and germline exome data to evaluate factors, and these effects on trans-methylation levels have a clear biological pathogenicity of rare variants in cancer predisposition genes basis. S. Yost1, M. Clarke1, E. Ruark1, N. Rahman1,2; BIOS (Biobank-based Integrative Omics Study) is a BBMRI-NL Rainbow pro- 1Division of Genetics & Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United ject. Kingdom, 2Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom. 
C08 .6 Integrated analysis of human and bacterial genomes in relation to Genes in which germline mutations confer substantial increased risks of BMI and blood lipid metabolites. A. Zhernakova1,2, M. Bonder1, M. Cenit1, E. Tigchelaar1,2, J. Dekens1,2, J. Marczynska1,3, cancer are called cancer predisposition genes (CPG). To date characteri- F. Imhann1, R. Weersma1, T. Poon4, R. Xavier4,5, D. Gevers4, L. Franke1, M. Hofker1, C. sation of cancers arising in CPG mutation carriers has been limited as has Wijmenga1, J. Fu1; utilisation of tumor data from CPG mutations carriers to facilitate clinical 1University medical centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Top Institute Food and interpretation of their germline data. To explore this we have downloaded Nutrition, Wageningen, Netherlands, 3Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland, 4Broad and reanalysed data from 7,632 germline exomes from the 28 cancer ty- Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 5Massachusetts General pes in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) using the OpEx exome analytical Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. pipeline which has high sensitivity and specificity for indel detection. In the first instance we have focussed on the BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline data. We identified 155 pathogenic BRCA mutations (PMs) in 7,632 samples and 856 Increased body mass index (BMI) and blood lipid levels are risk factors for rare nonsynonymous (missense) variants (RNVs), which would typically be many metabolic diseases. We aimed to investigate the combined effect of gut reported as variants of uncertain significance (VUS). Tumor data of multiple microbiome and host genetics on human lipid metabolites. We measured types strongly suggest that the great majority of the RNVs are not patho- LDL, HDL, triglycerides (TG) and total cholesterol (TC) in 893 individuals genic. For example, the PMs are highly clustered in patients with breast or from a Dutch population cohort LifeLines-DEEP. The microbiome composi- ovarian cancer whereas the RNVs are equally distributed amongst 28 cancer tion was accessed by 16S rRNA geEnSe sHeqGu e2n0ci1ng5. T| hGe LgeAnSotGypOesW of, 1
S5 C7
 OSNTPLsA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 29 types. Also the alternate allele frequency of the 155 PMs was significantlyABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index higher in their matched tumor samples, but a similar pattern does not ap- the known BC/OC predisposition genes should be tested for mutations in pear to be present for the RNVs (analyses still in process - data will be pre- ERC C2
. sented). These data indicate that integration of tumor and germline genetic  C09
.5 information may have considerable utility in the interpretation of variants Tumour risks and genotype-phenotype-proteotype analysis in ~800 of uncertain significance. This work was funded by the RM/ICR NIHR BRC. patients with germline mutations in the succinate dehydrogenase  C09
.3 subunit genes SDHB, SDHC and SDHD Expanding the mutation spectrum and phenotype of Polymerase K. A. Andrews1,2, D. B. Ascher3, D. E. V. Pires3, L. Vialard4, N. Bradshaw5, L. Izatt6, A. Proofreading-Associated Polyposis (PPAP): novel and previously Kumar7, F. Lalloo8, R. Irving9, J. Cook10, T. Cole4, D. Goudie11, M. McConachie11, R. Lindsay12, C. Perry12, J. Adlard13, V. Murday5, S. Stewart4, E. Woodward4, E. R. Maher2,1,4; reported POLE variants 1Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, M. Genuardi1, M. Calicchia1, M. Ciavarella1, B. Riboli2, P. Cavalli2, M. Castori3, P. 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge and NIHR Cambridge Grammatico3, E. Lucci-Cordisco1; Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Department of Biochemistry, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4West Midlands Regional Azienda Istituti Ospitalieri, Cremona, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, San Camillo-Forlanini Genetics service, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5West Hospital, Rome, Italy. of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Ferguson Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 6Regional Genetics Service Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, North East Thames Regional Genetics Constitutional mutations of the POLE and POLD1 genes, coding for DNA Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 8Department of Genetic polymerase ε e δ subunits, respectively, have been recently identified in pa- Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, St. Mary’s Hospital, University tients with multiple colonic adenomas (MCA) and colorectal cancer (CRC). of Manchester, Mancheser, United Kingdom, 9Department of ENT Surgery, University So far, only few families with this autosomal dominant inherited cancer Hospital Birmingham Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 10Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children‘s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, predisposition, named PPAP, have been reported and the phenotype and 11Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, United Kingdom, 12Institute of prevalence of the condition are not well defined. We therefore investigated Cardiovascular & Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, a total of 62 patients with MCA (> 10), early onset CRC (EA-CRC) and/or fa- 13Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Leeds, United Kingdom. milial CRC for mutations in the POLE and POLD1 exonuclease proofreading domains (aa 278-471 e 304-517, respectively), by direct sequencing of ge- nomic DNA, to verify their frequency and associated clinical characteristics. Germline mutations in the succinate dehydrogenase subunit genes SDHB, Patients were APC, MUTYH and MMR mutation-negative. In-silico analyses SDHC and SDHD are the most frequent causes of inherited phaeochromocy- were performed using Polyphen2, SIFT, Mutation Taster, ClustalOmega, Phy- tomas and paragangliomas. Since these genes were identified over a decade re2, and Chimera 1.6.2. ago, genetic testing for mutations in them has become a standard clinical Five POLE variants were identified in 4/62 patients: p. L424
V (which has tool for many patients with these, and other, tumour types. However, the already been reported as germline mutation) in a family with an autoso- lack of information regarding penetrance and phenotypic variability asso- mal dominant phenotype of Turcot syndrome (multiple polyps associated ciated with SDHB/C/D mutations hinders optimum clinical management of with gliomas) and cutaneous manifestations (multiple pilomatricomas); individuals who are found to have a germline mutation. In order to address p.D392G and p.K425R in a patient with two metachronous CRC and familial these issues we undertook a retrospective survey of 800 individuals (in- CRC; p. S459
C in a patient with 3 colorectal adenomas and a positive family cluding 401 previously reported) with identified mutations in SDHB/C/D. history of EA-CRC; p. P436
S in a proband with EA-CRC and MCA. Bioinforma- Analysis of age-related tumour risks according to relevant gene and mutati- tic analyses are concordant in predicting a pathogenetic effect for p.K425R, on type (for SDHB and SDHD) provided novel estimates of penetrance and p. S459
C and p. P436
S, while interpretations of p.D392G are discordant. genotype-phenotype correlations. In silico structural prediction analyses Our results contribute to a better definition of the phenotype and mutation were performed to evaluate the functional effects of SDHB and SDHD muta- spectrum of PPAP caused by POLE defects. tions. Increased knowledge of the molecular basis of phenotypic variability  C09
.4 commonly observed in individuals with germline SDHB/C/D mutations will Germline mutations in patients with hereditary breast and ovarian facilitate the development of personalised management protocols based on cancer establish ERC C2
 as a cancer susceptibility gene. gene and mutation-specific tumour risks. A. Rump1, A. Benet-Pages2, S. Schubert3, R. Janavicius4, K. Hackmann1, E. Betcheva- We describe the distinct phenotypes of SDHB Ile127Ser and SDHD Pro81- Krajcir1, L. Mackenroth1, J. Lehmann3, A. Nissen2, J. Altmueller5, H. Thiele5, N. Di Donato1, Leu carriers, which can be explained using structural prediction studies and B. Klink1, J. Kuhlmann6, A. Tzschach1, K. Kast6, P. Wimberger6, E. Holinski-Feder2, A. may indicate a need to move towards mutation-specific management plans Meindl7, S. Emmert3, E. Schrock1; for these patients. 1Institute for Clinical Genetics, TU Dresden, Germany, Dresden, Germany, 2MGZ - Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany, 3Clinic for Dermatology Venerology and Allergology,  C09
.6 Goettingen, Germany, 4Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania, Germline SMAD9 Mutation Destabilizes PTEN: Exome Sequencing 5Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 6Department of Gynecology and Reveals a Novel Susceptibility Gene For Hamartomatous Polyposis and Obstetrics, Dresden, Germany, 7Clinic for Gynecology and Obstetrics, TU Munich, Munich, Gastrointestinal Ganglioneuromas Germany. J. Ngeow1,2, W. Yu2, L. Yehia2, C. Eng2; 1Cancer Genetics Service, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland, OH, United States. Background: Breast and ovarian cancer (BC/OC) predisposition is asso- ciated with a number of high- and low-penetrance susceptibility genes. De- spite comprehensive testing there is still a large portion of high risk cases Hamartomatous polyposis syndromes (HPS) represent a small but ap- without mutation in any of the known susceptibility loci. Therefore novel preciable number of the gastrointestinal inherited cancer predisposition candidate genes need to be screened. Here we report on the results of te- syndromes associated with a substantial risk for developing colonic and sting 94 genes in 717 patients from Germany and Lithuania. extracolonic malignancies. We present a unique case of familial juvenile Method: Inclusion criteria for the patients in this study were defined by the polyposis syndrome associated with gastrointestinal ganglioneuromas of German Consortium for Breast and Ovarian Cancer. NGS was performed unknown etiology. The patient underwent genetic testing for the known with 150 bp paired end sequencing (Illumina TruSight cancer panel). HPS genes (BMPR1A, SMAD4, ENG, PTEN, STK11) but no mutation was de- Results: In 19.7 % of the patients, BRCA1/2 mutations have been found. tected. Exome sequencing identified a novel germline mutation in SMAD9 Additional 17.9 % of the patients had null-mutations and unclassified mis- resulting in reduced PTEN expression. We subsequently screened 40 JPS pa- sense variants in the BC/OC susceptibility genes ATM, CDH1, CHEK2, NBN, tients and 40 CS patients with HPS for SMAD9 mutations but did not detect PALB2, RAD51C/D and T P53
. Analysis of the non-BC/OC genes on the Tru- any with SMAD9 mutations. Our patient, in addition to HPS, had significant Sight-panel identified 4 protein truncating mutations in the „excision repair ganglioneuromatosis which is rare but is overrepresented in CS patients gene” ERC C2
. Additionally we found 20 rare, unclassified missense varia- with germline PTEN mutations. Our functional experiments show that our tions in ERC C2
. These variants have a cumulative allele frequency of 2.9% patient’s SMAD9 mutation results in gain-of-function in SMAD8 leading to in our BC/OC cohort, which is 14.5-fold overrepresented compared to the reduced PTEN mRNA and protein stability, together, yielding a phenotype “exome aggregation consortium” cohort. Initial functional assays show that (ganglioneuromatous polyps) seen more commonly in patients with germli- at least some of the protein variants (e.g. NM_000400.3:p.Val536Met) have ne PTEN mutations. Our study suggests that this may be indirectly regulated lost their DNA repair ability. by miR21expression. We recommend that all patients with a clinical presen- Conclusion: Overrepresentation of deleterious mutations in our cohort de- tation of hamartomatous polyposis especially those with gastrointestinal fi 3ne 0s ERC C2
 clearly as a susceptibility ge En Se Hfo Gr B 2C 0/O 1C 5 p |r Ged Lis Apo Ss Giti Oon W. A ,s S COgaTnLglAioNneDur,o UmKas |b We reWfeWrre.dE fSoHr gGen.OetiRcsG evaluation. part of ongoing research, affected individuals with excluded mutations inABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C10
.1 Institute, Division of Cell Biology & Cell Physiology, Braunschweig, Germany, 10Center for Whole genome sequencing reveals the mutation characteristics in Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. Autism Spectrum Disorder Purpose: R. K. Yuen1, B. Thiruvahindrapuram1, D. Merico1, S. Walker1, K. Tammimies1,2, N. Hoang1, C. Chrysler3, T. Nalpathamkalam1, G. Pellecchia1, Y. Liu1,4, M. J. Gazzellone1, L. D’Abate1, E. Mutations in GABAA receptor (GABAA-R) subunit genes have been Deneault1, J. L. Howe1, R. S. Liu1, A. Thompson3, M. Zarrei1, M. Uddin1, C. R. Marshall1, R. H. described in a range of epilepsy syndromes. Here, we tested whether muta- R P.i Sn zg a5, mL. aZ rw i1a i Sg e Wn .b Sa cu hm er6 e, P r1. ;N . Ray1, R. Weksberg1, M. Carter1, B. Fernandez7, W. Roberts1, Mtioentsh oind 1s:8 genes encoding for GABAA receptor subunit genes contribute to t , . the etiology of Rolandic epilepsy (RE) or its atypical variants (ARE). 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 4Qilu Children’s Hospital of We performed exome sequencing in 204 European patients Shandong University, Shandong, China, 5The Hospital for Sick Children, Autism Speaks, wGAitBhR RG E2
/ARE and compared the frequency of GABAA-R genes variants with NJ, United States, 6University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 7Memorial University of 728 platform matched controls. We functionally assessed nonsynonymous Newfoundland, St. John‘s, NL, Canada. Results: variants for protein stability, trafficking, postsynaptic clustering and receptor function. GABRG2 Out of 18 screened GABAA-R genes, we found a significant en- Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is genetically heterogeneous, with evi- richment of rare variants in the gene in RE/ARE patients (5/204, dence for hundreds of susceptibility loci. Previous microarray and exome- 2.45%) when compared to controls (1/723, 0.14%) (OR = 18.07, 9G5A%B CRIG =2 sequencing studies have examined portions of the genome in simplex fami- 2.01 – 855.07, p = 0.0024, pcorr = 0.043). We detected a splice variant (c.549- lies (parents and one ASD-affected child) having presumed sporadic forms 3T>G) in two unrelated patients as well as three nonsynonymous of the disorder. We used whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of 85 quartet variations (p.G257R, p.R323Q, p.I389V). Functional analysis of the nonsyn- families (parents and two ASD-affected siblings), consisting of 170 indivi- onymous variants showed reduced surface expression of p.G257R and de- duals with ASD, to generate a comprehensive data resource encompassing creased GABA-evoked currents for p.R323Q. The p.G257R mutation resul- all classes of genetic variation (including noncoding variants) and accom- ted in reduced palmitoylation, a posttranslational modification crucial for panying phenotypes, in apparently familial forms of ASD. By examining de trafficking of proteins to the cell membrane. Enzymatically enhanced pal- novo and rare inherited single-nucleotide and structural variations in genes mCoitnocylluastiioonn :l evels restored the surface expression of the p.G257R variant previously reported to be associated with ASD or other neurodevelopmental γ2-subunit. GABRG2 disorders, we found that more than two-thirds of the affected siblings car- The presented statistical association anGdA fBuRnGct2ional evidence ried different ASD-relevant mutations. These siblings with discordant muta- suggest that mutations in the gene increase risk of RE/ARE. Re- tions tended to demonstrate more clinical variability than those who shared storing the impaired membrane trafficking of some mutations by a risk variant. Our study emphasizes that substantial genetic heterogeneity augmenting palmitoylation levels offers a therapeutic perspective to reverse exists in ASD, necessitating the use of WGS to delineate all genic and non- the pathogenic effect of such mutants. genic susceptibility variants in research and in clinical diagnostics. We have DFG: L E1030
/11-1, BN416/5-1, NU50/8-1, SA434/5-1, FWF: I643-B09, now sequenced 200 additional ASD families using WGS. We will present our VH-NG-246, ERA-Net NEURON II CIPRESS, NOW: 175.010.2005.011, 911- complete data analysis as well as additional progress from this study. 03-012, and (NGI)/NOW 050-060-810  C10
.2  C10
.4 Identification of a common set of microRNAs deregulated in Autism Hyperexcitability or electrical silencing: de novo loss- or gain-of- Spectrum disorders function mutations in KCNA2 cause epileptic encephalopathy L. Nguyen1, M. Lepleux2, M. Makhlouf3, C. Martin2, J. Fregeac1, A. Phillipe1, F. Ferron4, B. S. Syrbe1, U. Hedrich2, E. Riesch3, T. Diémié4, S. Müller2, R. Møller5, B. Maher6, L. Gepner4, C. Rougeulle3, Y. Humeau2, L. Colleaux1; Hernandez-Hernandez6, M. Synofzik2, H. Caglayan7, M. Arslan8, J. Serratosa9, M. 1INSERM UMR 1163, Paris Descartes – Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Nothnagel10, P. May11, R. Krause11, H. Löffler2, K. Detert2, T. Dorn12, H. Vogt12, G. Krämer12, Institute, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 2Institut Interdisciplinaire L. Schöls2, P. Mullis13, T. Linnankivi14, A. Lehesjoki14, K. Sterbova15, D. Craiu16, D. Hoffman- de NeuroSciences, UMR 5297 CNRS - Université de Bourdeaux, Bordeaux, France, 3UMR Zacharska17, C. Korff18, Y. Weber2, M. Steinlin13, S. Gallati13, A. Bertsche1, M. Bernhard1, A. 7216, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France, 4Faculté de Médecine Nord, Aix Marseille Merkenschlager1, W. Kiess1, EuroEPINOMICS RES consortium, M. Gonzalez19, S. Züchner19, Université, NICN, CNRS UMR 7259, Marseille, France. A. Palotie20, A. Suls4, P. De Jonghe4, I. Helbig21, S. Biskup3, M. Wolff2, S. Maljevic2, R. Schüle19, S. Sisodiya6, S. Weckhuysen4, H. Lerche2, J. Lemke1; 1University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 4University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Danish Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disease caused Epilepsy Center, Dianalund, Denmark, 6University College London, London, United by an interaction between genetic vulnerability and environmental factors. Kingdom, 7Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Gulhane Military Medical School, MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as key post-transcriptional regulators Ankara, Turkey, 9University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 10Cologne Center for Genomics, and are involved in multiple aspects of brain development and connectivity. Cologne, Germany, 11Luxembourg Center for Systems Biomedicine, Esch-sur-Alzette, Here, using olfactory mucosal stem cells biopsied from living patients, we Luxembourg, 12Swiss Epilepsy Center, Zurich, Switzerland, 13University Hospital identified a signature of four miRNAs (miR-146a, miR-221, miR-654-5p and Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland, 14University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 15University miR-656) commonly deregulated in ASD. This signature is conserved in pri- of Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 16University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 17University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 18University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, mary skin fibroblasts and allows discriminating between ASD and intellec- 19University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States, 20Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United tual disability samples. Putative target genes of the differentially expressed Kingdom, 21University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany. miRNAs were enriched for pathways previously associated to ASD and alte- Epileptic encephalopathies are a phenotypically and genetically he- red levels of neuronal transcripts targeted by miR-146a, miR-221 and miR- terogeneous group of severe epilepsies accompanied by intellectual 656 were observed in patients’ cells. In the mouse brain, miR-146a displays disability and other neurodevelopmental features. Using next gene- strong neuronal expression in regions important for high cognitive func- ration sequencing, we identified four different de novo mutations in tions, and we demonstrate that overexpressing miR-146a leads to alteration KCNA2, encoding the potassium channel K1.2, in six isolated patients of neuronal dendritic arborisation. These findings have strong diagnostic V with epileptic encephalopathy (one mutation recurred three times implications and emphasize the role of miRNA expression deregulation in independently). Four individuals presented with febrile and multiple the etiology of ASD, opening new opportunities for therapeutic approaches. afebrile, often focal seizure types, multifocal epileptiform discharges  C10
.3 strongly activated by sleep, mild-moderate intellectual disability, de- Rare variants in GABAA receptor genes in Rolandic epilepsy and layed speech development and sometimes ataxia. Functional studies of related syndromes the two mutations associated with this phenotype revealed an almost E. M. Reinthaler1, B. Dejanovic2, D. Lal3,4,5, M. Semtner6, Y. Merkler2, A. Reinhold6, D. A. complete loss-of-function with a dominant-negative effect. Two further Pittrich1, C. Hotzy1, J. Altmüller5,7, A. Kawalia5, M. R. Toliat5, EuroEPINOMICS Consortium, GABA receptor study group, P. Nürnberg5,4, H. Lerche8, M. Nothnagel5, H. Thiele5, T. individuals presented with a different and more severe epileptic en- Sander5, J. C. Meier6,9, G. Schwarz2,4,10, B. A. Neubauer3, F. Zimprich1; cephalopathy phenotype. They carried mutations inducing a drastic 1Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 2Institute gain-of-function effect leading to permanently open channels. These of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, results establish KCNA2 as a novel gene involved in human neurode- 3Department of Neuropediatrics, University Medical Center Giessen and Marburg, velopmental disorders by two different mechanisms, predicting either Giessen, Germany, 4Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging- hyperexcitability or electrical silencing of K1.2-expressing neurons. Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Cologne V Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6RNA Editing and Hyperexcitability Disorders Helmholtz Group, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 8Department of Neurology and Epileptology, Hertie Institute of Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 9TU Braunschweig, Zoological ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 31ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C10
.5 Freiburg, Germany, 4Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Cysteine Correction of NOTCH3: exon skipping as a potential Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States, 5Institute for Molecular therapeutic strategy for CADASIL Bioscience, The University of Queensland,, St Lucia, Australia, 6INSERM UMR_1163, J. W. Rutten1, H. G. Dauwerse1, D. J. M. Peters1, A. Goldfarb1, R. R. Klever1, H. Venselaar2, S. Département de génétique, Université Paris Descartes Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Verbeek1, A. M. J. M. van den Maagdenberg1, G. B. van Ommen1, A. M. Aarstma- Rus1, S. A. Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 7Division of Experimental J. Lesnik Oberstein1; Ophthalmology and Medical Proteome Center, Center of Ophthalmology, University 1Leiden university medical center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 8Section of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Leeds Institutes of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 9Istanbul Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Medical Faculty, Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 10Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 11Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, CADASIL is a disabling hereditary vascular dementia and stroke syndrome, 12Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, UAE University, Al occurring worldwide in ~1:50.000 individuals, for which no treatment is Ain, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates. available. The disease is caused by stereotyped mutations in NOTCH3, which Background: alter the number of cysteines in one of the epidermal growth factor-like repeat (EGFr) domains of the NOTCH3 protein. This causes toxic NOTCH3 JATD is a very rare, autosomal recessively inherited ciliary aggregation and accumulation in the (cerebro)vasculature, leading to vascu- chondrodysplasia mainly characterised by short ribs resulting and narrow lar smooth muscle cell degeneration and a reduced cerebral blood flow. We thorax causing a life threatening respiratory phenotype, sporadic polydac- hypothesized that re-establishing the correct number of 6 cysteines within tyly and variable extraskeletal findings such as renal, hepatic and retinal di- EGFr may prevent or reduce toxic NOTCH3 aggregation. To accomplish this sease. Known disease causing genes currently explain approximately 80% NOTCH3 ‘cysteine correction’, we use antisense-mediated exon skipping. of the cases. We have recently identified mutations in components of the Based on extensive in silico protein predictions, at least 12 NOTCH3 exons Ocybtojepcltaisvmesic, dmyentehino-d2s caonmdp lreexs, uinltcslu: ding the heavy chain and 2 novel inter- are eligible for this approach, targeting the majority of CADASIL causing mediate chains, but not any light chains. mutations. We now have established that this targeted NOTCH3 exon skip- To define the underlying genetic and ping is feasible both in a CADASIL patient derived cell model and in human molecular basis, we have genetically explored a cohort of over 300 indi- NOTCH3 transgenic mice. Using ‘skip’ cDNA constructs, we show that the vidTuCalTsE uXs1iDng2 diverse DNA sequencing techniques including whole exome modified NOTCH3 proteins are expressed at the cell surface and bind to sequencing, identifying 3 families with loss of function (”null”) mutations their canonical ligand Jagged1. This indicates that this selected exon exclusi- in , a new cytopClahslammicy ddoymnoenina-s2 (IFT-dynein) light chain. We on does not abrogate normal NOTCH3 processing and function. The human observed an unusual inheritance pattern suggesting incomplete penetran- NOTCH3 transgenic mice which we generated for in vivo studies show pro- ce anCdh lianm pyadtoiemnotn caesl lasn adn d TCTEX1D2 , impairment of retrograde IFT gressive cerebrovascular NOTCH3 accumulation, and are therefore a good seems milder than in models for other dynein-2 defectCsh alanmd yind ohmumonaans, fish model to test potential therapies aimed at preventing or reducing NOTCH3 and loss of conferred no apparent changes accumulation. Ongoing studies focus on optimizing in vivo exon skipping, to in gross ciliary structure. Our proteomics analysis in and determine the effect of cysteine correction on vascular NOTCH3 accumulati- human proteomic aCnhallaymsiysd coomnofinramsed that TCTEX1D2/Tctex2b represents on and ultimately the CADASIL phenotype. a component of an intermediate chain/light chain sub-complex within IFT  C10
.6 dCyonnecilnu sainodn :t hat in , the reTtrCoTgErXa1dDe 2IF T defect observed is De novo deleterious genetic variations target a biological network caused by instability of the entire IFT dynein complex. centered on Aβ peptide in early-onset Alzheimer disease Together, our resul ts suggest is an integral compo- A. Rovelet-Lecrux1, C. Charbonnier1, D. Wallon1, G. Nicolas1, M. N. J. Seaman2, C. Pottier1, nent of the IFT-dynein complex in human, zebrafish and that loss of function S. Y. Breusegem2, P. Prakash Mathur3, P. Jenardhanan3, K. Le Guennec1, A. S. Mukadam2, mutations cause JATD, howeverits loss may be compensated for under cer- O. Quenez1, S. Coutant1, S. Rousseau1, A. Richard1, A. Boland4, J. Deleuze4, T. Frebourg1, D. tain conditions. Hannequin1, D. Campion5;  C11
.2 1Inserm and Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Pondicherry University, Pondicherry, India, 4Centre Mutations in DV L1
 cause an osteosclerotic form of Robinow Syndrome National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 5Inserm, Rouen, France. S. Robertson1, K. Bunn1, P. Daniel1, H. Rosken1, A. O‘Neill1, S. Cameron-Christie1, D. Markie1, H. Brunner2, H. Kunst2, A. Lai3; 1Dunedin School of Medicine, Dunedin, New Zealand, 2Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3KK Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, Singapore, We hypothesized that de novo variants (DNV) might participate in the ge- Singapore. netic determinism of sporadic early-onset Alzheimer disease (EOAD, onset before 65 years). We investigated first by array-CGH and then by whole exome sequencing 14 sporadic EOAD trios. Two patients carried a de novo Robinow Syndrome (RS) is a phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous copy number variation and 7, among the remaining 12, had at least one condition that can be caused by mutations in genes encoding components of non-synonymous DNV. Five of these 9 DNV (an APP duplication, a BAC E2
 the non-canonical WNT signaling pathway. In contrast, germline mutations intronic deletion, and three nucleotide variants affecting PSEN1, VP S35
 and that act to increase canonical WNT signaling lead to distinctive osteosclero- MARK4) targeted a biological network centered on the Amyloid beta (Aβ) tic phenotypes. Here we identify de novo frameshift mutations in DV L1
, a peptide. Using appropriate statistical analyses, we showed that this a priori- mediator of both canonical and non-canonical WNT signaling, as the cause defined genetic network was significantly enriched in amino acid-altering of a subtype of RS with osteosclerosis (RS-OS) in three unrelated individu- DNV, compared to the rest of the exome. In addition, we provided evidence als. The mutations all delete the DV L1
 C-terminus and replace it, in each in- of the functional impact of 4/5 DNV targeting this network: the causality of stance, with a novel, highly basic sequence. We show the presence of mutant the APP de novo duplication (which is the first reported one) was obvious; transcript in fibroblasts from one individual with RS-OS, and demonstrate the novel PSEN1 variant resulted in exon 9 skipping in patient’s RNA, lea- unimpaired protein stability with transfected GFP-tagged constructs bearing ding to a pathogenic missense at exons 8-10 junction; the VP S35
 missense a frameshift mutation. In vitro TOPFlash assays, in apparent contradiction variant led to partial loss of retromer function, which may impact neuronal to the osteosclerotic phenotype, revealed that the mutant allele is less active APP trafficking and Aβ secretion; and the MARK4 multiple nucleotide vari- than the wild type in the canonical WNT signaling pathway. However, when ant resulted into increased Tau phosphorylation which may trigger enhan- the mutant and wild type alleles are co-expressed, there is a 2-fold increase ced Aβ-induced toxicity. Despite the difficulty to recruit AD trios due to age in canonical WNT activity over that of the wild type construct alone. This structures of the pedigrees and the genetic heterogeneity of the disease, this work establishes that DV L1
 mutations cause a specific subtype of RS, RS-OS, strategy allowed us to highlight the role of de novo pathogenic events, the and that the osteosclerosis may be the result of an interaction between the putative involvement of three new genes in AD genetics and the key role of wild type and mutant alleles leading to elevated canonical WNT signaling. Aβ network alteration in AD.  C11
.3  C11
.1 Mutations in ZAK cause autosomal recessive split foot malformation Mutations in a novel dynein-2 light chain, TCTEX1D2, cause Jeune in humans and complex hindlimb defects in mice Asphyxiating Thoracic Dystrophy (JATD) with incomplete penetrance N. TAYEBI, N. Kakar, M. Spielmann, C. Leettola, S. Kühl, G. Nürnberg,, N. Sowada, J. M. Schmidts1,2,3, Y. Ho4, C. Cortes5, C. Huber6, D. Mans1, K. Boldt7, C. A. Johnson8, M. Altmüller, D. Lupianez, R. Flöttmann,, M. Radenz, H. van Bokhoven, C. Schwartz, H. Ueffing7, H. Kayserili9, D. Krakow10, U. Consortium11, P. L. Beales2, L. Al Gazali12, C. Thiele, P. Nürnberg, M. Kühl, J. Bowie, C. Kubisch, S. Ahmad, S. Mundlos, G. Borck; Wicking5, V. Cormier-Daire6, R. Roepman1, H. Mitchison2, G. Witman4; Max planck institute, berlin, Germany. 1Human Genetics Department, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Institute of Child Health, University College London (UCL), London, United Kingdom, 3Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Split hand foot malformation (SHFM) is a clinically heterogeneous defect of 32 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOthTe LceAnNtraDl r,a UysK o f| h WanWds Wan.dE fSeeHt.G.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 19Unidade de Genética do Instituto da Criança, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 20Département de Génétique - Hôpital Robert Debré, CRMR „Anomalies du By using a combination of homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing Développement & Syndromes Malformatifs“, CRMR „Déficiences intellectuelles de causes in a consanguineous Pakistani family, we have identified a c.1103T>G / rares“, Paris, France. p.Phe368Cys mutation in ZAK (also known as MLTK) on chromosome 2q31.1 as the cause of a unique autosomal recessive split foot-hearing loss syndro- me with highly variable expressivity. Screening of genetically unresolved Brachyolmia refers to a heterogeneous group of skeletal dysplasias with a SHFM cases identified an unrelated Tunisian individual with a homozygous disproportionate short stature with short trunk. Radiographically the dis- intragenic ZAK deletion. Our biochemical studies using a super negative GFP order is characterized by a predominant involvement of the axial skeleton gel assay show that the SAM domain of ZAK is monomeric. In situ hybridisa- with variable degrees of vertebral flattening (platyspondyly). Amelogenesis tion in mouse embryos revealed strong Zak expression in the heart as well imperfecta (AI) is a defect in enamel formation/mineralization presenting as in the developing forelimb and hindlimb between embryonic days (E) 9.5 as an isolated anomaly or occuring in association with other anomalies. In and 11.5. Consistent with a role for Zak/Mltk in cartilage and bone develop- 1996, Verloes et al. described an autosomal recessive form of brachyolmia ment morpholino oligonucleotide-mediated knockdown resulted in abnor- associated with AI (OMIM 601216). Bertola et al. (2009) subsequently pu- mal cartilage development in Xenopus laevis embryos. Finally, CRISPR-Cas blished two other families with the combination of vertebral anomalies and mediated complete inactivation of Zak in mice caused lethality at E 9.5 due enamel defects. Here we report on four additional families with the same to severe cardiac malformation. The targeted deletion of the SAM domain in phenotype. Three of the eight affected individuals had significant short mice however was associated with a complex hindlimb malformation with stature. All patients had variable degrees of platyspondyly, very thin or al- some animals showing severe clefting of the whole hindlimb including the most absent enamel in both primary and permanent dentitions. A combined femur, tibia, fibula and the feet. Furthermore expression analysis of mutant strategy of homozygosity mapping and whole exome sequencing resulted hindlimbs at E 10.5 and 11.5 showed a 60% decrease of Tp63 expression in the identification of recessive hypomorphic mutations in a gene involved compared to wild type hindlimbs, suggesting a functional link between Zak in the TGFbeta signaling pathway. We further investigated the gene expres- and p63. sion during mouse and tooth development. At  E18
.5 labeling was restricted to ameloblasts synthesizing enamel matrix proteins, and to odontoblasts.  C11
.4 Investigating an available knockout mouse model showed that the mutant Spondyloenchondrodysplasia: The expanding phenotype of TRAP mice displayed thin to absent enamel in both incisors and molars, as well as deficiency T. A. Briggs1, G. I. Rice1, Y. J. Crow1,2; disorganised ameloblasts layer and matrix hereby recapitulating the amelo- 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Institute of Human Development, Faculty genesis imperfecta phenotype in our patients. Our study confirms the role of of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, the TFGbeta signaling pathway in both osteogenesis and amelogenesis. University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2INSERM UMR 1163, Laboratory EU-funded project (ERDF) A27 „Oro-dental manifestations of rare diseases“ of Neurogenetics and Neuroinflammation, Paris Descartes – Sorbonne Paris Cite supported by the RMT-TMO Offensive Sciences initiative, INTERREG IV Up- University, Institut Imagine, Hopital Necker, Paris, France. per Rhine program www.genosmile.eu.  C11
.6 AC P5
. Pentosan Polysulfate: New Mechanistic Insights and Treatment of the Spondyloenchondrodysplasia is a rare immuno-osseous dysplasia caused by Mucopolysaccharidoses biallelic mutations in Clinical, molecular and serological data from a C. M. Simonaro1, S. Tomatsu2, M. Frohbergh1, M. Haskins3, A. Solyom4, E. Schuchman1; total of 22 patients from 17 families will be described, providing an update 1Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 2Nemours/Alfred regarding the skeletal, neurological and immune phenotype in this condi- I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United States, 3School of Veterinary tion, in which the spectrum of disease continues to widen with increased Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4University Medical identification of affected individuals. Of particular note we propose that the Center, Mainz, Germany. OMIM differentiation between Spondyloenchondrodysplasia and Spondylo- enchondrodysplasia with immune dysregulation is not required, as we have shown with molecular testing that they represent a continuum of the same Pentosan polysulfate (PPS) is manufactured in both oral and injectable disorder. We observed a diverse immune phenotype, frequently including forms, and has been used clinically for over 40 years. Due to the i) anti-in- autoimmune thrombocytopenia and systemic lupus erythematosus, and no- flammatory properties of PPS, ii) positive effects in arthritic animals and ted a possible increased susceptibility to infection. In the majority of patients patients, and iii) extensive safety history, we investigated the use of PPS tested we detected upregulated expression of type I interferon-stimulated in the mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS). Comparative studies of oral (daily) genes, in keeping with the autoimmune phenotype observed and the likely and injectable (weekly subcutaneous, s.c.) PPS were carried out in MPS VI immune regulatory function of the deficient protein: tartrate resistant acid rats (Schuchman et al., 2013; Frohbergh et al., 2014). Both studies led to phosphatase. Interestingly, however we identified two mutation positive reduced inflammatory markers, improved dentition and skull lengths, re- patients without an upregulation of interferon-stimulated genes, including duced tracheal deformities, and markedly improved mobility. Unexpectedly, one patient with significant autoimmune disease, which was controlled by a significant reduction of urine and tissue glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), was immunosuppressive therapy. This patient may demonstrate a useful therapy most evident after s.c. administration. Findings were confirmed by analysis for the immune manifestations of Spondyloenchondrodysplasia. of total GAGs and by mass spectrometry. The mechanism(s) leading to PPS-  C11
.5 mediated GAG reduction in MPS are currently being investigated. Further Brachyolmia with amelogenesis imperfecta can be caused by a defect preclinical studies were carried out in MPS I dogs, with oral (daily) and s.c. in the TGFbeta signaling pathway (every other week) PPS for >1 year. Significant reductions of inflammatory A. M. Bloch-Zupan1,2,3, M. Huckert1,2,4, C. Stoetzel4, S. Morkmued1,3,5, V. Laugel- markers, tissue and urine GAGs were most evident with s.c. administration. Haushalter3, V. Geoffroy4, J. Muller3,6, F. Clauss1,2,7, M. K. Prasad4, F. Obry1,2, Y. Alembik8, S. Both treatment groups also exhibited reduced carotid and aortic inflamma- Soskin9, J. Hemmerlé10, J. Weickert3, B. Dabovic11, D. B. Rifkin11, A. Dheedene12, E. Boudin13, tion with the absence of plaque formation, a common pathology in the va- O. Caluseriu14, M. Cholette14, R. McLeod14, R. Antequera15, M. Gellé16,17, L. Jacquelin16, I. sculature of MPS I dogs and patients.Based on these findings, two clinical Bailleul-Forestier18, M. Manière1,2, W. Van Hul13, D. Bertola19, P. Dollé3, A. Verloes20, G. studies evaluating s.c. PPS have been initiated, in adult MPS I (Germany) and Mortier12,13, H. Dollfus4,8; MPS II (Japan) patients. We conclude that PPS may be beneficial for MPS, 1Faculty of Dentistry, Strasbourg, France, 2Reference Center of Orodental Manifestations either as an adjunct therapy or as a stand alone treatment that reduces in- of Rare diseases, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg (HUS), Strasbourg, France, 3IGBMC, CNRS-UdS UMR7104, Inserm U964, Illkirch, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique flammation and GAG storage. Médicale, INSERM UMR 1112, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Strasbourg,  C12
.1 Strasbourg, France, 5Faculty of Dentistry, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand, A novel disorder reveals Clathrin Heavy Chain-22 is essential for 6Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, HUS, Strasbourg, France, 7Osteoarticular and human pain and touch development Dental Regenerative NanoMedicine, Inserm UMR 1109, Strasbourg, France, 8Service de M. S. Nahorski1, L. Al-Gazali2, J. Hertecant3, D. J. Owen1, G. Borner4, Y. Chen1, C. Benn5, O. Génétique Médicale, HUS, Strasbourg, France, 9Service de Pédiatrie 1, HUS, Strasbourg, Carvalho1, S. S. Shaikh1, A. Phelan5, M. Robinson1, S. Royle6, G. C. Woods1; France, 10Biomaterials and Bioengineering, Inserm UMR 1121, Strasbourg, France, 1Cambridge Institute of Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 11Department of Cell Biology, NYU Langone Medical Centre, New York, NY, United United Kingdom, 2United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, States, 12Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and University Hospital, Ghent, 3Tawam Hospital, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 4Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Belgium, 13Department of Medical Genetics, University and University Hospital of Martinsried, Germany, 5Neusentis, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Warwick Medical Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, 14Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and School, Coventry, United Kingdom. Dentistry, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 15Dentistry Division, HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 16Faculté d’Odontologie, Université de Reims Champagne-Ardenne, Reims, France, 17Laboratoire EA 4691 „BIOS“, Reims, France, 18Faculty of Dentistry, Paul Sabatier University, Pôle Odontologie, Hôpitaux de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, A congenital inability to feel pain is very rare but the identification of causa- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANtDive, gUeKne |s WhasW yiWeld.eEdS sHigGni.fiOcaRntG insights into pain pathways and also n3ov3elABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Crumlin and Department of Genetics, Children‘s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 9West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital NHS Trust, targets for pain treatment. We report a novel recessive disorder characte- Birmingham, United Kingdom, 10Leeds Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, rised by congenital insensitivity to pain, inability to feel touch, and cognitive St James‘s University Hospital, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 11School of Dentistry, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 12Department of Medical Genetics delay. Affected individuals harboured a homozygous missense mutation in and National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, CLTC L1
 encoding the CH C22
 clathrin heavy chain. The mutation p. E330
K University of Cambridge, and the Department of Clinical Genetics, East Anglian Regional renders CH C22
 non-functional in mediating endocytosis at the cell mem- Genetics Service, Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 13Institute of brane. We found that CLTC L1
 is significantly upregulated in the developing Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 14Faculty of Life Sciences, human brain, displaying an expression pattern suggestive of an early neuro- University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. developmental role. Guided by the disease phenotype, we investigated the role of CH C22
 in two human neural crest differentiation systems; human iPSC derived nociceptors and TRKB dependant SH-SY5Y cells. In both there Heimler syndrome (HS) is a rare recessive disorder characterized by sen- was a significant down-regulation of CH C22
 upon the onset of neural diffe- sorineural hearing loss, enamel hypoplasia, retinal pigmentation and nail rentiation. Furthermore, knockdown of CH C22
 induced neurite outgrowth abnormalities, for which no gene has been identified. We performed whole in neural precursor cells, which was rescued by stable overexpression of exome sequencing in eight families with HS and identified biallelic muta- siRNA resistant CH C22
 but not by mutant CH C22
. Similarly, overexpressi- tions in PEX1 or PEX6, in six affected families. Loss of function mutations on of wild-type, but not mutant, CH C22
 blocked neurite outgrowth in cells in both genes are known to cause peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs), treated with Retinoic Acid. Using a novel, quantitative proteomics approach such as Zellweger syndrome, which is a group of autosomal recessive dis- we have identified the protein complement of clathrin coated vesicles in orders, characterized by developmental brain abnormalities, sensorineural neuronal cells, and present insights into the neural-specific trafficking de- hearing loss, retinopathy, and skeletal, craniofacial, and liver abnormalities. fects resulting from loss of functional CH C22
. These results reveal an essen- We analyzed plasma, erythrocytes and cultured skin fibroblasts from affec- tial and non-redundant role for CH C22
 in neural crest development and in ted individuals for biochemical peroxisomal parameters but did not detect the genesis of pain and touch sensing neurons. any significant aberrations. However, immunofluorescence microscopy of  C12
.2 the fibroblasts revealed a so-called mosaic peroxisomal pattern compatible Exome sequencing of ataxia-blindness patients identifies atypical with a very mild peroxisomal dysfunction. The impaired peroxisomal bio- Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome-2 (BVVL S2
) presentation and genesis in the PEX1 or PEX6 mutant cells could be rescued by transfection identifies PEX6 as the SCAR3 (MIM#271250) gene of PEX1 or PEX6 cDNA respectively and by functional expression studies C. Guissart1,2, E. Acar3, H. Topaloglu3, B. Leheup4, S. Ferdinandusse5, M. Koenig1,2; we demonstrated which of each mutant allele caused the mild mutant phe- 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) notype. Most of these mutations had not been reported previously in PBD Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, patients. 3Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 4Service de Médecine Although individuals with HS share subtle clinical features found in PBDs, Infantile et Génétique Clinique, CHU de Nancy, Vandoeuvre, France, 5Laboratory of the overlap is minimal and the diagnosis was not suggested by routine plas- Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. ma analyses used to detect PBDs. In conclusion, our findings illustrate the diagnostic utility of exome sequencing for rare syndromes and expand the phenotypic spectrum associated with PEX mutations. We reported in 2000 the linkage of spinocerebellar ataxia with blindness and deafness (SCAR3) to chromosome 6p23-p21 from the study of a single  C12
.4 multigenerational consanguineous family (Bomont et al.). We have now per- An in-frame deletion in FOX L1
 identifies the first gene causing formed exome sequencing of this family and found in all patients the homo- autosomal dominant otosclerosis N. Abdelfatah1, A. Mostafa1, S. G. Stanton2, M. B. Lucas2, A. Griffin1, V. Booth3, C. Rowley3, zygous p.Gly306Arg missense mutation in SL C52
A2, previously reported in J. E. Besaw3, L. Tranebjærg4, N. Dahl Rendtorff4, K. A. Hodgkinson1, L. A. Little2, A. patients with BVVL S2
, but located on chromosome 8qter. High recombinati- Sangamanatha2, S. Agrawal5, L. Parnes5, A. Batten6, J. Houston1, D. Galutira1, T. Benteau1, on rate in the telomeric region and use of widely spaced microsatellite mar- C. Penney1, C. Negrijn1, T. Young1; kers explains why correct linkage was initially missed. Exome sequencing of 1Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University, St. John’s, NL, Canada, 2National Centre a second family with two children affected with progressive ataxia, bilateral for Audiology & School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Faculty of Health optic atrophy and mild mental retardation revealed the novel homozygous Sciences, Western University, London, ON, Canada, 3Faculty of Science, Memorial p.Pro134Leu missense mutation in SL C52
A2, confirming that treatable (by University, St. John’s, NL, Canada, 4Department of Audiology, H:S Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, London riboflavin supplementation) BVVL S2
 should be considered for differential Health Sciences Centre, University Hospital, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, diagnosis of syndromic autosomal recessive ataxia. Exome sequencing of a Canada, 6ENT Consultants, St. John’s, NL, Canada. third family with two children affected with progressive ataxia and retinitis Introduction: pigmentosa and with linkage to 6p23-p21 revealed the p.Ala912Val muta- tion in PEX6. Retrospective analysis of peroxisomal markers showed just Otosclerosis, the most common cause of conductive hearing above normal serum phytanic acid levels but fibroblasts from a subsequent loss in adults, is characterized by the cementing of the stapes bone to the skin biopsy revealed absent peroxisomal catalase immunostaining, peroxi- oval wOiTnSdCo1w-1, 0and is believed to be caused by dysregulation of bone remo- somal ghosts with abnormal structure and markedly increased  C26
/ C22
 deling in the otic capsule. Although considered sporadic, 10 distinct genetic ratio, confirming the pathogenicity of the p.Ala912Val mutation. Therefore, lMocait e(rials and) M heatvheo bdese:n mapped in families with autosomal dominant despite initial false linkage, the SCAR3 locus is confirmed and corresponds forms, but no genes have been identified. to PEX6 mutation. Identification of these hypomorphic missense mutations We used a combination of linkage, fine mapping lends further support to the concept that numerous recessive ataxias are Raneds uelxtso:me sequencing in a multiplex AD family from the island of New- caused by partial loss of function mutations in a large variety of pathophy- foundland, Canada. siological pathways (Anheim et al., NEJM, 2012). We identified a 15 bp in-frame deletion in the FOX L1
 gene Grant references: ANR/E-rare JTC 2011 ‘Euro-SCAR’ (2011-RARE-004-01) (c.976_990het_delGGGATCCCCTTCCTC) co-segregating in all relatives with  C12
.3 surgically confirmed otosclerosis. This in-frame deletion in FOX L1
 is predic- Heimler Syndrome is caused by unique hypomorphic mutations in the ted to cause the removal of 5 amino acids from the highly conserved C-ter- peroxisome biogenesis genes PEX1 and PEX6 minus (NM_005250). Screening of >100 patients from Canada and Europe I. Ratbi1, K. D. Falkenberg2, M. Sommen3, N. Al-Sheqaih4, S. Guaoua1, J. E. Urquhart4, K. E. rCeovnecalluedsi oa nses:cond family from Ontario, Canada, with the identical mutation Chandler4, S. G. Williams4, N. A. Roberts4, M. El Alloussi5, G. C. Black4, S. Ferdinandusse2, in FOX L1
 and shared ancestral haplotype. H. Ramdi5, A. Heimler6, A. Fryer7, S. Lynch8, N. Cooper9, K. Ong9, C. E. Smith10, C. F. Inglehearn10, A. J. Mighell11, J. A. Poulter10, M. Tischkowitz12, S. Davies13, A. Sefiani1, A. A. Expression studies using human cells suggest that mutant Mironov14, W. G. Newman4, H. R. Waterham2, G. Van Camp3; FOX L1
 causes dysregulation of cytokines, supporting the prevailing hypo- 1Centre de Génomique Humaine, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, Université thesis that patients with otosclerosis undergo activated bone remodeling in Mohamed V, Rabat, Morocco, 2Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic the otic capsule. Interestingly, although not present in ethnically matched Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of controls, the novel c.976_990het_delGGGATCCCCTTCCTC deletion in FOX L1
 Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Manchester Centre for was recently reported at a frequency of 0.16% in Europeans and 0.09% in Genomic Medicine, St. Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre Africans. In summary, we report the identification of the first otosclerosis (MAHSC), Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Département de Pédiatrie Dentaire, Faculté de Médecine Dentaire, Université Mohamed V, Rabat, Morocco, 6Division of Human Genetics, gene. Schneider Children‘s Hospital of Long Island Jewish Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Alder Hey Children‘s Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 8National Centre for Medical Genetics Our Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital 34 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C12
.5 Submicroscopic deletions at 13q32.1 cause congenital microcoria Funding L. Fares Taie1, S. Gerber1, A. Tawara2, A. Ramirez-Miranda3, J. Douet4, H. Verdin5, A. associated disease. Guilloux1, J. Zenteno6, H. Kondo2, H. Moisset1, B. Passet7, K. Yamamoto8, M. Iwai9, T. Tanaka10, Y. Nakamura11, W. Kimura12, C. Bole-Feysot1, M. Vilotte7, S. Odent13, J. Vilotte7, LFP: NIHR fellowship; GCB: Action Medical Research; GGG: American-Italian A. Munnich1, A. Regnier14, N. Chassaing15, E. De Baere5, I. Raymond-Letron14, J. Kaplan1, P. Cancer Foundation. Calvas15, O. Roche16, J. Rozet1; 1INSERM UMR1163. Imagine – Institute of Genetic Diseases, Paris Descartes University,  C13
.1 Paris, France, 2University of Occupational & Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan, Human-specific gene evolution and diversity of the chromosome 3Instituto de Oftalmologia Conde de Valenciana, Mexico City, Mexico, 4Veterinary 16p11.2 autism CNV School of Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 5Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 6Department G. Giannuzzi1, X. Nuttle2, M. H. Duyzend2, P. H. Sudmant2, O. Penn2, G. Chiatante3, M. of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Mexico City, Mexico, 7Institut Nationale de la Malig2, J. Huddleston2,4, L. Denman2, L. Harshman2, J. Chrast1, C. Baker2, A. Raja2,4, K. Recherche Agronomique, Jouy-en-Josas, France, 8Institute of Bioregulation, Fukuoka, Penewit2, F. Antonacci3, A. Reymond1, E. E. Eichler2,4; Japan, 9Ehime University, Ehime, Japan, 10Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, Japan, 11The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 12Kimura Eye Clinic, Kure, United States, 3University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 4Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, Japan, 13CHU Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 14University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France, WA, United States. 15Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 16Department of Ophthalmology, IHU Necker- Enfants Malades, University Paris-Descartes, Paris, France. Recurrent 600kbp deletions and duplications at 16p11.2 are associated with autism, scBhOizLoAp2hrenia and extremes of BMI and head circumference. These Congenital microcoria (MCOR) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder cha- rearrangements occur via non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) racterized by inability of the iris to dilate owing to absence of dilator pupil- between -containing directly oriented segmental duplications at B P4
 lae muscle. So far, a dozen MCOR families are reported worldwide. By using (breakpoint 4) and B P5
. IllBuOmLinAa2 sequencing of 2,551 humans, 86 great whole-genome oligonucleotide array CGH, we have identified deletions at apes, a Neanderthal and a Denisovan showed that modern humans carry at 13q32.1 segregating with MCOR in six families originating from France, Ja- least one additional copy of (from 3 to 10 diploid copies) in contrast pan and Mexico. Breakpoint sequence analyses showed nonrecurrent dele- to apes and archaic hominins. Through Illumina and PacBio sequencing of tions in 5/6 families. The deletions varied from 35 Kbp to 80 Kbp in size, but large-insert clones from orangutan and chimpanzee, we identified three in- invariably encompassed or interrupted only two genes: TGDS encoding the versions in the human lineage after divergence from BoOraLnAg2u tan, affecting TDP-glucose 4,6-dehydratase and GPR180 encoding the G protein-coupled >1Mbp of sequence and 45 genes, toHgoemthoe rs awpiitehn sthe addition of ~1Mbp via receptor 180, also known as intimal thickness-related receptor (ITR). Un- segmental duplication. The latter includes a ~102kbp segment that like TGDS which has no known function in muscle cells, GPR180 is involved duplicated ~183kya, the time when emerged as a species. in the regulation of smooth muscle cell growth. The identification of a null We sequenced four human haplotypes aBnOdL Ad2iscovered multiple ~102kbp GPR180 mutation segregating over two generations with iridocorneal angle tandem duplications in B P4
 and B P5
, likely leading to different NAHR pBrOe-- dysgenesis which can be regarded as a MCOR endophenotype is consistent LdAis2position. We are currently assaying copy number and refining with the view that deletions of this gene, with or without the loss of elements breakpoints in >125 patients with a B P4
-B P5
 deletion or duplication. regulating the expression of neighboring genes, are the cause of MCOR. is ubiquitously expressed, present in all eukaryotes, and involved in the  C12
.6 regulation of iron metabolism. Expression levels in human lymphoblastoids A molecular network surrounding dysregulated H3K9 di-methylation correlate with copy number (r=0.29), expression of genes on 16p13 and in PRDM5-associated disease 19p13, and of genes encoding mitochondrial and ribosomal proteins. L. F. Porter1, G. G. Galli2, S. Williamson3, J. Selley4, D. Knight4, N. Elcioglu5, M. Elcioglu6, A. These findings suggest that a possible advantage linked to the emergence Lund7, R. Bonshek8, G. Black9, F. Manson9; of duplicated genes in the last 200,000 years of human evolution, underlies 11. Centre for Genomic Medicine, Institute of Human Development, Faculty of Medical the predisposition to recurrent rearrangements at 16p11.2 associated with and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 23. autism. Stem Cell Program, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology department and Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Boston, MA,  C13
.3 United States, 3University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Faculty of Chromosomal contacts connect loci associated with autism, BMI and Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Department of head circumference phenotypes Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Department of M. Loviglio1, M. Leleu2, G. Giannuzzi1, K. Mannik1, E. Migliavacca1, I. Roberts-Caldeira3, Ophthalmology, Okmeydani Research and Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Biotech I. van der Werf1, 16p11.2 European Consortium, J. S. Beckmann4, S. Jacquemont1, J. Research and Innovation Centre and Centre for Epigenetics, University of Copenhagen,, Rougemont2, A. Reymond1; Copenhagen, Denmark, 8National Ophthalmic Pathology Service Laboratory, 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, Department of Histopathology, Central Manchester Foundation Trust, Manchester, 3Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, United Kingdom, 9Centre for Genomic Medicine, Institute of Human Development, Switzerland, 4Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Introduction: We identified the cis- and trans-acting long-range chromosomal contacts of five genes located within the 16p11.2 600kb B P4
-B P5
 copy number variants ZNF469 BrittlPeR cDoMrn5ea syndrome (BCS) is an inherited connective tis- (CNVs). Its deletion is one of the most frequent known etiologies of autism sue disease with a devastating ocular phenotype. Mutations in transcription spectrum disorder (ASD), while this deletion and reciprocal duplication are factors and cause BCS types 1 and 2, respectively. PR domain associated with mirror phenotypes on BMI, head circumference and brain containing 5 (PRDM5) is hypothesised to exert epigenetic effects on histone volume. We observed complex chromatin looping between genes located and DNA methylation, icnh vriovmo atin organisation, and microRNA regulation, in the proximal 600kb B P4
-B P5
 and those mapping to the distal 16p11.2 however its role in epigenetic regulation is not fully elucidated. PRDM5-re- 220kb B P2
-B P3
 region, two loci separated by 650kb, successfully confir- lated disease offers an opportunity to observe a subset of epigenetic med by reciprocal 4C, FISH, Hi-C and associations between active regula- regulatory mechanisms in an inherited eye disease. Methods and results tory regions. Phenotyping of 137 unrelated carriers of distal 16p11.2 220 kb B P2
-B P3
 deletion and duplication showed that these CNVs are similarly : We report a retinal vascular phenotype in the eyes of associated with ASD and reciprocal impacts on BMI and HC. two patients with PRDM5-associated disease, and through mining PPRRDDMM55 Our results indicate that chromosomal contacts’ maps could uncover func- ChIP-seq data performed in muriPnReD MM C53
T3 cells and our expression mi- tionally and clinically related genes. Consistent with this hypothesis, loci croarray data performed on patient fibroblasts suggest a role for chromatin-contacted by our selected viewpoints are enriched for ASD genes in vasculogenesis. We confirmed binding at a subset of vasculoge- (OR=2.15, P=1.65e-08). Furthermore, we uncovered 16p11.2 600kb B P4
- nesis-related genes in skin fibroblasts by ChIP-QPCR. We examined PRDM5 B P5
 chromatin loops with (i) the 1q21.1 cytoband, whose deletions and du- interaction partners by pull-down and mass spectrometry and observed di- plications were previously linked to micro- and macrocephaly, respectively; minished interaction of a PRDM5 construct carrying a BCS-associated muta- (ii) PTEN, mutations of which are associated with a macrocephalic-form of tion with repressiinve v civoomplexes, including NuRD complex protein CHD4, and ASD; and (iii) the 2p15 cytoband. We enrolled 35 carriers of 2p15-16.1 de- heterochromatin protein 1 binding protein 3 (H P1
B P3
). We investigated a letion and duplication and showed that they similarly display mirror pheno- role for H P1
B P3
 , identifying reduced H P1
B P3
 staining in patient re- types on HC and weight. tinas, and identifying H3K9 di-methylation as a molecular mechanism for Finally, we observe that genes differentially expressed in 16p11.2 B P4
-B P5
 transcriptional repression at a subset of vasculoing evniveos.i sC-roenlactleuds iPoRnDs:M5 tar- CNV carriers are concomitantly modified in their chromatin interactions, get genes. Western blotting studies on patient fibroblasts further suggested suggesting that disruption of chromatin interplays participates in the ob- a role for dysregulated H3K9 diE-mSeHthGyl a2ti0on1 5 | GLASGOW, SC TOhTesLeA NsDer,v UedK p h| eWnoWtypWes..ESHG.ORG 35 findings suggest a role for dysregulated H3K9 di-methylation in PRDM5-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C13
.2 The impact and activity of mobile elements within the genome J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, D. Thung1, V. Guryev2, W. P. Kloosterman3, T. Marschall4, K. Ye5, J. A. of all multicellular organisms. Broken chromosomes trigger repair pathways Veltman1,6; and are known to block or delay mitosis. As a consequence, chromosome se- 1Radboud umc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Groningen, gregation is generally thought to accurately transmit intact chromosomes. Groningen, Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, Estimates of the whole chromosomal error rates derived from karyotyping 4Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik, Saarbrücken, Germany, 5The Genome Institute and FISH studies of cell lines or stimulated white blood cells, range bet- Washington University, St Louis, MO, United States, 6Maastricht University Medical ween 2-4x10-2 per cell division. The occurrence of segmental imbalances Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands. is estimated to be 5x10-4 per cell division. Sporadic studies of single cell genome wide CNV analysis suggested that the error rate might be higher than currently estimated. To obtain accurate measures of chromosomal er- Mobile genomic element insertions (MEIs) are DNA sequences that can be ror rates, we plated fibroblast and analyzed the genomes of two daughter autonomously copied or moved through the genome, yet their highly repe- cells following a single cell division, using array-based approaches. In total titive sequence structure makes them difficult to detect and genotype. In 152 cells (76 mitoses) from 5 different normal control fibroblast cell lines addition to being a major evolutionary driver in changing the genomic archi- were analyzed. At least one imbalance was detected in 23 cells, giving a an- tecture, MEIs can also directly resulted in pathogenic variation in a number euploidy rate of 5.3-25% (median=15.1%) in the different cell lines tested. of human diseases by inserting into functionally important regions and dis- In conclusion, the chromosomal stability is more than 100 times lower than rupting gene function, or indirectly by mediating deletions. current dogma, showing that chromosomal instability is a common place We have developed a method to identify both MEIs as well as gene retro- and putting the efficacy of the DNA repair mechanisms and control check- transposition insertions (GRiPs) in whole genome sequencing data. Using points in question. this tool we screened a cohort of 250 trios selected from the Dutch popula- tion and whole genome sequenced to a mean depth of 14x. In total 11,680  C13
.6 MEIs and 5 GRiPs were identified. The majority of the MEIs were rare Alu Chromothripsis in healthy individuals affects multiple protein-coding events (83%) with a frequency of less than 1% (56%). Per individual 1,200 genes and can result in severe congenital abnormalities in offspring MEIs were identified, including exonic insertions predicted to result in loss M. S. de Pagter1, M. J. van Roosmalen1, A. F. Baas1, I. Renkens1, K. J. Duran1, E. van Binsbergen1, M. Tavakoli-Yaraki1, R. Hochstenbach1, L. T. van der Veken1, E. Cuppen1,2, W. of function in known disease genes. In addition we identified and validated 5 P. Kloosterman1; de novo MEI events and used the trio design to estimate the genotype error 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands. rate (0.4%). Due to developments in NGS it is now possible to perform genome wide identification of both MEI and GRiP events. The discovery of these events in Chromothripsis represents an extreme class of complex chromosome re- large cohorts provides new insights into the role of genomic variation with arrangements (CCRs) with major effects on chromosomal architecture. positional effects. Although recent studies have associated chromothripsis with congenital Grants: ERC DENOVO 281964, NWO 184.021.007 abnormalities, the incidence and pathogenic effects of this phenomenon  C13
.4 require further investigation. Here, we analyzed the genomes of three fami- Single-cell allele specific expression (ASE) in T21: a novel approach to lies in which chromothripsis rearrangements were transmitted from a mo- understand Down syndrome. ther to her child. The chromothripsis in the mothers resulted in completely G. Stamoulis1, P. Makrythanasis2, F. Santoni1, A. Letourneau1, M. Guipponi2, M. Garieri1, balanced rearrangements involving 8-23 breakpoint junctions across 3-5 N. Panousis1, E. Falconnet1, P. Ribaux1, C. Borel1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2,3; chromosomes. Two mothers did not show any phenotypic abnormalities, 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School although 3-13 protein coding genes were affected by breakpoints. Unba- 1211, Geneva 4, Switzerland, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Geneva University Hospitals-HUG, Service of Genetic Medicine, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland, Geneva, Switzerland, 3iG E3
 lanced but stable transmission of a subset of the derivative chromosomes Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4, caused apparently de novo complex copy number changes in two children. Switzerland, Geneva, Switzerland. This resulted in gene dosage changes, which are likely responsible for their severe congenital phenotypes. In contrast, one child with severe congenital disease harbored all three chromothripsis chromosomes from his healthy Trisomy 21 is a model disorder of altered gene expression. We have pre- mother, but one of the chromosomes acquired de novo rearrangements lea- viously used a pair of monozygotic twins discordant for T21 to study the ding to copy number changes. These results show that the human genome global dysregulation of gene expression, without the noise due to genetic va- can tolerate extreme reshuffling of chromosomal architecture, including riation among individuals (Nature:508;345-350;2014). The majority of pre- breakage of multiple protein coding genes, without noticeable phenotypic vious studies focused on aneuploidies were conducted οn cell populations effects. The presence of chromothripsis in healthy individuals affects repro- or tissues. Studies on gene and allelic expression behavior at the single cell duction and is expected to substantially increase the risk of miscarriages, level, may reveal important biological insights regarding the cellular impact spontaneous abortions and severe congenital disease. of aneuploidy and elucidate the fundamental mechanisms of gene dosage.  C14
.1 In this study we employed allele specific expression (ASE) using RNAseq External Quality Assessment of Genetic Counselling: experiences with from 352 single cell fibroblasts (172 Normal and 180 T21 cells) from the the first pilot assessment pair of monozygotic twins discordant for T21. A considerable number of C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1, C. van Asperen2, E. Dequeker3, L. Tranebjaerg4, L. heterozygous sites throughout the non-chr21 genome were expressed mo- Garavelli5, B. Peterlin6, B. Cope7, H. Skirton8, R. Hastings9, ESHG Genetic Services Quality noallelically (Normal: 73.2 % monoallelic in 559,134 observations, and T21: Committee; 78.8 % monoallelic in 573,670 observations). There was also considerable 1Dept. Genetics UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Dept. Genetics LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Dept. Genetics UzLeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4University of Copenhagen, monoallelic expression for chr21 genes in Normal and surprisingly in T21 Copenhagen, Denmark, 5S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 6UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, cells as well (Normal: 67,2 % monoallelic in 4,985 observations, and T21: Slovenia, 7Genetic Alliance UK, London, United Kingdom, 8University of Plymouth, 76.07 % monoallelic in 6,723 observations). This metric was used to classify Plymouth, United Kingdom, 9John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. genes on chr21 according to the level of monoallelic expression (9 monoal- lelic, 29 intermediate, 2 biallelic). We hypothesize that different classes of genes contribute with different mechanisms to the phenotypic variability Quality assessment has long been associated with laboratory, but not clini- of Down Syndrome. Furthermore we have made a preliminary observation cal, services. To address this gap, in 2012 the ESHG Genetic Services Quality that genomewide T21 cells showed more monoallelic expression than the Committee (GSQC) explored the needs for a European Quality Assessment normal cells, but more analysis is needed to confirm these results. This stu- (EQA) scheme for genetic counselling. All European national societies of dy provides a fundamental understanding of the allele specific expression human genetics were surveyed. All participating 15 countries expressed a behavior in T21. need for an EQA for genetic counselling services.  C13
.5 A proposal for achieving an EQA for genetic counselling was launched at High incidence of mosaic chromosomal aneuploidies in human cell an ESHG satellite symposium in 2013. The working group wrote four case lines: a quantification of the frequency of the phenomenon scenarios in the fields of cardiogenetics, oncogenetics, monogenetic disor- E. S. Dimitriadou1, M. Zamani Esteki2, N. Van der Aa2, T. Voet2, J. R. Vermeesch1; ders and dysmorphology. Each scenario started with a referral letter and 1Laboratory for Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Department of Human Genetics, KU consisted of multiple stages, to reflect an episode of clinical care. At each Leuven, Leuven 3000, Belgium., Leuven, Belgium, 2Laboratory of Reproductive Genomics, stage more information was given and a number of questions presented. For Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven 3000, Belgium, Leuven, Belgium. each question, consensus answers were obtained by the author of the case, a patient organisation and at least two other experts. 36 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOA TtoLtaAl oNf D16, gUenKe t|i cW ceWntWres. EfrSomH G11. OcoRunGtries participated in the pilot EQA Maintenance of a balanced euploid genome is a key requisite for the successABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index and all answers were reviewed by two assessors per case. The whole pro- about the ethical issues arising from the introduction of genetic testing in cess was evaluated, both by the assessors and by the participating centres mainstream medicine. (post pilot EQA questionnaire). The results highlighted some differences in  C14
.4 genetic counselling practice across Europe and indicated that few centres Sharing information with children and young people about adult- offered psychosocial support. The conclusion was that an EQA for genetic onset inherited conditions: Using evidence to improve services for counselling is feasible and highly educational. A second exploratory pilot parents and their children EQA will be run in 2015 to further improve the process. The EQA process K. Forrest Keenan, L. McKee, Z. Miedzybrodzka; will be demonstrated using one of the educational pilot cases. University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.  C14
.2 Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome: successful, large-scale implementation of a group-based approach to genetic Background: A growing number of young people are undertaking predicti- counseling. ve testing for adult-onset conditions. However, there is a lack of empirical P. R. Benusiglio1, M. Di Maria1, A. Jouinot1, B. Claret2, D. Boinon3, D. Lejri1, O. Caron1; evidence about their information and support needs. Aim: To produce the 1Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus. Département de Médecine Oncologique, Villejuif, evidence for, and to develop materials to help parents and professionals in France, 2Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus. Département de Psycho-Oncologie, Villejuif, sharing information with young people about serious adult-onset genetic France, 3Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus. Département de Psycho-Oncologie, Villejuif, conditions. France. Methods: Clinic observations and interviews with young people and parents; an analysis of practitioners’ case notes and online web fora for young people; collaborations with patient groups and interviews with genetics Introduction. In the past two years, there has been a large increase in re- professionals. We used two adult-onset inherited disorders as exemplars: ferrals to our cancer genetics clinic of patients with suspected BRCA1/2- Huntington‘s disease and Familial Hypercholesterolaemia. associated hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC), probab- Results: In both patient groups the process of genetic testing could be a ly due to the “Angelina Jolie effect”. However, staffing has not increased in positive and empowering experience for young people, but for some pati- proportion, and dealing with the demand has proved challenging. A group- ents there were gaps in the provision of age-appropriate information and based approach to genetic counseling seemed an appealing way to increa- emotional support, resulting in poor experiences. Children and young peop- se efficiency. Methods. From 9-October-2014, we systematically invited re- le could question their own risk earlier than literature suggests. Genetics ferred patients aged 35-75, with a good performance status and in which professionals used a range of strategies to support communication between assessment for HBOC was warranted, to group-based counseling. It consi- parents and children, but one third gave limited advice and felt under-skilled sted of a 30-minute group session with a genetic counselor and a cancer in this area. Some parents also felt inadequate time was given to discussion geneticist, followed by rapid face-to-face standard counseling, and genetic of disclosure strategies. We helped patient groups develop evidence based testing when appropriate. Patients completed a form assessing their general materials for children and young people. understanding of cancer genetics before and after the group session, and a Conclusions: Practitioners should give serious consideration to parents custom-made satisfaction questionnaire before leaving the clinic. Results. concerns about disclosure even in treatable inherited conditions, and the As of 23-January-2015, 75 patients with a mean age of 50 had attended provision of age-appropriate information. Facilitating family communicati- group-based counseling. The number of patients seen in a three-hour slot on should be a goal of genetic counselling, but training for practitioners is was 6, compared to 4 with traditional individual counseling. Cancer gene- needed. tics understanding improved by an average of 3/10 points after the group KFK was funded by a CSO Fellowship, Scottish Government. session, and the average satisfaction score was 9.5/10. Conclusion. Large-  C14
.5 scale, systematic group-based genetic counseling is feasible in patients with Attitudes towards returning data to participants in sequencing suspected HBOC. This novel approach has allowed us to increase efficiency research in the context of an ever-increasing number of referrals, and to maintain A. Middleton1, C. Wright1, H. Firth1, M. Hurles1, M. Parker2, on behalf of the DDD study; waiting times of about a month between the referral and the consultation. 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Ethox, University of Updated data including a greater number of patients will be presented at Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. ESHG 2015.  C14
.3 Experiences of systematic genetic testing involving women recently Genome-wide sequencing in a research setting has the potential to reveal diagnosed with epithelial ovarian cancer: a qualitative study health-related information of personal or clinical utility for the study par- H. E. Shipman1, M. Tischkowitz1,2, S. Flynn3, C. MacDonald-Smith4, N. Hulbert-Williams3, ticipant. There is increasing pressure to return research findings to partici- GTEOC Study team; pants that may not be related to the project aims, particularly when these 1East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation could be used to prevent disease. This cross-sectional, web-based survey Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Chester Research Unit for the Psychology of investigated the attitudes of 6944 individuals from 75 countries towards re- Health, University of Chester, Chester, United Kingdom, 4North Wales Cancer Treatment turning results from genome research. Participants included four relevant Centre, Betsi Cadwaladr University Health Board, Rhyl, United Kingdom. stakeholder groups: 4961 members of the public, 533 genetic health profes- sionals, 843 non-genetic health professionals and 607 genomic researchers who were invited via traditional media, social media and professional email Newly available rapid genetic testing (RGT) for BRCA1/2 makes it possible list-serve. Treatability and perceived utility of genomic data were deemed to identify mutation carriers soon after cancer diagnosis. There are bene- important with 98% of stakeholders personally interested in learning about fits for directing women’s treatment and providing information for families, preventable life-threatening conditions. Participants appeared to assign a but there are ethical concerns about testing this group at this point. These value to genomic data, there was a sense of ‘if the scientists know it, I’d like women may be elderly, unwell and may have little or no family history of to know it too’ - 59% were interested in being able to receive their raw se- cancer. Those found to have a mutation then have the task of communicating quence data, even though the majority would not do anything with this. 52% this sensitive information to their families. of participants felt it was important that genomic researchers kept reanaly- We explore the experiences of women recently diagnosed with epithelial sing their data and had the ability to update them periodically with new fin- ovarian cancer who have been offered RGT through a project considering dings; 85% of participants felt that if something serious was discovered they the feasibility of integrating RGT into routine oncology services (The GTEOC would like this information delivered to them directly by an appropriately Study). Using data collected from twelve semi-structured interviews with trained health professional. This social studies study offers the largest data- women that were analysed using Interpretive Phenomenological Analysis, set, published to date, of attitudes towards issues surrounding the return of we consider how individuals make sense of genetic testing within their results from sequencing research. broader cancer and life experiences.  C14
.6 Our results highlight the sensitivity of the timing of discussions about gene- Population-based Preconception Carrier Screening: how do potential tic testing during a woman’s cancer journey. Women have much emotional users view a preconception test for 70 severe autosomal recessive work to do as they confront their cancer diagnosis, their own mortality and diseases? the impact on their family and others. Though genetic testing is welcomed M. Plantinga1, E. Birnie1, S. Kaplan1, M. A. Verkerk2, A. M. Lucassen3, A. V. Ranchor4, I. M. during this time by the women we interviewed, the burdens and comple- van Langen1; xities are acknowledged. This foregrounds the necessity for appropriate 1University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of Genetics, support for this patient group. OuErS wHorGk c2o0nt1ri5b u|t GesL toA cSuGrreOnWt d,i sScuCsOsioTnLsA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 37ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of Internal Medicine, Groningen, Netherlands, 3University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Ethics and Law, Southampton, United Kingdom, 4University of ID disorders and their underlying biology is still limited. We established of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of Health Psychology, a curated database of 650 currently known ID genes, linked them to various Groningen, Netherlands. functional datasets and classified them according to ID manifestation and severity and 27 associated core clinical features such as organic or neuro- logical anomalies. Using this integrated resource we show that ID genes are Background substantially enriched in protein-protein interactions and co-expression, A preconception carrier screening (PCS) test can detect whether a couple highest in the hippocampus. 86% of ID genes fall into 32 common Gene On- has an increased risk of having a child with a monogenetic disease. Next-ge- tology based molecular processes: metabolism and nervous system deve- neration sequencing (NGS) allows the testing of many genes or diseases si- lopment among the largest, and hedgehog and glutamate signalling among multaneously. The University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG) developed the most enriched groups. Identification of highly enriched functional the- an NGS PCS test for couples covering 70 very severe, autosomal recessive mes and phenotypes systematically revealed characteristic phenoprofiles of diseases simultaneously and screening for all variants. This is the first non- process-defined IDopathies including chromatin- and DNArepairopathies. commercial population-based PCS test to be offered to prospective couples Strikingly, classification of ID genes according to their associated clinical in a healthcare setting in Europe. So far, little is known about how potential phenotypes efficiently breaks them down into subsets with significantly users view such a population-based PCS test. elevated biological coherence and allows ID genes to predict each other. Fur- Methods thermore, we utilised custom-made datasets on ID gene function in Droso- We examined potential users’ intentions to undergo the test and preferences phila. Early onset behavioural and specific morphological wing phenotypes regarding who should offer the test. Data was collected in March 2014 by were characteristic for ID genes in general, and several fly phenotypes were means of an online survey among 500 people belonging to the target popu- particularly representative for specific human clinical phenotype classes. lation (people aged 18-40, with a partner and living in the Netherlands). Our study and resource provide systematic insights into the molecular and Results clinical landscape of ID disorders and prove the utility of systematic human One third of the respondents said they intend to take this test were it to and cross-species phenomic analyses in highly heterogeneous genetic dis- be offered. They prefer this to be offered via their GP and via face-to-face orders. pre-test consultation. Fifty-eight percent is willing to pay for the test, up to  C15
.3 a cost of 5,000 euro. Testing for later onset, treatable diseases or even traits 9.6% of mouse gene knockouts show abnormal neuroanatomy: a (e.g sportivity) is valued less. The UMCG will start an implementation study resource to identify genes and gene networks involved in ID in human soon in which the PCS test is supplied via selected GPs in the north of the B. YALCIN1,2, A. Mikhaleva1, V. E. Vancollie3, M. Kannan2, H. Whitley2, A. Edwards4, Netherlands. Our first aim is to measure the uptake, practical feasibility and C. Wagner2, J. Estabel3, C. J. Lelliott3, J. K. White3, Sanger Mouse Genetics Project, D. J. psychological impact of offering the test. Adams3, D. A. Keays5, J. Flint4, Y. Herault2, A. Reymond1;  C15
.1 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, Genome-wide association study of 200,000 individuals identifies 2Institute of Genetics and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Illkirch, France, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Trust Centre for Human 18 genome-wide significant loci and provides biological insight into Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, human cognitive function Austria. T. Esko1,2,3, on the behalf of Social Science Genetic Association Consortium (SSGAC); 1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 3Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States. Intellectual disability (ID) affects 1-3% of the general population. Genetic mutations account for about half of the currently undiagnosed cases, and despite recent successes in identifying some of the mutations responsible, Educational attainment, measured as years of schooling, is commonly used it has been suggested that up to 1,000 further genes remain to be identified. as a proxy for cognitive function. A recent genome wide association stu- To identify genes involved in brain malformation and potentially associated dy (GWAS) of educational attainment conducted in a discovery sample of with ID, we are collaborating with the Sanger Mouse Genetics Project (MGP), 100,000 individuals identified and replicated three genome-wide significant allied to the International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium (IMPC), to sy- loci. Here, we report preliminary results based on conducted in 200,000 in- stematically study the neuroanatomy of the MGP/IMPC knockout mouse dividuals. We replicate the previous three loci and report 15 novel, genome- strains. We are measuring a standardized set of 78 brain parameters across wide significant loci for educational attainment. A polygenic score com- 22 brain regions to detect a variety of mechanisms that underlie brain mal- posed of 18 single nucleotide polymorphisms, one from each locus, explains formation disorders, such as aberrant cell proliferation, neuronal migration ~0.4% of the variance educational attainment. Applying data-driven com- defects or elevated cell death rates. putational tools, we find that genes in loci that reach nominal significance (P So far, we have assessed brain defects in 825 knockout mouse genes. These < 5.0x10-5) strongly enrich for 11 groups of biological pathways (false dis- preliminary data yielded success with the identification of 40 known ID ge- covery rates < 0.05) mostly related to the central nervous system, including nes including Ap4e1, Cenpj, Chd7, Mcph1, Sc4mol and Ube3b demonstrating dendritic spine morphogenesis (P=1.2x10-7), axon guidance (P=5.8x10-6) the pertinence of our approach. We also discovered 41 other genes including and synapse organization (P=1.7x10-5), and show enriched expression in Mta1, Ccdc104, Caprin2 and Dusp3, which when disrupted caused modifica- various brain areas, including hippocampus, limbic system, cerebral and en- tion of brain structures and thus are good candidate genes for ID. torhinal cortex. We also prioritized genes in associated loci and found that Our study is the largest screen of brain morphology from the MGP/IMPC. It several are known to harbor genes related to intellectual disability (SMAR- shows that we can detect abnormalities in about 10% of knockout mouse CA2, MAPT), obesity (RBFOX3, SLITRK5), and schizophrenia (GRIN2A) mutants, and that these translate into human pathology. This offers a com- among others. By pointing at specific genes, pathways and brain areas, our plementary resource to human genetic studies. work provides novel biological insights into several facets of human cogni- The project is funded by the French National Research Agency and the Swiss tive function. National Science Foundation.  C15
.2  C15
.4 Systematic phenotype-based deconvolution of intellectual disability Finding new connections in the transcriptional regulation of disorders into biologically coherent modules Lysine-specific demethylase 5C (KDM5C) a disease gene involved in C. Zweier1, K. Kochinke2, B. Nijhof2, M. Fenckova2, P. Cizek3, F. Honti4, S. Keerthikumar3, M. syndromic and non-syndromic XLID A. W. Oortveld2, T. Kleefstra2, J. M. Kramer2,5, C. Webber4, M. A. Huynen3, A. Schenck2; A. Padula1, L. Poeta1, C. Shoubridge2, A. Ranieri1, K. Helin3, J. Gecz2, C. Schwartz4, M. V. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Ursini1, H. vanBokhoven5, M. G. Miano1; Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, 1IGB-CNR, Naples, Italy, 2University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 3University of Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United 3CMBI, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical States, 5Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4MRC Functional Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and X-linked Intellectual Disability (XLID) is a group of heterogeneous disorders Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada. caused by mutations in genes on the X chromosome. Disease mutations in ~10% of X chromosome genes are implicated in causing XLID disorders in ~50% of known XLID disorders. Intellectual disability (ID) disorders, due to their frequency and enormous Mutations in Lysine-specific demethylase 5C (KDM5C) gene have been re- genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity, represent a major unmet challenge in 38 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOpoTrtLeAd NasD an, iUmKpo |r WtanWt caWus.Ee SofH boGth.O syRnGdromic and non-syndromic (XLID) health care and diagnostics. A comprehensive and systematic understandingABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index in males. KDM5C is a chromatin remodelling regulator with histone deme- hindbrain malformation on brain imaging known as molar tooth sign. It is thylase activity for di- and trimethylated histone 3 lysine 4 acting as tran- genetically heterogeneous with >20 causal genes identified to date and its scriptional repressor during brain development and neuronal maturation. clinical and neuroradiologic findings overlap with other ciliopathies such With Regulatory Element-1-Silencing Transcription factor (REST), a critical as acrocallosal syndrome (ACLS). However, craniofacial manifestations of regulator of the spatio-temporal transition of neural progenitors to neurons, macrocephaly, prominent forehead and hypertelorism have been distinctive KDM5C co-occupies the promoters of a subset of REST target genes. features of ACLS among ciliopathies. Here, we evaluated eight families with We identified a disease path, linking functionally KDM5C to another XLID/ ACLS-likeK cIrFa7niofacial appearanceC 5aonrdf 4o2ther ciliopathy features by whole Epilepsy gene, encoding the homeotic transcription factor ARX, whose mu- exome or targeted Sanger sequencing which revealed biallelic mutations tations impair severely KDM5C transcript regulation. affecting , the ACLS gene, or , the JBST gene. Given the known Furthermore, we analysed two additional XLID proteins that also bind role of KIF7 in primary cilia and Hedgehog signaling, we wondered if the- KDM5C promoter. They are PHD Finger Protein 8 (PHF8), a H3K9 deme- re was a functional connection to  C5
oinrf 4o2vo which‘s function has remained thylase; and Zinc Finger Protein 711 (ZNF711), a transcriptional factor, unknown. Therefore, we also assessed  C5
orf42 by evaluation ofK tIhF7e pri- which role is almost unknown. We observed that PHF8 and ZNF711, which m C5
aorryf 4c2ilia in affected individuals and RNAi silencing in chicken em- co-occupy the target promoter, induce cooperatively the KDM5C stimula- bryoCs5. oCrof4n2sequently, in addition to the clinical overlap between and tion. This activity seems to be ARX-independent and we propose that the -related craniofacial features, we found abnormal primary cilia in transcriptional induction by ARX does not synergize with the action of the the -patients and evidenced its role in craniofacial development, pa- PHF8/ZNF711 complex. Remarkable, our findings open new perspectives thfinding of commissural axons and neural circuit formation in developing towards the exploitation of rational strategies to treat the growing group of chicken embryos. ID and cognition diseases that are caused by chromatin and/or transcrip-  C16
.1 tional defects. Systematic evaluation of patients with idiopathic short stature using  C15
.5 whole exome sequencing HCF C1
 is a dosage sensitive transcriptional coregulator of C. T. Thiel1, N. N. Hauer1, S. Schuhmann1, E. Schöller1, M. T. Wittmann1, S. Uebe1, A. B. neurodevelopment that influences neural progenitor and neuronal Ekici1, H. Sticht2, H. Dörr3, A. Reis1; 1Institute of Human Genetics Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, cell function Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry Friedrich-Alexander-Universität L. A. Jolly1,2, L. S. Nguyen3, D. Domingo1, Y. Sun1, S. Barry1,2, M. Hancarova4, P. Plevova5, Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent M. Vlckova4, M. Havlovicova4, V. M. Kalscheuer6, C. Graziano7, T. Pippucci7, Z. Sedlacek4, E. Medicine Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. Bonora7, J. Gecz1,2; 1University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 2Robinson Research Institute, Adelaide, Australia, 3Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 4Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 5University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 6Max Shortness of stature is a common medical concern in childhood and has an Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 7University of Bologna, incidence of 3% in the general population. After excluding defects of the Bologna, Italy. growth hormone pathway and recognizable syndromes the underlying cau- se remains unknown in approximately 70-80% of patients. In some of these patients the underlying diagnosis is omitted by the lack of Initially we implicated HCF C1
 in X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) by clinical features characteristic for known syndromic forms of short statu- a non-coding, regulatory mutation. The single base change abolished bin- re. To address this in patients with idiopathic short stature we thoroughly ding of the YY1 transcription factor at a highly conserved sequence proxi- built a study group of more than 500 families with idiopathic short stature. mal to the HCF C1
 transcription start site resulting in loss of transcriptional We systematically selected 100 individuals where growth hormone defects, repression. We employed ex-vivo models of embryonic neural development common genetic causes of short stature or copy number variations were to show that this change was likely pathogenic; over-expression of HCF C1
 excluded and performed whole exome sequencing. Variants were selected caused cell cycle exit and differentiation of neural progenitor cells (NPCs), unbiased based on all modes of inheritance in agreement with the segrega- and reductions in neurite growth of hippocampal neurons. Intriguingly, mis- tion in the families and their potential effect on protein function using our sense mutations that result in almost complete loss of HCF C1
 have also been NGS Variant Analyzer software. reported to cause Cobalamin type X (CblX), a VitaminB12 metabolic disor- We confirmed mutations in known short stature genes in 11 patients. All der with severe neurodevelopmental impairment including intractable epi- these syndromes have been reported to be associated with further clinical lepsy. We extended our studies to show that in contrast to over-expression, issues providing mandatory medical guidance for these patients. modest reduction (~50%) of Hcfc1 expression promoted the cell cycling Furthermore, we recognized recessive, dominant and x-linked inherited of NPCs at the expense of differentiation, and enhanced neurite growth of variants in novel candidate genes involved in epigenetic modification, cell neurons. We further identified four additional missense variants in HCF C1
 cycle regulation, ubiquitination and protein synthesis. that segregate with ID in four families. Three of these variants caused partial In conclusion, whole exome sequencing identified the underlying genetic loss of function in multiple cell based assays, including complementation of defect in 11% of the patients with idiopathic short stature. As the clinical neurite growth. In line with only partial loss of function, metabolic features spectrum of most genetic defects is yet to be explored, an unbiased genetic of CblX were largely absent in affected individuals. Our identification and analysis of patients with idiopathic short stature can establish a diagnosis functional assessment of HCF C1
 mutations together with descriptions of a in these cases. broadened phenotypic spectrum reveals an emerging genotype-phenotype  C16
.2 correlation, dependent also on HCF C1
 abundance and not just function. Fur- Mutations in the core NHEJ components LIG4 and XRC C4
 result in thermore, we have identified relevant disease mechanisms of ID that con- microcephalic primordial dwarfism verge on the behaviour of cells present during embryonic stages of brain J. E. Murray1, M. van der Burg2, H. Ijspeert2, P. Carroll1, Q. Wu3, T. Ochi3, A. Leitch1, E. S. development and Cobalamin metabolism. Miller4, B. Kysela5, A. Jawad2, A. Bottani6, F. Brancati7, M. Cappa8, V. Cormier-Daire9, C.  C15
.6 Deshpande10, E. Ali Faqeih11, G. Graham12, E. Ranza6, T. L. Blundell3, A. P. Jackson1, G. S. Clinical and experimental evidence establish a link between KIF7 and Stewart4, L. S. Bicknell1;  C5
orf42-related ciliopathies 1MRC Institute of genetics and molecular medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical R. Asadollahi1, J. E. Strauss2, M. Zenker3, O. Beuing4, S. Edvardson5, O. Elpeleg6, P. Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Biochemistry, University Joset1, T. M. Strom7, D. Niedrist1, B. Oneda1, S. Azzarello-Burri1, M. Papik1, A. Baumer1, K. of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4School of Cancer Sciences, University Steindl1, A. Schinzel1, E. T. Stoeckli2, A. Rauch1; of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5School of Clinical and Experimental 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich-Schlieren, Switzerland, Medicine, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Department of 2Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and Neuroscience Center Zurich, University Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 7Medical Genetics of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Unit, Policlinico Tor Vergata University Hospital, Rome, Italy, 8Endocrinology and Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 4Institute of Neuroradiology, Otto-von-Guericke- Diabetes Unit, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 9Department of University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 5Pediatric Neurology Unit, Hadassah Genetics, INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hopital Necker, University Hospital, Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel, 6Monique and Jacques Roboh Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France, 10Department of Genetics, Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Guy‘s Hospital, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, Jerusalem, Israel, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, 11Department of Pediatrics, King Saudi bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Munich, Germany. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 12Department of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada. Joubert syndrome (JBTS) is a ciliopathy characterized by developmental delay, oculomotor apraxia, breatEhiSngH aGb n2o0rm1a5li t|i eGs LanAdS aG dOisWtin,c tSivCeO mTidL-AN ND o, n -U hoK m | o W logW ouW s e. nE dS H joiG ni. nO g R (NG HEJ) is a vital cellular process repai3ri9ngABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index E. Hurles15, A. A. Noegel2, S. M. Baig3, P. Nurnberg2, A. P. Jackson1; 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2University of Cologne, DNA double strand breaks. Previously, mutations in NHEJ pathway compon- Cologne, Germany, 3National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, ents have predominantly been associated with severe combined immunode- Faisalabad, Pakistan, 4Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 5South East of Scotland Genetics Service, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 6German Cancer Research ficiency, consistent with the requirement for NHEJL IdGu4ring V(D)J recombi- Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 7Hopital Necker, Paris, France, 8Hopital de Hautepierre, nation to ensure diversity of the adaptive immune system. In contrast, we Strasbourg, France, 9University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 10Institut Pasteur, recently described biallelic truncating mutations in as a common cause Paris, France, 11Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of microcephalic primordial dwarfism (MPD), a disorder of prenatal-onset of, 12UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 13Southwest Thames extreme global growth failure; identifying a genotype-phenotype correlati- Regional Genetics Service, London, United Kingdom, 14Oregon Health & Science on where the severity of growth failure is related to disruption of the XRC C4
 University, Portland, OR, United States, 15Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, binding domain in XLIRG C4
C.4 L IG4 is required for the final ligation step in NHEJ United Kingdom. forming a complex with XRC C4
 and NHEJ1. XGRivCeCn4 its candidacy, we have now identified biallelic mutations in a further five families and provide confirmatory cellular studies establishing as a disease causing gene. Centrioles are microtubule-based structures that form the core of the cen- Both patient groups show similar anthropometric measurements with seve- trosome and are essential for ciliogenesis. However, mutations in centriole re microcephaly and short stature as well as similar facial features. However, biogenesis genes have been reported in primary microcephaly and Seckel in contrast to LIG4 patients, pancytopenia leading to bone marrow failure syndrome, disorders without the hallmark clinical features of ciliopathies. has not been observed in XRC C4
 patients and overt immunodeficiency is not Through linkage analysis and exome sequencing, we have identified mutati- apparent on clinical investigation despite reduced junctional diversification. ons in the gene, PLK4, encoding PLK4 kinase, a master regulator of centriole TLIhGe4se findXiRnCgCs 4suggest differential developmental requirements for grow- duplication, in individuals with microcephalic primordial dwarfism. PLK4 th and immunity by specific components of thPeC NNTH EJ pathway. We found individuals also demonstrated retinopathy, a phenotypic feature normally and mutations to be the second most common cause of MPD associated with cilium dysfunction. Two distantly related individuals are in a large patient cohort behind mutations in (MOPDII) highlighting homozygous for a frameshift mutation, where detailed molecular charac- the importance of NHEJ, and LIG4-XRC C4
 binding in particular, in promoting terization revealed a previously unrecognized alternative isoform which normal growth. rescued the null allele. An additional mutation was identified in a large consanguineous family, where splicing altered the reading frame of the ter-  C16
.3 minal exon. Using cellular and developmental systems we established that, Loss-of-Function Mutations in WDR73 Are Responsible for through reduction in centriole number, PLK4 mutations resulted in aberrant Microcephaly and Steroid-Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome: Galloway- growth and retinal phenotypes. Exome analysis and resequencing also iden- Mowat Syndrome E. Colin1,2, E. Huynh Cong3,4, G. Mollet3,4, A. Guichet1, O. Gribouval3,4, C. Arrondel3,4, O. tified multiple individuals with mutations in the substrate of PLK4, TUBG- Boyer3,4,5, L. Daniel6, M. Gubler3,4,5, Z. Ekinci7, M. Tsimaratos8, B. Chabrol9, N. Boddaert4,10, C P6
, in individuals with microcephalic primordial dwarfism and additional A. Verloes11, A. Chevrollier1,2, N. Gueguen1,2, V. Desquiret-Dumas1,2, M. Ferré1,2, V. congenital anomalies, including retinopathy, thereby extending the human Procaccio1,2, L. Richard12, B. Funalot12, A. Moncla13, D. Bonneau1,2, C. Antignac3,4,14; phenotypic spectrum associated with centriole dysfunction. Furthermore, 1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Angers University Hospital, Angers, we establish that different levels of impaired PLK4 activity result in growth France, 2Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 6214 and Institut National de la and cilia phenotypes, providing a mechanism by which microcephaly disor- Sante ́ et de la Recherche Me ́dicale 1083, Universite ́ Nantes Angers Le Mans, Angers, ders can occur with or without ciliopathic features. France, 3Institut National de la Sante ́ et de la Recherche Me ́dicale Unite ́ Mixte de Recherche 1163, Laboratory of Inherited Kidney Diseases, Paris, France, 4Universite ́  C16
.5 Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cite ́, Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 5Department of Mutations in TUBGC P4
 alter microtubule organization via the Pediatric Nephrology, Necker Hospital, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, γ-tubulin ring complex γTuRC in autosomal recessive microcephaly France, 6Department of Pathology, Timone Hospital, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de with chorioretinopathy. Marseille, Marseille, France, 7Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, S. SCHEIDECKER; Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey, 8Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Timone Medical Genetics Laboratory, INSERM U1112, Institute of Genetics and medicine of Hospital, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Marseille,, Marseille, France, 9Department Alsace (IGMA), University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg Medical School, Strasbourg, France. of Pediatric Neurology, Timone Hospital, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France, 10Department of Pediatric Radiology, Necker Hospital, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 11Department of Genetics, Robert Debre ́ Hospital, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris and Universite ́ Paris Diderot, Paris, Inherited congenital microcephaly is a clinically and genetically heteroge- France, 12Departments of Neurology, Biochemistry, and Genetics, Limoges University neous disorder. Autosomal dominant Microcephaly with or without Chori- Hospital, Limoges, France, 13Department of Genetics, Timone Hospital, Assistance oretinopathy, Lymphoedema, or Mental Retardation (MCLMR) also known Publique – Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France, 14Department of Genetics, Necker as Alzial syndrome has recently been attributed to mutations in KIF11. Hospital, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. Autosomal recessive Microcephaly and Chorioretinopathy with or without Mental Retardation, abbreviated as MCMR, is a very rare entity recently de- scribed to be associated with TUBGC P6
 mutations. Galloway-Mowat syndrome is a rare autosomal-recessive condition cha- We have identified TUBGC P4
 variants in individuals with autosomal reces- racterized by nephrotic syndrome associated with microcephaly and neu- sive microcephaly and chorioretinopathy. Whole exome sequencing perfor- rological impairment. Through a combination of autozygosity mapping and med on one family with two affected siblings and independently on another whole-exome sequencing, we identified WDR73 as a gene in which muta- family with one affected child revealed compound heterozygous mutations tions cause Galloway-Mowat syndrome in two unrelated families. WDR73 in TUBGC P4
. Subsequent Sanger sequencing was performed on a panel encodes a WD40-repeat-containing protein of unknown function. Here, we of individuals with microcephaly and ophthalmic manifestations and one show that WDR73 was present in the brain and kidney and was located dif- other patient was identified with compound heterozygous mutations in fusely in the cytoplasm during interphase but relocalized to spindle poles TUBGC P4
. TUBGC P4
 encodes the γ-tubulin complex protein 4, a component and astral microtubules during mitosis. Fibroblasts from one affected child of the γ-tubulin ring complex (γTuRC) known to regulate the nucleation and and WDR73-depleted podocytes displayed abnormal nuclear morphology, organization of microtubules. Functional analysis of patient fibroblasts dis- low cell viability, and alterations of the microtubule network. These data closed reduced levels of the γTuRC, altered nucleation and organization of suggest that WDR73 plays a crucial role in the maintenance of cell architec- microtubules, abnormal nuclear shape, and aneuploidy. Moreover, zebrafish ture and cell survival. Altogether, WDR73 mutations cause Galloway-Mowat treated with morpholinos against tubgcp4 were found to have a reduced syndrome in a particular subset of individuals presenting with late-onset head volume and eye developmental anomalies with chorioretinal dyspla- nephrotic syndrome, postnatal microcephaly, severe intellectual disability, sia. and homogenous brain MRI features. WDR73 is another example of a gene The identification of biallelic TUBGC P4
 mutations described herein, as well involved in a disease affecting both the kidney glomerulus and the CNS. as the very recent TUBGC P6
 mutations, confirms the existence of autosomal  C16
.4 recessive cases described as microcephaly and chorioretinopathy with or Mutations in PLK4, encoding a master regulator of centriole without mental retardation and provides evidence for an important role for biogenesis, and its substrate, TUBGC P6
, cause microcephaly, growth the γTuRC in brain and eye development. failure and retinopathy  C16
.6 L. S. Bicknell1, C. Martin1, A. Klingseisen1, I. Ahmad2, M. S. Hussain2, A. Leitch1, G. From whole exome sequencing to functional studies in syndromic Nurnberg2, M. R. Toliat2, J. Murray1, D. Hunt1, F. Khan3, Z. Ali3, S. Tinschert4, J. Ding1, C. Keith5, M. E. Harley1, P. Heyn1, R. Mueller2, I. Hoffman6, V. Cormier-Daire7, H. Dollfus8, L. microcephaly: using zebrafish for variant testing Dupuis9, A. Bashamboo10, K. McElreavey10, A. Kariminejad11, R. Mendoza-Londono9, A. T. F. Cristofoli1, E. E. Davis2, K. Devriendt3, H. Peeters3, H. Van Esch3, J. R. Vermeesch1,3; Moore12, A. Saggar13, C. Schlechter14, R. Weleber14, H. Thiele2, J. Altmuller2, W. Hohne2, M. 1Laboratory for Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Department of Human Genetics, KU 40 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States, 3Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. high-throughput RNA sequencing. Using detailed gene expression data from the GTEx consortium, we show that a large majority of previously reported escape genes demonstrate Microcephaly (MC) is a clinical condition characterized by abnormal small male/female expression differences detectable at population-level. For head circumference for the respective age and sex which closely correlates many of these genes sex-biased expression is present and directionally si- with reduced brain volume and most of the times with intellectual disabili- milar across the 38 tissues studied, a pattern distinct from autosomal sex- ty. Many syndromes encompassing MC have been described and although biased expression, suggesting XCI is tightly and uniformly regulated across several genes have been recently reported in literature, a massive number human tissues. Notably, however, escape genes close to an edge of an escape of unexplained cases still exist. We have collected and performed whole domain (e.g. KA L1
) show more tissue heterogeneity and subtle sex-bias. exome sequencing (WES) on 21 patients displaying syndromic forms of MC To complement these observations and assess individual-level variability in and on their parents for trio-based variant filtering. Since most of the index escape we have analyzed single cell RNA-seq data across two tissue types, patients were sporadic, the majority of causative variants were suspected to and assessed the allelic imbalance across the X chromosome from deep se- be de novo. However, recessive models have also been taken into account. quencing of 17 tissues from a female with non-random XCI. These analyses We were able to identify causative mutation in 10/21 patients. For the re- highlight well-known escape genes (e.g. US P9
X), replicate novel candidates maining cases, we found de novo mutations in 8 novel candidate genes. We from the population-scale analyses (e.g. ZRSR2) and confirm variable esca- used the zebrafish model to test the pathogenicity of candidate variants. The pe genes (e.g. TIM P1
) and elaborate the underlying dynamics. While finding morphant model for one of our main candidates showed a 10% head size little evidence for tissue-specific escape the analyses demonstrate tissue he- reduction, while preliminary mRNA overexpression data unexpectedly sho- terogeneity in expression from the inactive X (e.g. GYG2). wed a slight head area increase. Our cohort was enriched with patients dis- Together these analyses provide a comprehensive view of the landscape of playing de novo mutations in CASK, responsible for an X-linked syndrome of escape from XCI in adult tissues, essential for understanding the impact of MC and pontocerebellar hypoplasia. CASK morphants displayed a pronoun- this process on sex differences and inter-individual variability. ced head size reduction, while anti-acetylated tubulin staining revealed pro-  C17
.3 minent cerebellar abnormalities. For both genes, rescue experiments and Genome wide DNA promoter methylation: Differences in human further functional assays are pending. subcutaneous vs. omental visceral adipose tissue Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek-Vlaanderen Grant nr 11O4813N to F.C. M. Keller1, L. Hopp2, X. Liu1, K. Rohde1, M. Klös1, A. Dietrich3, M. Schön4, D. Gärtner4, T.  C17
.1 Lohmann5, M. Dreßler5, M. Stumvoll1,6, P. Kovacs1, H. Binder2, M. Blüher6, Y. Böttcher1; RNF12 is essential for X-inactivation in female mouse embryonic 1IFB Adiposity Diseases; University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2Interdisciplinary Centre for Bioinformatics; University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 3Department of stem cells, is required for female mouse development, and might be Surgery; University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 4Municipal Clinic Karlsruhe, Clinic of a target for future therapies to treat X-linked disorders in females: Visceral Surgery, Karlsruhe, Germany, 5Municipal Clinic Dresden-Neustadt, Dresden, evidence from a mouse knockout model Germany, 6Department of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. T. S. Barakat1,2, J. Gribnau1; 1Department of Reproduction and Development, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Laboratory of Embryonic Stem Cell Biology, MRC Center for Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Background: Differences in DNA methylation pattern between subcuta- Edinburgh, United Kingdom. neous adipose tissue (SAT) and omental visceral adipose tissue (OVAT) may help, together with corresponding changes in the mRNA profile, to elucidate variances in metabolic activity. In the present study we examined genome X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in females is a crucial mechanism which wide promoter methylation and mRNA expression pattern in 80 paired hu- equalizes X-linked gene-dosage between both sexes. In mice, a first wave of man SAT and OVAT samples including lean as well as obese subjects. imprinted XCI occurs during cleavage stages of embryonic development, fol- Methods: DNA methylation analysis was performed using methylated DNA lowed by X-chromosome reactivation (XCR) at the pre-implantation blasto- immunoprecipitation and subsequent hybridising on Affymetrix Human cyst, and subsequent random XCI (rXCI) in the post-implantation epiblast. Promoter 1.0R tilling arrays. Expression profiles were generated using Il- rXCI can be simulated in differentiating mouse ES cells. We have previously lunima human HT-12 chips. All genes with at least 30% methylation diffe- shown that the X-encoded RNF12 protein act as a dosage-sensitive XCI-ac- rence between SAT and OVAT or lean and obese subjects in the same fat tivator (PMID:19945382, PMID:21298085, PMID:24613346). When RNF12 depot were taken forward to overlap analysis with corresponding mRNA becomes up-regulated during differentiation, it targets the pluripotency expression levels. factor Rex1 for proteasomal degradation (PMID:22596162). As Rex1 is a Results: We identified 35 genes in the lean and 38 in the obese subgroup repressor of the non-coding Xist RNA, which is crucial for initiating chro- conferring negative correlation between DNA methylation and mRNA ex- mosome-wide gene-silencing, down-regulation of Rex1 by RNF12 allows pression comparing SAT and OVAT. 37 genes were found in the SAT and 76 female-specific Xist-expression and XCI-initiation in a stochastic manner in the OVAT subgroup comparing lean and obese individuals. The gene lists (PMID:20083102).Here we present the generation and analysis of a novel included known candidate genes such as PPARG but also unexpected genes, Rnf12 knockout mouse model, and provide evidence that RNF12 is also cru- e.g. BHMT. cial for iXCI and rXCI in vivo. Whereas Rnf12-/Y males are viable, Rnf12-/- Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, we show the first genome wide female mice fail to undergo XCI leading to lethality at post-implantation. epigenetic data set comparing SAT and OVAT in a considerably large cohort. Rnf12-/+ animals inheriting the maternal knockout allele are lethal due to We identified significant differences in genome wide DNA methylation pat- silencing of the paternal Rnf12 allele upon iXCI. Rnf12+/- females inheri- tern in paired human SAT and OVAT samples from lean and obese subjects ting the paternal knockout allele are healthy but show an XCI-defect, with with corresponding changes in mRNA levels. This work helped to identify adult cells displaying XCR. This peculiar finding, together with our recent re- novel interesting genes related to human obesity. sults on XCR in human induced pluripotent stem cells (Stem Cell Reports, in  C17
.4 press), opens a new area of research which might lead to novel approaches Mapping genetic and epigenetic factors influencing human for treating X-linked diseases, such as Rett syndrome, in females. hippocampal gene expression  C17
.2 A. Hofmann1, H. Schulz2, A. Ruppert2, S. Herms1,3, K. Pernhorst4, C. Wolf5, N. Kerbalai5, O. Stegle5, D. Czamara5, S. Sivalingam1, A. Hillmer6, B. Pütz5, A. Woitecki4, S. Schoch4, A. Pattern of X chromosome inactivation across human tissues - insights J. Forstner1, B. Müller-Myhsok5, M. M. Nöthen1, T. Sander2, A. Becker4, P. Hoffmann1,3,7, S. from population-scale and single-cell RNA sequencing Cichon3,7; T. Tukiainen1,2, A. Villani3,2, A. Kirby1,2, D. DeLuca2, R. Satija2,4, A. Byrnes1,2, J. Maller1,2, T. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Lappalainen4,5, The GTEx Project Consortium, A. Regev2, K. Ardlie2, D. MacArthur1,2; University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Cologne Center of Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Broad Institute of Harvard 3Genomics Research Group, Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, Universityhospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 4Department of Neuropathology, University MA, United States, 4New York Genome Center, New York, NY, United States, 5Columbia of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn, Germany, 5Statistical Genetics, Max Planck Institute University, New York, NY, United States. of Psychiatry, Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 7Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, Genomic Imaging Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany. Incompleteness and skewing of X chromosome inactivation (XCI) can result in biases in disease susceptibility and presentation between sexes and across individuals but the full extent and heterogeneity of XCI remains unclear. We Genome-wide association studies have detected multiple loci associated have comprehensively profiled the landscape, regulation and variability of with psychiatric disorders. The majority of these associated variants are ob- escape from XCI by deploying sevEerSaHl cGom 2p0le1m5e n|t aGryL AapSpGroOacWhes, bSaCseOdT oLnA NsDer,v UedK in | nWonWcoWdin.Eg SreHgiGon.sO aRndG their functional effects are unclear. N4ov1elABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index methods allow to systematically investigate the regulatory effects of genetic where the parents‘ effects are expected to be different. By combining the variants by screening the genome for correlations between allelic variants marginal effects from [Westra et al 2013] and our observed POE estimates and gene expression (expression Quantitative Trait Loci / eQTLs) or DNA for the differences between maternal and paternal effects we found that 135 methylation (meQTLs). Several studies have investigated the occurrence of of these 495 candidates exhibit classical POE, i.e. where the effect from one QTLs in human brain tissue; however the overlap of QTLs between these parent is exactly zero. studies is relatively low. These 135 candidates are currently being validated in ~700 trios from the We employed 150 fresh frozen hippocampal biopsy samples derived from Framingham study to confirm that the expression levels differ between he- surgery of patients with chronic pharmaco-resistant temporal lobe epilepsy terozygous individuals that inherited the two alleles from different parents. and performed genome-wide SNP genotyping, expression and methylation  C18
.1 profiling. Data from 115 brain samples was correlated using a linear regres- Disassembly of MINOS complex by CHCHD10 mutations promotes sion model. To limit the effect of confounding factors, surrogate variables loss of mitochondrial cristae with defects in mitochondrial genome were included. maintenance and apoptosis At a false discovery rate threshold of 5%, 641 RNA transcripts and 19,953 E. Genin1, M. Plutino1, S. BANNWARTH2,3, E. Villa4, E. Cisneros-Barroso5, M. Roy6, B. CpGs showed a genetic regulation by common variants in cis. Enrichment Ortega-Vila5, K. Fragaki2, F. Lespinasse1, E. Pinero-Martos5, G. Augé2, D. Moore7, F. Burté7, testing of our QTL data among the top hits from the public NHGRI GWAS S. Lacas-Gervais8, Y. Kageyama6, P. Yu-Wai-Man9, H. Sesaki6, J. Ricci4, C. Vives-Bauza5, V. catalogue revealed an overlap for brain disorders. Paquis-Flucklinger10; 1IRCAN, UMR CNRS 7284/INSERM U1081/UNS, NICE, France, 2Hôpital Archet 2, CHU de Overall, we present an integrative functional analysis to explore the effects Nice, Service de Génétique Médicale,, NICE, France, 3IRCAN, UMR CNRS 7284/INSERM of common DNA sequence variants on DNA methylation and mRNA expres- U1081/UNS, Nice, France, 4INSERM U1065, NICE, France, 5Research Health Institute of sion. In contrast to all published studies, our samples were collected from Palma (IdISPa)-Research Unit, Palma, Spain, 6Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins fresh frozen and not post-mortem brain tissue. Therefore, the identified University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 7Wellcome Trust Centre for QTLs provide an extremely valuable resource for functional annotation of Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle, SNPs and will help guiding the interpretation of GWAS hits in genetically United Kingdom, 8Joint Center for Applied Electron Microscopy, Nice Sophia-Antipolis complex brain disorders. University, NICE, France, 9Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 10Hopital Archet 2, Service de Génétique  C17
.5 Médicale, NICE, France. Analysis of monoallelic expression in human individual cells revealed CHCHD10 novel imprinting genes. C. Borel, F. Santoni, M. Garieri, E. Falconnet, P. Ribaux, S. E. Antonarakis; Recently, we described as a novel gene responsible for mtDNA University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. instability disorder by studying a large family with a late-onset phenotype including motor neuron disease, cognitive decline looking like frontotem- poral dementia (FTD), cereCbHeCllHaDr 1a0taxia and mitochondrial myopathy with Genomic imprinting is defined as the mutually exclusive expression of either accumulation of multiple mtDNA deletions. Subsequently, other groups and the paternally or maternally inherited allele. Imprinted genes are implicated ourselves, identified other mutations in several cohorts with fron- in the etiology of rare syndromes and have been associated with common totemporal dementia-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS) or with pure diseases such as diabetes and cancer. We aim to identify novel imprinting familial or sporadic ALS or late-onset spinal motor neuropathy (SMCHACJ)H.D10 genes using a Single-Cell (SC) RNA sequencing approach. The detection of Here, we show that CHCHD10 is a component of the mitochondrial inner average to low expressed genes allows a more comprehensive profiling of membrane organizing system (MINOS) complex. The expression of the allelic imbalance of each gene as previously reported (Borel et al, AJHG, mutant allele leads to MINOS complex disassembly and loss of mitochondrial 2015). From the proband of a family trio, 380 individual fibroblasts were cristae in patient fibroblasts. The abnormalities of the inner membrane are RNA sequenced and more than 770’000 heterozygous SNVs were identi- responsible for nucleoid disorganization leading toC dHeCfHecDt1 i0n mtDNA repair fied by WGS (25x). For each gene, we analysed the allelic specific expres- after oxidative stress, which explains the mucltiple mtDNA deletions found sion using an in-house pipeline. We modeled the likelihood of a gene to be in patient muscles. Interestingly, the expression of mutant alleles monoallelically expressed with a beta-binomial distribution and evaluated inhibits apvoiaptosis by preventing cytochrome release. This result supports the significance of the aggregate monoallelic ratio (reads sum of the most previous studies suggesting that, in some ALS models, motor neuron death frequent allele per site / total reads) with the log-likelihood test. Genes can occur caspase-independent apoptotic mechanism. presenting with a significant (adjusted p-value <0.01) aggregate monoalle- In conclusion, we show for the first time that mutaCtiHoCnHs Din1 0a gene encoding lic ratio between 0.9-1 were retained. We were able to detect 634 putative a MINOS component are responsible for human disorder. Dissecting the imprinted genes and 16 known imprinted genes. We validated 118 of these cellular pathways disrupted by the expression of mutant alleles genes in 165 SC fibroblasts from an independent individual; in addition, 19 represents, therefore, a golden opportunity to gain powerful insight into the were imprinted in 48 SC lymphoblasts from the same individual. A SC tran- sequence of events that link mitochondrial dysfunction with neurodegene- scriptome analysis provides an unprecedented opportunity to discover the rative disorders. full repertoire of imprinted genes per cell type, and will contribute to the Grants: to V.P-F (FRM); to H.S: (NIH); to JER: Fondation ARC; to P.YWM: understanding of the molecular pathophysiology of genetic disorders. C.B. (MRC-UK),Fight for Sight (UK) and (NIHR); to C.V-B: Spanish Instituto de and F.S. contributed equally. Salud Carlos III.  C17
.6  C18
.2 Novel method reveals a large number of expression quantitative trait COQ4 mutations cause a broad spectrum of mitochondrial disorders loci (eQTLs) influencing transcript levels in a Parent-of-origin fashion associated with CoQ10 deficiency A. F. McDaid1, T. Esko2, L. Franke3, Z. Kutalik1; L. Kremer1, G. Brea-Calvo2, T. B. Haack1, D. Karall3, A. Ohtake4, F. Invernizzi5, R. 1Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine (IUMSP), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Carrozzo6, S. Dusi5, C. Fauth3, S. Scholl-Bürgi3, E. Graf1, U. Ahting1, N. Resta7, N. Laforgia7, Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Estonian Genome Center, University of D. Martinelli6, D. Verrigni6, Y. Okazaki4, M. Kohda4, P. Freisinger8, T. Strom1, T. Meitinger1, Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, C. Lamperti5, A. Lacson9, P. Navas2, J. Mayr3, E. Bertini6, K. Murayama10, M. Zeviani11, D. Groningen, Netherlands. Ghezzi5, H. Prokisch1; 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Universidad Pablo de Olavide- CSIC-JA and CIBERER, Sevilla, Spain, 3Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, We investigate expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) and search for Austria, 4Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan, 5Institute of Neurology “Carlo SNPs that have a parent-of-origin effect (POE) with respect to transcript le- Besta”, Milan, Italy, 6Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 7University of Bari vels in cis. We applied our recently published algorithm [Hoggart et al 2014] ‘Aldo Moro’, Bari, Italy, 8Klinikum Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany, 9Walter Mackenzie to tease out SNPs where the contribution of the maternal allele to the nearby Health Sciences Centre, Alberta, AB, Canada, 10Chiba Children’s Hospital, Chiba, Japan, 11MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom. gene expression is different to that of the paternal allele. In the case where each parent‘s allele has a different effect, the variance in the expression le- vels within the heterozygous group will be larger than the variance within Primary Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) deficiencies are rare, clinically heteroge- either homozygous group. We used genome-wide genotyping and gene-ex- neous disorders caused by recessive mutations in several genes encoding pression data from the EGCUT and Groningen cohorts and ran the quicktest proteins involved in CoQ10 biosynthesis. CoQ10, a lipoidal quinone, is an software to estimate the difference in effects. essential component of the electron transport chain (ETC), shuttling elec- Controlling the type I error at 5%, we selected 4,162 of the 59 million trons from complex I/II to complex III. By whole exome sequencing we SNP-gene pairs, where we could reject the null hypothesis of no difference identified five individuals carrying biallelic mutations in COQ4. The precise between paternal and maternal effects. We applied conservative pruning 42 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOfuTncLtiAonN oDf h, uUmKa n| CWOQW4 Wis .nEoSt kHnGow.On, RbuGt it seems to play a structural role (based on LD) to end up with 495 candidate lead SNP-gene expression pairs,ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index French National Blood Service (EFS), Brest, France. in stabilizing a multiheteromeric complex, which contains most of CoQ10 biosynthetic enzymes. The clinical phenotypes of the five subjects varied wi- Haemochromatosis type 4 is a rare form of prSimLCa4ry0 Air1onS oLvCe4r0loAa1d transmit- dely, but four had a prenatal or perinatal onset with early fatal outcome. Two ted as an autosomal dominant trait caused by mutations in the gene enco- unrelated individuals presented with severe hypotonia, bradycardia, respi- ding the iron transport protein ferroportin 1 ( ). mutations ratory insufficiency and heart failure; two sisters showed antenatal cerebel- fall into two funcStLioCn4a0lA c1ategories (loss- versus gain-of-function) underlying lar hypoplasia, neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, and epileptic ence- two distinct clinical entities (haemochromatosis type 4A-B). However, the phalopathy. The fifth subject had early-onset but slowly progressive clinical vast majority of mutations are rare missense variations, with only course, dominated by neurological deterioration with hardly any involve- a few showing strong evidence of causality. The present study reports the ment of other organs. CoQ10 amount was reduced in all available specimens results of an integrated approach collecting genetic and phenotypic data from mutant subjects, often associated with decrease of CoQ10-dependent from 44 suspected haemochromatosis type 4 patien1,2t s, with comprehensive ETC complex activities and reduced oxygen consumption rate in cultured structural (3D model) and functional annotations. Causality was demon- cells. The pathogenic role of all identified mutations was experimentally va- strated for 10 missense variants, showing a clear dichotomy between the lidated in a recombinant yeast model: oxidative growth, strongly impaired two haemochromatosis type 4 subtypes. Two subgroups of loss-of-function in strains lacking COQ4, was corrected by expressing a human wild-type mutations were distinguished: one impairing cell surface expression and COQ4 cDNA but failed to be corrected by expressing COQ4 cDNAs with any one altering only iron egress. A new gain-of-function mutation was identi- of the nucleotide variants identified in affected subjects. COQ4 mutations fied, and the degradation of ferroportin on hepcidin binding was shown to are responsible for early-onset mitochondrial diseases with heterogeneous probably depend on the integrity of a large extracellular loop outside of the clinical presentations associated with CoQ10 deficiency. hepcidin-binding domain. Eight further missense variations, on the other  C18
.3 hand, were shown to have no discernible effects at either protein or RNA MCT1 deficiency impairs ketone utilization and causes profound level; these were found in apparently isolated patients and were associated ketoacidosis upon catabolic stress with a lesSsL sCe4v0eAre1 phenotype. The present findings illustrate the importance P. van Hasselt1, S. Ferdinandusse2, G. Monroe1, J. Ruiter2, M. Turkenburg2, M. Geerlings1, of combining in-silico and biochemical approaches to fully distinguish pa- K. Duran1, M. Harakalova1, B. van der Zwaag1, A. Monavari3, I. Okur4, M. Sharrard5, M. thogenic et al. mutations from benign variants. This has profound impli- Cleary6, N. O‘Connell7, V. Walker8, E. Rubio Gozalbo9, M. de Vries10, G. Visser1, R. Houwen1, c1ations for paett iaeln.t management. J. van der Smagt1, N. Verhoeven-Duif1, R. Wanders2, G. van Haaften1; 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Childrens 2 Le Gac G Hum Mut. 2013;34:1371-80 University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 4Gazi University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, Callebaut I Hum Mol Genet. 2014;23:4479-90. 5Sheffield Children‘s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 6Great Ormond Street Hospital,  C18
.5 London, United Kingdom, 7Department of Laboratory Medicine, Utrecht, Netherlands, Companion diagnostics by comprehensive targeted NGS with evidence 8Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom, 9MUMC, Maastricht, for a threshold model in a cohort of 605 patients with atypical Netherlands, 10Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. haemolytic uremic syndrome and hereditary glomerulopathies M. Grohmann1, N. Bachmann1, M. Hiersche1, T. Eisenberger1, H. J. Bolz1, T. Ring2, B. Hohenstein3, C. Mache4, M. J. Kemper5, C. S. Haas6, N. Heyne7, R. P. Wüthrich8, F. Thaiss9, B. Ketoacidosis is a potentially lethal condition caused by an imbalance bet- Tönshoff10, L. Pape11, M. Wiesener12, J. Menne13, G. Walz14, C. Bergmann1,14; ween ketone body production and ketone body utilization. Ketone bodies 1Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Aalborg University are mainly produced in the liver and used as an energy source in extrahe- Hospital, Nephrology, Aalborg, Denmark, 3Department of Nephrology, University Dresden, Germany, 4Pediatrics University Graz, Graz, Austria, 5Pediatric Nephrology, patic tissues. Currently only two genetic defects in ketone body metabolism University Hamburg, Germany, 6University of Hamburg, Department of Medicine I, are known, whereas most patients with recurrent ketoacidosis remained Hamburg, Germany, 7Department of Nephrology, University Tübingen, Germany, 8Clinic unresolved. for Nephrology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 9University Hospital We performed targeted exome sequencing of homozygous genomic regions Eppendorf UKE, Center of Internal Medicine, Hamburg, Germany, 10Department of in a patient from consanguineous parents with recurrent massive ketoaci- Pediatrics I, University Children‘s Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 11Department of dosis. We sequenced the main candidate gene and related genes in a cohort Pediatric Nephrology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 12Department of of 96 patients suspected of a ketolysis defect, followed by functional, bioche- Nephrology and Hypertension, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany, 13Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Hannover Medical School, mical and clinical characterization. Hannover, Germany, 14Renal Division and Center for Clinical Research, University We identified a homozygous frameshift mutation in the monocarboxylate Freiburg Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany. transporter 1 (MCT1/SL C16
A1), a known transporter of monocarboxylates including lactate and ketones. Subsequent analysis of MCT1 and related ge- nes in our cohort yielded 6 additional truncating mutations and 1 missense Genetic defects are responsible for the majority of primary renal diseases mutation in MCT1. We identified both homozygous and heterozygous inac- leading to end-stage renal disease. The risk of recurrence after transplan- tivating mutations, correlating with the depth of ketoacidosis. Immunoblot tation depends on the genotype. Genetic testing becomes increasingly im- analyses revealed reduced and absent levels of MCT1 in heterozygous and portant for proper clinical management and therapeutic and prognostic homozygous patients, respectively. A lactate transport assay in erythrocytes issues, but there is a need for novel comprehensive, time- and cost-efficient showed absence of transport in homozygous patients and reduced trans- strategies. We analysed 605 unrelated patients by a customized NGS-panel port in heterozygotes. of 347 genes for atypical haemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) and heredi- We show that MCT1 deficiency is a novel cause of profound ketoacidosis. tary glomerular disorders (nephrotic syndrome, FSGS, Alport syndrome, Our results indicate that MCT1 is pivotal for import of ketones in extrahepa- MPGN,  C3
 glomerulopathies) which often show clinical and genetic overlap. tic tissues. Contrary to the current concept of freely diffusing ketone bodies, The alternative complement pathway is typically overactivated in aHUS and our study shows that during catabolic stress, facilitated transport of ketones  C3
 glomerulopathies, but genes implicated in coagulation and haemostasis by MCT1 is essential to allow adequate ketone utilization and maintain acid- play a pivotal role too. Secondary triggers (e. g., hypertension, pregnancy, base balance. transplantation, infection) and predisposing polymorphisms lower the  C18
.4 threshold for disease onset. Our study represents the by far largest cohort Rare non-synonymous variations in the human ferroportin iron analysed by comprehensive genetic testing. We present new disease genes transporter gene (haemochromatosis type 4): the quest for causal and demonstrate that variations in more than one gene contribute to the mutations phenotype with variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance. We show I. Callebaut1, S. Pissard2, C. Kannengiesser3, V. Gérolami4, C. Ged5, F. Cartault6, J. Rochette7, that detailed information on the genotype is crucial for decisions on trans- C. Ka8, C. Férec8, G. Le Gac8; plantation, recurrence risk and treatment such as when and how long an ex- 1IMPMC, UMR7590, CNRS, Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Paris, France, Paris, France, 2UPEC (Université Paris Est Creteil), GHU Henri Mondor, Laboratoire pensive drug like the monoclonal antibody eculizumab should be given. The de Génétique, Créteil, France, Créteil, France, 3Inserm U1149 - Center for Research diseases discussed represent an interesting model that may help to explain on Inflammation, Université Paris Diderot, AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, Département de basic genetic principles not confined to renal disorders and of relevance for Génétique, Paris, France, Paris, France, 4CHU de Marseille, Hôpital Conception, Biologie all geneticists. We demonstrate that genetic testing assists in the decision- Moléculaire, Marseille, France, 5Inserm U1035, Biothérapies des Maladies Génétiques making process to treat patients adequately while handling public resources et Cancers, Université de Bordeaux, CHU de Bordeaux, Pôle de Biologie et Pathologie, responsibly. Bordeaux, France, Bordeaux, France, 6CHU de la Réunion, Service de Génétique, Saint-Denis, France, Saint-Denis, La Réunion, France, 7UPJV EA4666, CHU d’Amiens, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Amiens, France, Amiens, France, 8Inserm U1078, University of Western Brittany (UBO), University Hospital of Brest (CHRU de Brest), ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 43ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C18
.6  C19
.2 Common and rare variants associated with kidney stones and Increasing accessibility and affordability of genetic testing through biochemical traits targeted clinical exome sequencing A. Oddsson1, P. Sulem1, H. Helgason1,2, V. Edvardsson3,4, G. Thorleifsson1, G. S. Abbs1, H. Martin1, K. Brugger1, I. Delon1, O. Spasic-Boskovic1, G. Sagoo2, F. Rodger3, Sveinbjornsson1, E. Haraldsdottir1, G. I. Eyjolfsson5, O. Sigurdardottir6, I. Olafsson7, G. R. Littleboy3, S. Mehta1, S. Park1, R. Armstrong1, G. Woods3, S. Holden1, J. Campbell4, C. Masson1, H. Holm1, D. F. Gudbjartsson1,2, U. Thorsteinsdottir1,4, O. S. Indridason8,9, R. Bennett4, R. Sandford1, E. Maher3; Palsson8,9, K. Stefansson1,4; 1East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation 1DeCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2School of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Children‘s Medical Center, Landspitali – The 3Dept of Medical Genetics, Cambridge University, Cambridge, United Kingdom, National University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 4Faculty of Medicine, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 5Icelandic Medical Center (Laeknasetrid), Kingdom. Laboratory in Mjodd (RAM), Reykjavik, Iceland, 6Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Akureyri Hospital, Akureyri, Iceland, 7Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 8Division of Nephrology, Internal Medicine 900 patients have been sequenced for 4813 clinically relevant genes using Services, Landspitali – The National University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 9Division of Radiology, Diagnostic Medicine Services, Landspitali – The National the Illumina TruSight One sequencing assay. This test has replaced nu- University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. merous alternative diagnostic sequencing tests, providing a single laborato- ry workflow and financial savings. Data is analysed for a panel of genes appropriate for the clinical presenta- To search for novel sequence variants that confer risk of kidney stones, we tion. To date 190 virtual gene panels have been developed, incorporating conducted a genome-wide association study using 28.3 million sequence 1085 genes, averaging 7.9 genes per panel. Almost 1/3 of panels established variants identified through whole genome sequencing of 2,636 Icelanders (60) are single genes, requested for patients with homogeneous clinical and subsequent imputation into 5,419 kidney stone cases, includinSLgC 23,14A721 presentations. Single gene analysis yields a higher mutation detection rate cases with a history of recuPrrent kidney stones, and 279,870 controls. In (40%) than panel testing (27%), however we will present data showing that addition to replicating previousA fLinPdLin-1g1s in an Asian population at panel testing would increase the diagnostic yield further if applied instead (Prs12654812[A] ,OR = 1.18, =5.7×10 ) we identified CsAeqSuRence variants as- of single gene analysis. sociating wP-i1t0h kidney stones at (rs1256328[T], odds ratio (OR) = 1.21, Gene panels are established on demand. As long as the required gene(s) are = 5.8×10 ) as well- 8as a suggestive association at (rs7627468[A], captured and yield good sequencing coverage, a diagnostic test, which may OR = 1.16, = 2.0×10 ). We specifically focused our analysis on coding se- be unavailable or unaffordable by alternative methodology, can be offered quence variants in 63 genes with prePferential gene expression in the kidney. almost immediately. For example, we were able to offer rapid testing for a The strongePst associations observed were of -t5wo rare missense variants couple presenting in pregnancy, after having a child with a tentative diagno- SL C34
A1 p.Tyr489Cys- 5(OR = 2.38, = 2.8×10 ) and TRPV5 p.Leu530Arg sis of Schwartz-Jampel syndrome. Sequence data was filtered for skeletal (OR = 3.62, = 4.1×10 ) for recurrent kidney stones. We further tested the dysplasia and distal arthrogryposis gene panels. A biparentally inherited sequence variants identified in this study for association with biochemical homozygous pathogenic HSPG2 variant was detected in the affected indivi- traits involved in calcium-phosphate and purine metabolism, kidney func- dual, confirming the diagnosis and enabling prenatal testing within 3 weeks tion, acid-base and ion homeostasis in a large population set. The results of receiving the referral. demonstrate the role of sequence variants at genes involved in calcium- This “clinical exome” sequencing approach offers flexible testing at ~25% phosphate homeostasis in the pathophysiology of kidney stones in humans. cost reduction over alternative tests, significantly increasing accessibility to genetic testing for patients with a huge range of genetic disorders.  C19
.1 Large-scale, high-throughput testing of cancer predisposition genes  C19
.3 using the TruSight Cancer panel The RD-Connect platform includes the first 360 analysed exomes S. Mahamdallie1,2, E. Ruark1, A. Fowler3, M. Münz3, V. Cloke2, A. George1,4, S. Seal1,2, G. linked to phenotypic data and integrates user-friendly tools for rare Lunter3, N. Rahman1,2,4, Mainstreaming Cancer Genetics Programme; disease variant prioritization 1Division of Genetics & Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United D. Piscia1, S. Laurie1, A. Cañada2,3, J. Fernández2,3, C. Kingswood1, J. Desvignes4,5, M. Kingdom, 2TGLclinical, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Thompson6, R. Kaliyaperumal6, E. van der Horst6, S. Lair7, P. Sernadela8, A. Topf9, I. Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Cancer Zaharieva10, M. Girdea11, M. Brudno11, A. Blavier7, R. Thompson9, H. Lochmüller9, M. Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Bellgard12, J. Paschall13, P. Lopes8, J. Oliveira8, M. Roos6, P. ‚t Hoen6, V. de la Torre2,3, A. Valencia2,3, D. Salgado4,5, C. Béroud4,5,14, S. Beltran1, I. Gut1; 1Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain, 3Instituto Nacional de Bioinformática, Genetic testing of cancer predisposition genes is a major activity of Clinical Madrid, Spain, 4Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France, 5Inserm, UMR_S 910, Genetics, but gene testing in most countries remains very restricted with re- Marseille, France, 6Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, spect to the number of genes and number of people that can access testing. Leiden, Netherlands, 7Interactive Biosoftware, Rouen, France, 8DETI/IEETA, University of In collaboratioBnR wCAit1h IllumBRinCaA w2e developed an NGS pulldown panel called Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal, 9Institute of Genetic Medicine, MRC Centre for Neuromuscular TruSight Cancer Panel (TSCP), which targets 97 cancer predisposition ge- Diseases, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 10Dubowitz Neuromuscular nes including and . TSCP requires only 50ng of input DNA and Centre, UCL Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, we multiplex to sequence 96 samples at a time on a HiSeq2500, generating London, United Kingdom, 11Centre for Computational Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 12Centre for Comparative median coverage of 500X. We have developed and validated a bespoke ana- Genomics, Murdoch University, Perth, Australia, 13European Molecular Biology lytical pipeline that detects small and large variants, which runs overnight Laboratory , European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome with no bioinformatic input. Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 14APHM, Hôpital TIMONE Enfants , Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Marseille, France. To date we have processed >5000 individuals with TSCP and BthReCsAe1 data wBRilCl Ab2e presented. Furthermore, TSCP has now been implemented in our accredited clinical testing laboratory, TGLclinical, as the test for and Around 300 million people worldwide are estimated to suffer from one of mutations, with all mutations validated by Sanger or MLPA as appro- the 6000+ known rare diseases. However, rare disease research faces par- priate. 376 clinical reports using TSCP have been issued, including 42 with ticular challenges because patient populations, clinical expertise, and re- pathogenic mutations. Using our laboratory and analytical TSCP pipeline search communities are small in number and highly fragmented. To overco- one person can process 96 samples from DNA to variant calling in eight wor- me these challenges the EU F P7
-funded RD-Connect project, in collaboration king days. The average turnaround time from sample receipt to report issue with Neuromics and EURenOmics, is building a platform to harmonise and is now 27 days. Expansion of clinical testing to other genes on the panel securely integrate clinical data with biosample and -omics data. The geno- is underway. These data provide multiple insights into integration of NGS mics side of the platform already includes over 360 NGS exomes linked to panel analysis in the clinical setting. This work was undertaken as part of detailed phenotypes stored in PhenoTips using the Human Phenotype On- the MCG programme (www.mcgprogramme.com), funded by the Wellcome tology. Exomes were processed with v1 of the RD-Connect standard analysis Trust Grant 098518/Z/12/Z. pipeline for genomics, which exceeds 99% precision and sensitivity when compared to the NIST reference set of calls for NA12878. The platform runs on a Hadoop cluster and uses technologies such as ElasticSearch, Postgres, Scala and Angular.js, making it highly configurable and efficient. The exo- mes can be combined in a very flexible manner and variants can be filtered and prioritized through the user-friendly front-end using the most common quality, genomic location, effect, pathogenicity and population frequency 44 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOanTnLotAatNioDns,, UinKclu |d WingW CWAD.DE SanHdG E.xOACR. GMoreover, additional tools can beABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C19
.6 Whole genome sequencing as a clinical diagnostic tool for integrated at the database level or at the interface through API queries. To heterogeneous Mendelian disease date, UMD Predictor, DiseaseCard, Alamut Functional Annotation (ALFA) J. M. Ellingford1, S. Barton2, S. Bhaskar2, S. G. Williams2, P. I. Sergouniotis3, J. O‘Sullivan1, and gene-disease relationships in nanopublication format have been inte- J. A. Lamb4, R. Perveen1, G. Hall2, W. G. Newman2, P. N. Bishop3, S. A. Roberts5, S. Bayliss2, S. grated. The project aims to publicly release the first version of the platform C. Ramsden2, A. H. Nemeth6, G. C. M. Black2; during 2015 for authorized users and will gladly accept submissions from 1Institute of Human Development, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University other projects in the future. Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre,  C19
.4 Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Manchester Royal Eye Hospital, Manchester Academic Copy Number Analysis using Exon-level aCGH and Exome Sequencing Health Sciences Centre, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, in over 3,000 Parent-Offspring Trios from the Deciphering Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Population Health, University of Manchester, Developmental Disorders Project Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Centre for Biostatistics, Institute of Population Health, T. W. Fitzgerald, J. McRae, D. de Vries, M. Hurles; University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6The Division of Clinical Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Neurology, Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. The Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) project is a family based Background: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) enables the analysis of ge- study focused on rare genetic variants in patients with undiagnosed develop- nome-wide genetic variation that can range from single nucleotide alterati- mental delay. Copy number (CNV) discovery in the DDD project is achieved ons to large structural genomic variants. WGS has become more affordable using a combination of exon-resolution array comparative genomic hybri- and presents dramatic opportunities for a potential shift in diagnostic ser- dization (exon-CGH) and whole exome next generation sequencing (WES) vices for genetic disease. This is exemplified by the recent commission of the platforms. We have developed a new algorithm - CIFER (CNV Inheritance 100,000 Genomes Project in England and the ‘precision medicine’ program- From Exome Resources) that uses trio WES for the validation and inheri- me in the USA. However, diagnostic WGS pipelines are yet to be validated as tance classification of CNVs detected using exon-CGH in probands. We screen a clinical tool in the context of heterogeneous genetic disease. the genomes of over 3,000 parent-offspring trios for potentially pathogenic Methods: We surveyed the diagnostic yield of an accredited, conventional CNVs to elucidate the genetic basis for numerous patient phenotypes from next-generation sequencing (NGS) diagnostic testing method for 537 pa- the DDD project. The inheritance patterns for CNVs across the patient co- tients with genetically and clinically heterogeneous single gene disorders hort are explored and compared to current CNV mutation rate estimates (specifically, inherited-retinal-disease). A subset of 47 patients also under- from normal controls. An investigation into the potential for using WES as went WGS, and we compare the diagnostic yield of a WGS pipeline to that the sole source for CNV discovery comparing against and using exon-CGH achieved by the conventional NGS diagnostic test. as the gold standard is undertaken. By applying an automated CNV filtering Findings: The WGS pipeline achieved similar sensitivity and specificity rates pipeline we present the overall characteristics of CNVs predicted to have to the targeted NGS diagnostic testing method. Importantly, the WGS pipe- broad clinical relevance in approximately 10% of proband samples. We pro- line detected pathogenic variants that were not identified by current NGS vide examples of recurrent CNVs in single known DD genes across multiple diagnostics and, amongst the 47 patients, facilitated an 85% increase in dia- patients with similar phenotypes. Additionally by using association based gnostic yield. If applied to the 537 patients surveyed, weighted estimates testing and gene haploinsufficiency predictions we present initial findings suggest that the WGS pipeline could provide a 27% increase in diagnostic into suggestive novel DD genes based on CNV frequency rates, inheritance yield. patterns and patient phenotype similarities. Interpretation: We demonstrate the capability of a WGS pipeline to detect  C19
.5 pathogenic genetic variants missed by current methodologies, and to iden- Small exonic CNVs as causes of primary immunodeficiencies tify essential modifications for current and future molecular diagnostic A. Stray-Pedersen1,2, H. S. Sorte3, T. Gambin1,4, P. S. Samarakoon3, S. Gu1, L. R. Forbes5, I. practice. We establish the potential utility of diagnostic WGS pipelines for Chinn5, Z. H. C. Akdemir1, O. K. Rødningen3, B. Yuan1, P. M. Boone1, A. Patel6, S. J. Penney1, clinically and genetically heterogeneous Mendelian disorders. W. Wiszniewski1, S. N. Jhangiani1, D. Muzny1,7, R. A. Gibbs7, R. Lyle3, J. S. Orange5, J. R. Lupski1,8,6;  C20
.1 1Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics (BHCMG) of the Department of Ethical and legal challenges of genomic cloud computing Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United E. S. Dove1,2,3, M. Phillips1, Y. Joly1, A. Tassé4, B. M. Knoppers1,3; States, 2The National Neonatal Screening Unit, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 3Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Institute Kingdom, 3Global Alliance for Genomics and Health, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Public of Computer Science, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland, 5Center for Population Project in Genomics and Society, Montreal, QC, Canada. Human Immunobiology, Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children‘s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 6Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 7Human Genome Sequencing Center of Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 8Department of Pediatrics, Baylor Genomic researchers are increasingly utilizing vast computer infrastructure College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. and advanced software tools to store and perform comprehensive analyses of genomic data sets. Cloud computing is harnessed both to integrate data from multiple sources and to analyze data to solve biomedical problems. Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDD) constitute a heterogeneous group of Cloud computing offers multiple advantages, including lower costs and the genetic diseases affecting the immune system. Mutations in more than 300 enablement of greater international collaboration and research efficiency. genes are known to cause PIDD and the subtype symptoms can be overlap- Yet, it also brings a number of new ethical and policy issues, particularly tho- ping. Both disease severity, which can range from mild to life-threatening, se concerning the protection of personal health data in an environment of and treatment options depend on the genetic aetiology. We examined the transnational, multidirectional data flow. Because cloud computing affects utility of whole exome sequencing (WES) to detect disease-causing single multiple stakeholders situated across multiple jurisdictions, careful legal nucleotide variants (SNVs) and copy number variations (CNVs) in PIDD and ethical analysis is warranted. In this presentation, we will characterize patients. Patients were recruited from Texas Children‘s Hospital (Houston, and analyze the specific legal and ethical challenges emerging from cloud- US) and Oslo University Hospital (Norway). As of February 2015, patients based genome analysis based on our analysis of publicly available cloud with extensive immunological and genetic testing from 258 families have service providers’ Terms of Service. These challenges include: data control; been WES tested. PIDD-causing SNVs were identified in 100 of the families. data security and privacy; international data transfer; and, accountability. A computational CNV prediction pipeline was applied to the exome data to Additionally, in conjunction with the collaborative work of  P3
G-IPAC (Public identify PIDD-causing CNVs. The predicted PIDD-causing CNVs were valida- Population Project in Genomics and Society - International Policy interope- ted using a custom array CGH (aCGH) platform with exon-level resolution. rability and data Access Clearinghouse) and the Global Alliance for Geno- The same aCGH was also applied to a selection of the families with negative mics and Health, we will present an international policy for cloud-based WES. PIDD-causing CNVs were identified in 10 families, involving MAGT1, genomic research and clinical practice that sets an innovative but effective SMARCA L1
, DOCK8, I L7
R, MYB, PGM3, DK C1
, and FANCA. Five of the CNVs and ethically responsible approach to conducting genomic medical research spanned between 1-4 exons and would not have been detected by traditio- in the cloud. Such a policy will robustly protect patient privacy and medical nal diagnostic aCGH, with a typical resolution of 50 kb. This study shows confidentiality, and also facilitate secure access to genomic and clinical data- that exome sequencing is an efficient method to establish a genetic diagno- -even when up in the clouds. sis for PIDD patients and that small exonic CNVs might be a neglected cause of PIDD. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 45ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C20
.2 University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Ethics Institute, Utrecht In utero treatment of Down syndrome - proceed with care University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Department of Medical Psychology, Leiden University G. M. W. R. de Wert, W. J. Dondorp; Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 5Department of Health, Ethics & Society, Maastricht Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 6University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 7Julius Center, Department of Medical Humanities, University Medical in utero Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Ethics Institute, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 9Department of Medical Non-invasive prenatal testing may well create an opportunity for Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. treatment of Down syndrome (IUTDS) by means of compounds impro- ving neurogenesis (1). While research is still in its infancy, experts invol- ved rightly stress the importance of an anticipatory ethical debate. Clearly, Introduction: IUTDS would raise both conceptual and a cluster of normative issues, linked The empirical body of evidence on parents’ decision-making processes for with research ethics, the ethics of prenatal screening and responsible par- whole exome sequencing (WES) and return of unsolicited findings (UFs) in enthood. pediatric disease diagnostics is limited. Yet understanding these processes First, the suggested conceptualization of such treatment as ‘fetal persona- and the differences between them is needed for developing morally respon- lized medicine’ is debatable as this seems to presume a (rightly) contested sible policy. view regarding the status of the fetus (as a ‘person’). Second, future IUTDS Method: will, obviously, be experimental for a longer period. What about the pro- Twenty semi-structured interviews were conducted with parents of child- portionality of possible harms and benefits, taking account of the fact that ren ages <1 – 17, after consenting to WES (trio-analyses), but prior to feed- DS children with a somewhat higher IQ are not necessarily happier? Which back of results. criteria should be used to measure success? How to guarantee well-consi- Results: dered decisions of women who may prematurely consider such IUTDS to be Parental preferences for return of UFs, reasoning patterns, and difficulties evidence-based? Third, (how) would IUTDS change the ethics of NIPT for experienced in decision-making diverged. Context-specific factors of per- DS? While IUTDS could circumvent traditional ‘pro life’ criticism, objections sons’ situations, such as uncertainty about whether their child will develop may still come from ‘disability rights’ criticists - arguing that IUTDS reflects into an autonomous adult capable of making future disclosure decisions, a problematic ‘normalization’ of people with mental retardation - and from and differences in persons’ moral starting points clarify this divergence. feminists arguing that women may be pressurized to refrain from termina- Parents valued being given choices over most outcome categories of UFs ting affected pregnancies, undermining their reproductive rights. for various reasons. One reason was that decisional discretion necessitates This exploratory ethical analysis will scrutinize the main moral issues and contemplation of the possible future consequences of hearing, or not hea- contribute to agenda-setting for further debate ring, certain results – thereby ensuring parents’ confidence of having made 1. Bianchi D. From prenatal genomic diagnosis to fetal personalized medici- a well-informed decision for WES. A need was sometimes also expressed by ne: progress and challenges. Nature Medicine 2012;18(7):1-11. parents to understand the moral argumentation behind the center’s policy  C20
.3 choices regarding opt-ins and opt-outs for certain UFs, since seeing different Should children’s carrier results be reported following diagnostic arguments can help one weigh alternatives in a systematic manner, thus, WES/WGS? adding to one’s confidence about having decided responsibly. D. F. Vears1,2, K. Sénécal3, J. Massie4,5, P. Borry1; Conclusion: 1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Leuven, Belgium, 2Centre for Health Equity, These insights inform ethical theorizing on how policy for WES and UFs University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 3Centre of Genomics and Policy, Mc Gill should be structured in order to ensure persons’ well-informed decision- University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Royal making. Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 5Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. This project is funded by ZonMw (grant no. 70-73000-98-047) – The Nether- lands Organization for Health Research and Development.  C20
.5 The ACMG recommend that if children undergo whole genome/exome se- A Human Rights Approach to International Data Sharing? quencing (WGS/WES) for diagnostic purposes, results for their predisposi- B. Knoppers, E. Dove; tion to 24 genetic conditions, predominantly autosomal dominant familial McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. cancer and vascular syndromes, should be reported to clinicians for discus- sion with the family. They suggest the possible negative psychological im- pacts from identifying children’s genetic risks and the loss of their future Human rights are engrained in international law. They offer many advan- autonomy, are outweighed by the potential benefits, both for the health of tages to translational and transnational genome science centred on data the child and also their parents. sharing. First, their universalizing force can overcome site-specific factors Yet ACMG do not recommend disclosure of children’s carrier status to fa- that drive a wedge between research initiative/funder data sharing policies milies, despite the potential benefits to the child, due to the possible health and harmonization. Second, because human rights have both political and implications for carriers of some X-linked conditions, such as Duchenne legal dimensions, they reach beyond the moral appeals of bioethics and can Muscular Dystrophy (DMD), and their parents, who may benefit from re- provide a more robust governance framework for the regulation of geno- productive choices. mics research. If health care becomes a primary location for collecting the phenotypic and genetic data needed to create learning systems for research This paper explores the ethical implications of reporting incidental carrier and cliniccaol care, we need to reinforce the self-regulatory codes of ethics of results from diagnostic WGS/WES. We draw on data from qualitative inter- genomic researchers, and clinicians with legally recognized human rights, views with 17 genetic health professionals and 33 parents of children with that is, a -regulatory system. Third, human rights belong to groups as well genetic conditions (cystic fibrosis, DMD and haemophilia), exploring the as individuals (creating a reciprocity between the individual and public le- practices, views and experiences of carrier testing in children to inform this vel) and reach beyond classic negative duties (i.e. forbidding State actors discussion. We consider these parents’ reactions to learning their child’s from interfering with the rights of individuals), to positive, more progressive carrier status and their intentions to communicate carrier information to duties, thereby urging action by governments (and ideally, industry, funders, their children, and how this might impact on their abilities to manage inci- and researchers) to share the data, technologies and knowledge that are the dental findings from diagnostic WES/WGS. fruits of our science to achieve a goal desired by all, such as health. Fourth, Finally, we draw conclusions about the appropriateness of conveying in- humFarna mriegwhtosr cka fno rfo Rsetespr ornessipbolen sSihbaleri pnrgo otef cGteionno mini ct harnede Hcreiatilcthal- Raerelaatse:d p Driavtaa- cidental carrier information from WGS/WES to families in contrast to the cy; anti-discrimination, and procedural fairness. This presentation will use recommendations of international guidelines against performing carrier the testing in siblings of children with genetic conditions. of the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health as a case study for harnessing human rights as mobilizing force for international data sharing.  C20
.4 Informed consent for whole exome sequencing in pediatric disease  C20
.6 diagnostics: parental decision-making processes, their ethical What’s in it for me? A critical analysis of the notion of personal utility relevance and implications for policy development in genomic testing C. Cornelis1, M. van Summeren2, I. Bolt3, A. Tibben4, W. Dondorp5, M. van Haelst6, A. E. M. Bunnik; Bredenoord7, M. Düwell8, N. Knoers9; Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 1University Medical Center Utrecht; Ethics Institute, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of General Pediatrics, Wilhelmina Children‘s Hospital, Observers have suggested that in the ethical evaluation of genomic tests, the 46 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO crT iteL rA ioN n oD f , c lU inK ic a| l W utiW lityW sh. oE uS ldH bG e . rO epR laG ced or complemented with the cri-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences and Donders Centre for Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein 10, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, terion of personal utility. These suggestions are commonly made from a li- Netherlands, 8Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universitat Erlangen- beralist vantage point, in which it is held that patients or consumers should Nurnberg, 91054, Erlangen, Germany, 9Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, 8603, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland, 10Department of Human Genetics, be free to define the value of genomic tests for themselves and to access Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences and Donders Centre for Neuroscience, genomic tests - through the healthcare system or through commercial chan- Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein 10, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, Germany. nels - that may lack clinical utility, strictly defined. A paradigmatic example is ApoE testing: while there are limited therapeutic options for Alzheimer’s disease (i.e. clinical utility), many people prefer knowing their genetic risk Cohesinopathies are rare disorders arising from a dysfunction in the cohesin to make life choices or to psychologically prepare for possible scenarios. pathway, which enables chromosome segregation and proper cell division. Further, genomic tests for non-medical traits (e.g. ancestry, professional or So far, seven genes from this pathway have been reported in human disease. sports-related testing) can be interesting or fun and thus have personal va- Five of them are involved in autosomal dominant (NIPBL, SM C3
, RAD21) or lue for consumers. But does a ‘consumer value’ imply that there is personal X-linked (SM C1
A and HDA C8
) Cornelia de Lange syndrome, and two of them utility in a genomic test? I will argue that genomic tests that lack predictive in autosomal recessive Roberts (ESCO2) and Warsaw Breakage syndromes ability cannot have personal utility. Further, I will argue - descriptively and (DDX11). All are severe neurodevelopmental conditions characterized by normatively - that the notion of personal utility should be demarcated nar- intellectual disability, growth retardation, microcephaly, limb defects and rowly in order for it to have a role in the ethical evaluation of genomic tests. I facial dysmorphism. will set forth the conditions sine qua non of personal utility in genomic tests, STAG1 belongs to the STAG subunit of the core cohesin complex, which, including clinical validity and reasonable potential use. Often, the notion of along with three other subunits, mediates cohesion between sister chroma- personal utility is used to ethically justify genomic testing offers to the pu- tids. Here, we report an international series of four unrelated individuals, 3 blic; such justifications, I will point out, are flawed. males and 1 female, aged 8 to 33 years, referred for moderate to severe intel-  C21
.1 lectual disability that could be attributed to STAG1 haploinsufficiency. Three Recurrent de novo p.Arg83Cys mutations in the acetyl CoA binding had history of intrauterine growth retardation, two with prenatal-onset site of NAA10 are associated with atypical Cornelia de Lange microcephaly, one with post-natal growth retardation. One individual had syndrome epilepsy, two had autistic features. The four patients shared common facial M. Ansari1, N. Akawi2, H. Bengani1, A. M. Meynert1, I. Parenti3, J. Pozojevic3, D. C. Soares1, features, with widely spaced incisors, thin eyebrows, and high nasal bridge. C. Martin1, A. Blatnik1, H. Kayserili4, S. Avci4, S. Joss5, K. Tatton-Brown6, F. Elmslie6, M. The mechanism for haploinsufficiency was a small deletion encompassing Suri7, S. Mansour6, K. S. Wendt8, E. Watrin9, F. J. Kaiser3, M. S. Taylor1, M. E. Hurles2, D. R. FitzPatrick1; STAG1 diagnosed by array-CGH in two individuals, an intragenic deletion in 1MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, STAG1 found by whole genome analysis in one individual, and a missense 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Universität zu Lübeck, heterozygous mutation (c.641A>G) revealed by exome analysis in the last Lübeck, Germany, 4Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, 5West of Scotland Genetic patient. All the variants were shown to be de novo. This series provides evi- Services, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 6St George‘s University of London, London, United dence that STAG1 haploinsufficiency leads to a new cohesinopathy with a Kingdom, 7Nottingham University Hospitals, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 8Erasmus clinically recognizable phenotype. MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 9Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Rennes, France.  C21
.3 Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum associated with KMT2A (MLL) mutations de Cnoovronelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a variable mNIuPltBisLystem disorder with W. D. Jones1, M. McEntagart2, C. Deshpande3, T. Deciphering Developmental Disorders Project1, M. A. Simpson4, M. Hurles1, J. Barrett1; a broad phenotypic spectrum. Most typically-affectedS MinCd1ivAidHuaDlAs Cc8arSrMy  C3
 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2South West Thames R hAeDte2r1ozygous loss-of-function mutations in . Mutations in other Regional Genetics Service, London, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics, Guys and St components of the sister chromatid cohesion sysdtee nmo,v o , , Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4King’s College and , result in phenNoAtyAp1e0s that overlap with CdLS but which can be London School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom. highly atypical. In the present study, a recurrent mutation was iden- tified in the X-linked gene, (c.d2e4 7nCov>oT [p.Arg83Cys]) in four unrelated female individuals through trio-based exome sequencing and re-sequencing. In 2012 members of our group reported that de novo mutations in the histo- A fifth female was found to carry a mutation affecting the adjacent ne methyl-transferase MLL (renamed KMT2A) underlie a distinct phenotype codon (p.Arg82Gln). Three of these cases have a CdLS-like appearance, with of hypertrichosis, short stature, intellectual disability and a distinctive facial the growth and dysmorphic features in all individuals being variableIn. Avnivao- appearance consistent with a diagnosis of Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome in lysis of X-chromosome inactivation revealed complete skewing of X-inacti- five individuals. Other phenotypic features observed were feeding difficul- vation in 3/5 cases and borderline skewing in the remaining two. ties, behavioural difficulties, skeletal abnormalities and cardiac defects. analysis of a patient fibroblast cell line, only expressing the mutant allele, We have now identified 39 individuals with mutations in KMT2A. Our co- showed no obvious defects in cell division. Molecular modelling suggests hort contains 37 sporadic individuals and a set of monozygous twins. In that the p.Arg83Cys conversion is likely to alitne rv bitirnoding of NAA10 to ace- total 19 individuals with KMT2A mutations have undergone detailed clini- tyl CoA. A significant reduction in auto-acetylation of NAA10 was observed cal phenotyping by members of our group and we have detailed phenotype in the presence of the p.Arg83Cys mutation . Furthermore, mouse information for 20 further patients with KMT2A mutations. Recruitment to embryonic fibroblast cell lines derived from CRISPR-induced p.Arg83Cys our study, sequencing and detailed phenotyping is on going. knock-in mouse embryNoAsA a1r0e being analysed for further characterisation of Our study has shown that hypertrichosis, which was initially identified, as this mutation in redlaet inoonv oto cohesin funcNtioAnA.1 A0 detailed clinical comparison a typical feature is variable in individuals with KMT2A mutations. We have to published cases of mutations will also be presented. Our results expanded the list of phenotypic abnormalities associated with KMT2A mu- identify recurrent mutations in as a possible cause of CdLS- tations and report novel features including seizures, renal abnormalities, overlapping phenotypes. plantar fat pads, ptosis, and malrotation of the bowel. Review of the facial  C21
.2 appearance of individuals of KMT2A mutations shows that the facial phe- STAG1 haploinsufficiency is responsible for a new cohesinopathy notype evolves over time, clinical photographs will be presented at different with intellectual disability and characteristic facial features in four time points to illustrate this progression. unrelated individuals In addition to the expansion and clarification of the clinical features, grow- D. Lehalle1,2, A. Masurel-Paulet1,2, A. Mosca-Boidron3,4, M. Deardorff5, H. Olivie6, J. th profile and mutational spectrum associated with KMT2A mutations, we Thevenon1,2,4, M. Willemsen7, C. Zweier8, A. Rauch9, C. Gilissen10, P. Callier1,3,4, C. Thauvin- will review the overlap with other conditions and compare the phenotype of Robinet1,2,4, L. Faivre1,2,4; individuals identified through non-targeted screening to those individuals 1Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies du identified following clinician phenotyping to define the characteristic phe- Développement (TRANSLAD), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, 21079, Dijon, notype that should prompt consideration of KMT2A testing. France, 2Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l’Interrégion Est, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon,  C21
.4 21079, Dijon, France, 3Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Mutations in the endothelin receptor type A cause mandibulofacial Dijon, F-21079, Dijon, France, 4Equipe GAD, EA4271, Faculté de Médecine, Université dysostosis with alopecia via a maxillary to mandibular de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 5Division of Human Genetics, The Children‘s Hospital transformation of Philadelphia, Clinical Genetics Center, and the Perelman School of Medicine of the C. T. Gordon1, N. Weaver2, R. Zechi-Ceide3, E. Madsen4, A. Tavares5, M. Oufadem1, Y. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 6KU Leuven, Kurihara6, I. Adameyko7, A. Picard8, S. Breton9, S. Pierrot10, M. Biosse-Duplan1, N. Voisin1, Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 7Department of Human Genetics, C. Masson1, C. Bole-Feysot1, P. Nitschké1, M. Delrue11, D. Lacombe11, M. Guion-Almeida3, ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 47ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index P. Moura3, D. Garib3, A. Munnich1, P. Ernfors7, R. Hufnagel2, R. Hopkin2, H. Kurihara6, H. Saal2, D. Weaver12, N. Katsanis4, S. Lyonnet1, C. Golzio4, D. Clouthier5, J. Amiel1; 1Institut Imagine, INSERM UMR-1163, Paris, France, 2Division of Human Genetics, on characterized by macrocephaly, hypotonia, intellectual disability, autism Cincinnati Children‘s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, and other behavioral concerns. Facial signs resemble del3q13.31 syndrome. 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, Individuals with Primrose syndrome also develop diabetes in adulthood, University of São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil, 4Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke progressive muscle wasting, hearing loss and ectopic calcifications. We used University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States, 5Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United a WES-based strategy to identify the Primrose disease gene. We report that States, 6Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of mutations in ZBTB20, residing within the 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 7Unit of Molecular Neurobiology, critical region, underlie this disorder. Eight different missense mutations af- Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, fecting residues located in the N-terminal region of the DNA binding domain Sweden, 8Service de Chirurgie Maxillo-Faciale et Plastique, Centre de Référence des of the transcription factor were identified. Mutations were predicted to af- Malformations de la Face et de la Cavité Buccale, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades et fect DNA binding, and biochemical data provided evidence for reduced in- Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 9Service d’Imagerie Pédiatrique, Hôpital teraction with DNA and transactivation activity of disease-causing mutants. Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP et Laboratoire d’Anatomie, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 10Service d’ORL Pediatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP et Mutations were documented affect protein function through a dominant Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 11Unité de génétique médicale, CHU Bordeaux, negative action. Our findings establish a genetic link between this disorder Bordeaux, France, 12Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University and the clinically related del3q13.31 syndrome, and delineate the impact of School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States. ZBTB20 functional dysregulation and haploinsufficiency on development, growth and metabolism.  C21
.6 The endothelin receptor type A (EDNRA) signaling pathway is essential for Mutations impairing GSK3-mediated MAF phosphorylation cause the establishment of mandibular identity during development of the first cataract, deafness, intellectual disability, seizures, and a Down pharyngeal arch. We report four unrelated individuals with a novel syndro- syndrome-like facies. me, mandibulofacial dysostosis with alopecia (MFDA), who have de novo M. NICETA1, E. Stellacci2, K. W. Gripp3, G. Zampino4, M. Kousi5, M. Anselmi6, A. Traversa7, missense variants in EDNRA. The MFDA phenotype includes eyelid and ear A. Ciolfi2, D. Stabley8, A. Bruselles2, V. Caputo7, S. Cecchetti9, S. Prudente10, M. T. Fiorenza11, dysplasia and hearing loss. Three of the four individuals have the same sub- C. Boitani12, N. Philip13, D. Niyazov14, C. Leoni4, T. Nakane15, K. Keppler-Noreuil16, S. R. stitution in EDNRA, p.Tyr129Phe. Tyr129 is known to determine the selecti- Braddock17, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach18, A. Palleschi6, P. M. Campeau19, B. H. L. Lee20, C. ve affinity of EDNRA for endothelin 1 (EDN1), its major physiological ligand, Pouponnot21, L. Stella6, G. Bocchinfuso6, N. Katsanis5, K. Sol-Church8, M. Tartaglia2; 1Polo di Ricerca - Malattie rare, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù IRCSS, Rome, Italy, and the p.Tyr129Phe variant increases the affinity of the receptor for EDN3, 2Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, its non-preferred ligand, by two orders of magnitude. The fourth individual, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, A.I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United previously described as having Johnson-McMillin syndrome, has a somatic States, 4Pediatria, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 5Center for Human mosaic substitution in EDNRA, p.Glu303Lys. The zygomatic arch of indivi- Disease Modeling, Department of Cell Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, United duals with MFDA resembles that of mice in which EDNRA is ectopically ac- States, 6Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche, Università “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 7Medicina tivated in the maxillary prominence, resulting in a maxillary to mandibular Sperimentale, Università “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 8Biomedical Research, A.I. duPont transformation, suggesting that the p.Tyr129Phe variant causes an EDNRA Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United States, 9Biologia Cellulare e Neuroscienze, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 10Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della gain of function in the developing upper jaw. Our findings highlight the im- Sofferenza, Rome, Italy, 11Psicologia, Sezione di Neuroscienze, Università “La Sapienza”, portance of finely-tuned regulation of EDNRA signaling during human cra- Rome, Italy, 12Istologia e Embriologia Medica, Dipartimento di Scienze Anatomiche, niofacial development and suggest that modification of endothelin receptor- Istologiche, Medico-legali e dell’Apparato Locomotore, Università “La Sapienza”, Rome, ligand specificity was a key step in the evolution of vertebrate jaws. Italy, 13Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d‘Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 14Medical Grant references: Genetics, Ochsner Health System, New Orleans, LA, United States, 15Pediatrics, Center for Université Sorbonne Paris-Cité Pôle de recherche et d‘enseignement supé- Genetic Medicine, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan, 16Medical Genomics rieur (PRES) grant, project number SPC/JFG/2013-031; and Metabolic Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 17Pediatrics, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. ANR E-Rare grant CRANIRARE; Louis, MO, United States, 18Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, ANR grants EvoDevoMut, CranioRespiro, ANR-10-IAHU-01. Germany, 19Pediatrics, Sainte-Justine Hospital, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC,  C21
.5 Canada, 20Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, Mutations in transcription factor ZBTB20 cause tall stature, United States, 21Curie Centre de Recherche, Paris Sud University, Orsay, France. macrocephaly, cognitive deficits, diabetes, progressive muscle wasting and deafness V. Cordeddu1, B. Redeker2, E. Stellacci1, A. Jongejan3, A. Fragale4, T. Bradley5, M. Anselmi6, Transcription factors operate in developmental processes to mediate induc- A. Ciolfi1, S. Cecchetti7, V. Muto1, L. Bernardini8, M. Azage9, D. Carvalho10, A. Espay11, A. tive events and cell competence, and perturbation of their function or regu- Male12, A. Molin13, R. Posmyk14, C. Battisti15, A. Casertano16, D. Melis16, A. van Kampen3, F. lation can dramatically affect morphogenesis, organogenesis, and growth. Baas5, M. Mannnens17, G. Bocchinfuso6, L. Stella6, M. Tartaglia1, R. Hennekam2; We report that a narrow spectrum of mutations within the transactivation 1Dipartimento di Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare,Istituto Superiore domain of the v-maf avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical homolog (MAF), a leucine zipper-containing transcription factor of the Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical Center,University of A P1
 superfamily, profoundly affects development. Seven different de novo Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Dipartimento di Malattie infettive, parassitarie missense mutations involving conserved residues of the four GSK3 phos- e immunomediate, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 5Department of Genome phorylation motifs were identified in eight unrelated individuals. The di- Analysis, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, stinctive clinical phenotype, for which we propose the eponym Aymé-Gripp 6Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche, Università “Tor Vergata”, Rome, syndrome, is not limited to lens and eye defects as previously reported for Italy, 7Dipartimento di Biologia cellulare e Neuroscienze, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, MAF/Maf loss-of-function, but includes sensorineural deafness, intellectual Rome, Italy, 8Laboratorio Mendel, Fondazione Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza,, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Childern’s Hospital of disability, seizures, brachycephaly, distinctive flat facial appearance, skele- Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 10Medical Genetic Unit, SARAH Network of tal anomalies, mammary gland hypoplasia, and reduced growth. Disease- Rehabilitation Hospitals, SMHS Quadra 501 Conj. A, Brasilia, Brazil, 11Department of causing mutations impair proper MAF phosphorylation, ubiquitination and Neurology, University of Cincinnati, Gardner Family Center for Parkinson‘s Disease and proteosomal degradation, perturb gene expression in patient fibroblasts, Movement Disorders, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 12Clinical Genetics Department, and induce neurodevelopmental defects in an in vivo model. Our findings Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United nosologically and clinically delineate a previously poorly understood reco- Kingdom, 13Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of gnizable multisystem disorder, provide evidence for MAF governing a wider Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 14Podlaskie Center of Clinical Genetics, Białystok, Poland, 15Dipartimento di Scienze neurologiche, neurochirurgiche e del comportamento, range of developmental programs than previously appreciated, and uncover Università degli Studi di Siena, Policlinico Le Scotte, SIENA, Italy, 16Dipartimento di a novel example of protein dosage effect severely perturbing development. Pediatria, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università “Federico II”, NAPOLI, Italy,  C22
.1 17Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The secrets of GWAS are written in the reads Amsterdam, Netherlands. C. Wadelius1, M. Cavalli1, G. Pan1, H. Nord1, O. Wallerman1,2, E. Wallén Arzt1, O. Berggren3, I. Elvers2,4, M. Eloranta3, L. Rönnblom3, K. Lindblad Toh2; 1Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Many Mendelian disorders with isolated or syndromic short stature have Uppsala, Sweden, 2Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and been recognized but the spectrum of conditions with increased growth Microbiology, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical appears much more restricted. Among the latter, the 3q13.31 microdele- Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States. tion (del3q13.31) syndrome is a multisystem disorder characterized by in 4c 8reased postnatal growth, hypotonia, EinStHellGec t2u0al1 d5is |a bGilLitAy, SdGistOurWbe,d S COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG behavior and unusual face. Primrose syndrome is an overgrowth conditi-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified a large number of related phenotypes: fasting insulin (FI), triglycerides (TG) and waist-to-hip disease associated loci, but in few cases have the functional variant and the ratio (WHR), using data from 4788 individuals from the Northern Finland gene it controls been identified. To systematically identify candidate regula- Birth Cohort 1966. Individuals were genotyped on the Illumina370CNV ar- tory variants we sequenced ENCODE cell lines and used public ChIP-seq data ray and imputed to the 1000 Genomes Project all ancestries reference panel to find allele-specific transcription factor binding. We found 15,644 candi- (March 2012). FI/TG/WHR were adjusted for body mass index and three date regulatory SNPs of which more than 20% were rare, allele frequency principal components to control for population structure. The following <1%, and showed evidence of larger functional effect than common SNPs. transformations were applied: natural logarithm for FI and inverse normal This high frequency of rare functional variants adds heterogeneity to GWA fZoNrF t2h5e9 residuals of TG and W-6HR. We identified RV associations, at genome- studies of traits and expression and may explain divergent GWAS results wide significance (p<1.7x10 , Bonferroni correction for 30,000 genes) in between populations and why SNPs with the highest association signal rare- , which maps to a common variant GWAS locus for TG and coronary ly are functional. The majority of allele specific variants (95%) were specific heart disease. Ba-s9ed on BIC, the model with TG and FI provided the best to one of the six studied cell types. By examining GWAS loci we found >600 fit (Pmodel=3.1-8x10 ), and stronger associations than in univariate analyses allele-specific candidate SNPs, 184 of which were highly relevant in our cell (PTG=6.7x10 ; PFI=0.13). Using MARV, we demonstrate its ability to identify types. Results were confirmed by luciferase assays, EMSA and stimulation RV multi-phenotype associations with greater statistical significance than of primary cells. Functionally validated SNPs support identification of an in- in univariate analyses. tronic SNP in MERTK associated to risk for liver fibrosis, a SNP in SYNGR1 Grant references: Supported by EU F P7
 project MARVEL (WPGA- P48951
). affecting risk for rheumatoid arthritis and primary biliary cirrhosis as well  C22
.4 as a SNP in the last intron of COG6 affecting risk for psoriasis. We propose The Exomiser suite for exome prioritization of human disease genes that by repeating ChIP-seq experiments of 20 selected transcription factors D. Smedley1, J. Jacobsen1, S. Kohler2, A. Oellrich1, K. Wang3, C. Mungall4, N. Washington4, in three to ten people most common polymorphisms can be interrogated S. Bauer2, D. Seelow2, P. Krawitz2, C. Gilissen5, M. Haendel6, S. E. Lewis4, P. N. Robinson2; for allele-specific binding, in different cell types and tissues. Our strategy 1Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Charite-Universitatsmedizin, Berlin, may help to alleviate the current bottle neck in functional annotation of the Germany, 3Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, United States, 5Radboud University genome. Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Oregon Health & Sciences University,  C22
.2 Oregon, OR, United States. Optimal ancestry-matched imputation of GWAS association summary statistics using large reference panel of sequenced individuals S. Rüeger1,2, Z. Kutalik1,2; Introduction: Whole-exome sequencing has revolutionized rare disease re- 1Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, search. However, many cases remain unsolved due to the fact that ~100- Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. 1000 loss of function, candidates remain after removing common and non-pathogenic variants. Exomiser offers a suite of algorithms that address this problem by additionally combining gene-based measures of candida- The ultimate goal of GWASs is to find disease-associated markers, preferab- cy. hiPHIVE (Human Interactome PHenotypic Interpretation of Variants in ly causal variants. GWASs use microarrays to interrogate tag SNPs, there- Exomes) assesses each candidate gene by comparing the patient phenotype fore many untyped variants need to be inferred through imputation, using to existing knowledge from disease and model organism databases. For ge- the available genotyped SNPs. As demonstrated recently [Pasaniuc et al. nes with missing data, a guilt-by-association approach is applied, based on (2014)], not only genotypes, but association summary statistics, generated the phenotypic similarity of near-by genes in a protein-protein association by large meta-analytic studies, can be imputed. network. PhenIX is designed for use in a clinical diagnostic setting where We propose several improvements to state-of-the-art summary statistic only genes associated with existing Mendelian diseases are phenotypically imputation tools. We compute the optimal shrinking of the SNP-SNP cor- compared with the patient signs and symptoms. ExomeWalker ranks exome relation matrix, which flexibly adapts to the reference panel size, local LD candidates based on their proximity in protein-protein networks to genes structure, region size, etc. In addition, our method allows for summary sta- shown, or suspected, to be associated with the disease. tistics that are dervied from variable sample sizes. Finally, we search for the Results: In benchmarking experiments with known disease mutations ad- optimal linear combination of reference panel sub-populations in order to ded to unaffected exomes, both hiPHIVE and PhenIX were able to detect the match their joint allele frequency distribution to that of the association stu- causative variant as the top hit in 97% of samples. Further experiments, dies. This is analogous to selecting the subset of the reference panel that where knowledge of the known disease-gene association was masked, best represents the individuals in the GWAS cohorts. revealed hiPHIVE could detect novel associations as the top hit in 87% of Our extensive simulation study, using UK10K whole genome sequencing samples. Exomiser is freely available via download for command-line use or data sets, showed that our optimized shrinkage constant significantly out- through our web interfaces. performs all previously proposed choices when the reference panel is small Conclusions: We are applying Exomiser to the NIH Undiagnosed Diseases (<300). We also demonstrated the importance of ancestry weighted mixture Program and detect causative variants as the top hit in most previously sol- using 1000 Genomes subpopulation panels combined with summary stati- ved cases and have diagnosed several new cases including a novel associa- stics simulated from our local CoLaus study (Firman et al., 2008). Finally, tion. using cohort-level association summary data from the GIANT (Genetic In- vestigation of ANthropometric Traits) Consortium, we found that applying  C22
.5 ancestry-matched imputation of individual cohort summary statistics before Allele specific expression reveals common and rare regulatory meta-analysis substantially outperforms the imputation of meta-analysed variation acting in human substantia nigra and putamen association summary statistics. K. D‘Sa*1,2, A. Ramasamy*1,2,3, S. Guelfi*1,2, J. Vandrovcova1,2, J. A. Botía1,2, D. Trabzuni1,4, J. R. Gibbs5, C. Smith6, M. Matarin1, V. Varghese2, P. Forabosco2,7, The UK Brain Expression Financial support: Swiss National Science Foundation (31003A-143914, Consortium (UKBEC), J. Hardy1, M. E. Weale2, M. Ryten1; 51RT P0
_151019). 1Reta Lila Weston Institute and Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute  C22
.3 of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, A novel method and software tool for genome-wide multi-phenotype King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and analysis of rare variants Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute M. Kaakinen1, R. Mägi2, K. Fischer2, M. Järvelin1,3, A. P. Morris4, I. Prokopenko1; on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 6MRC Sudden Death 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, Brain Bank Project, University of Edinburgh, Department of Neuropathology, Edinburgh, 3University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 4University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom. United Kingdom, 7Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Cittadella Universitaria di Cagliari, Sardinia, Italy. Recently, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been expanded to analysis of low-frequency and rare variants (MAF≤5%, both denoted by Allele-specific expression (ASE) occurs when the two alleles of a transcribed RVs). Power for variant detection could also be increased by jointly analy- polymorphic locus are differentially expressed. The advantages of ASEs are: sing multiple correlated phenotypes. We have developed software for geno- (1) they are a within individual comparison, so this avoids potential con- me-wide Multi-phenotype Analysis of RVs (MARV), combining features from founding factors; and (2) they can be interrogated in small sets, even single both RV burden tests and multi-phenotype analyses. Specifically, the pro- samples, from rare tissues. ASEs can therefore help clinicians gauge the pa- portion of rare variants at which an individual carries minor alleles within thogenicity of rare variants obtained from exome sequencing. a gene region is modelled on linear combinations of phenotypes in a regres- As part of the UKBEC project, we applied ASE analysis to paired RNA and sion framework. MARV also impEleSmHenGts 2m0o1de5l |s eGleLctAioSn GviOa Wthe, SBaCyOesTiaLnA NeDxo,m UeK se |q WuenWcinWg .dEaStaH frGom.O 8R4G substantia nigra and putamen samples4 o9b- information criterion (BIC). We have applied this new method on three cor-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index tained from 53 neuropathologically normal post-mortem human brains. We However, mutations in these genes explain less than 1/3 of ALS cases. analysed mRNA-enriched (but not mRNA-exclusive) total RNA, to explore To evaluate the contribution of low-frequency variants in protein-coding ge- gene expression in both pre-mRNA and mRNA. nes to familiar ALS, we performed exome sequencing of 252 index cases and 7.83% of the heterozygous variants we studeiet da lw. ere identified as ASE si- 827 control individuals. We performed gene-based rare variant analysis and gnals at a False Discovery Rate < 5%. We found 66% concordance with the identified a single exome-wide significant enrichment of loss-of-function lymphoblastoid cell line data of Lappalainen (2013), giving strong va- (LoF) mutations in the gene TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) in the patient lidation considering the difference in tissues in both datasets. Signals that group. Seven different LoF mutations were found in nine patients, whereas showed a reversal in direction of ASE between individuals were seen to be LoF variants were absent in controls and in 3,101 additional in-house exo- enriched for known imprinted genes. Additionally, 91 ASE sites that are also mes. known risk loci for a range of disorders and phenotypes were also identi- No enrichment of LoF mutations was detected using a targeted mutation fied, of which 64.84% were exonic and 30.76% were intronic SNPs. Amongst screen of 1,010 sporadic cases and 650 Swedish control individuals. ASE sites identified, 15% are risk loci for adult neurological disorders thus Next, we recruited relatives from index mutation carriers to perform linkage providing insights into these disorders and indicating the power of this ap- analysis. Incomplete penetrance was observed in all pedigrees. Linkage ana- proach. lysis in 3 extended families using a dominant model with reduced penetran-  C22
.6 ce resulted in a summary LOD score of 4.6 thus exceeding the genome-wide Evidence for directional dominance on complex traits relating to size significance threshold. and cognition in a wide range of human populations In vitro experiments including patient-derived cell lines confirmed loss of P. Joshi1, T. Esko2, H. Matteson3, N. Eklund3, I. Gandin4, A. Jackson5, T. Nutile6, C. expression of TBK1 LoF mutant alleles, or loss of interaction of the TBK1 Schurmann7, O. Polasek1, J. F. Wilson1; coiled coil domain (CCD) with the TBK1 adaptor protein optineurin, an esta- 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Estonian Genome Centre, Tartu, blished ALS target. Estonia, 3National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 4University of In conclusion, we provide parallel evidence from association testing and lin- Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 5University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 6Consiglio kage analysis that LoF TBK1 variants cause a monogenic form of ALS with Nazionale delle Ricerche, Naples, Italy, 7Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States. FTD and reduced penetrance.  C23
.2 PMPCA Mutations cause Abnormal Mitochondrial Protein Processing Homozygosity has long been associated with rare, often devastating, Men- in Patients with Non-Progressive Cerebellar Ataxia delian disorders and Darwin was one of the first to recognise that inbree- R. Jobling1, M. Assoum2,3, O. Gakh4, S. Blaser5, J. A. Raiman1, C. Mignot6, E. Roze7,8,9, A. ding reduces evolutionary fitness. However, the effect of the more distant Dürr7,8,10, A. Brice7,8,10, N. Lévy2,3,11, C. Prasad12, T. Paton13, A. D. Paterson13, N. Roslin13, parental relatedness common in modern human populations is less well C. R. Marshall13, J. Desvignes2,3, N. Roëckel-Trevisiol2,3, S. Scherer13,14, G. A. Rouleau15, A. understood. Genomic data now allow us to investigate the effects of homo- Mégarbané16,17, G. Isaya4, V. Delague2,3, G. Yoon1,18; zygosity by measuring runs of homozygosity (ROH), however information 1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University is required on very large numbers of people to provide sufficient power. of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Inserm, UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 3Aix Marseille Here we use ROH in a study of 16 health-related quantitative traits in up University, GMGF, Marseille, France, 4Department of Pediatric & Adolescent Medicine to 354,224 individuals from 102 cohorts and find statistically highly signi- and Mayo Clinic Children‘s Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 5Division of Neuroradiology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, ficant associations between individual genome-wide summed ROH and four 6Département de Génétique, Unité de Génétique Clinique, APHP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié- complex traits: height, forced expiratory lung volume in 1 second (FEV1), Salpêtrière; Centre de Référence Maladies Rares „Déficiences Intellectuelles de Causes general cognitive ability (g) and educational attainment (nominal p<1 x 10- Rares“;Groupe de Recherche Clinique UPMC, Université Paris 6, Paris, France, 7Inserm, U 300, 2.1 x 10-6, 2.5 x 10-10, 1.8 x 10-10). In each case increased homozygo- 1127, ICM, Paris, France, 8Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), Paris, France, sity was associated with decreased trait value, equivalent to the offspring 9AP-HP, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Département de Neurologie, Paris, France, 10AP-HP, of first cousins being 1.2 cm shorter and having 10 months less education. Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Paris, France, Similar effect sizes were found across four continental groups and in po- 11Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d‘Enfants de la Timone, AP-HM, Marseille, France, 12Medical Genetics Program, Department of Pediatrics, London Health Sciences pulations with different degrees of genome-wide homozygosity, providing Centre, London, ON, Canada, 13The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics convincing evidence for the first time that homozygosity, rather than genetic and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 14McLaughlin or environmental confounding effects, contributes to observed phenotypic Centre and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, variance. Directional dominance is predicted for traits under directional Canada, 15Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital and Department of Neurology and evolutionary selection, so this study provides evidence that increased statu- Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada, 16Unité de Génétique Médicale, re and cognitive function have been positively selected in human evolution, Laboratoire International Associé Inserm, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint Joseph, whereas many important risk factors for late-onset complex diseases have Beirut, Lebanon, 17Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France, 18Division of Neurology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. not.  C23
.1 TBK1 mutations cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and fronto- Non-progressive cerebellar ataxias (NPCAs) are a rare group of disorders, temporal dementia with only 7 genes/loci described, for autosomal recessive NPCAs. NPCAs T. Wieland1, A. Freischmidt2, B. Richter3, W. Ruf2, V. Schäffer3, K. Müller2, N. Marroquin2,4, manifest in infancy with abnormal gross motor development and hypotonia, F. Nordin5, A. Hübers2, P. Weydt2, S. Pinto6, R. Press7, J. Dorst2, E. Graf1, T. Meyer8, A. S. Winkler9, J. Winkelmann9, M. de Carvalho10, D. R. Thal11, M. Otto2, T. Brännström12, A. E. followed by the appearance of ataxia. Dysarthria, intellectual disability and Volk4,13, P. Sarvari14, D. Y. R. Stainier14, P. Kursula15, K. M. Danzer2, P. Lichtner1, I. Dikic3, T. spasticity are often present. Meitinger1,16, A. C. Ludolph2, P. M. Andersen2,5, J. H. Weishaupt2, T. M. Strom1,16; We studied 17 patients from 4 families affected with NPCA, including the 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, large Lebanese family previously described by Megarbane et al (1999) and 2Department of Neurology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany, 3Institute of Biochemistry II, localized to chromosome 9q34 (Delague et al, 2001; OMIM #213200). Ho- Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, mozygosity mapping and exome sequencing led to the identification of mu- Ulm University, Ulm, Germany, 5Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Neurosience, tations in PMPCA in all patients: a homozygous p.Ala377Thr missense mu- Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden, 6Institute of Physiology and Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 7Department of Neurology, Karolinska tation in 16 patients, and compound heterozygous mutations, p.Ser96Leu Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Charité University Hospital, Humboldt- and p.Gly515Arg, in one. We describe a founder effect for the p.Ala377Thr University, Berlin, Germany, 9Department of Neurology, Technical University of Munich, mutation, as patients from 3 a priori non-related Lebanese families share a Munich, Germany, 10Department of Neurosciences, Hospital de Santa Maria-CHLN, common haplotype at the PMPCA locus. Lisbon, Portugal, 11Institute of Pathology – Laboratory of Neuropathology, Ulm PMPCA encodes α-MPP, the alpha subunit of mitochondrial processing University, Ulm, Germany, 12Department of Medical Biosciences, Umeå University, Umeå, peptidase (MPP), the primary enzyme responsible for the maturation of Sweden, 13Institute of Human Genetics, University Clinic Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins. Analysis of cells from patients ho- Germany, 14Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Dpt. III – Developmental Genetics, Bad Nauheim, Germany, 15University of Oulu Biocenter, Faculty of Biochemistry mozygous for the PMPCA p.Ala377Thr mutation and carriers, demonstrate and Molecular Medicine, Oulu, Finland, 16Institute of Human Genetics, Technische that the mutation impacts both the level of α-MPP and the function of MPP. Universität München, Munich, Germany. Indeed, this mutation impacts the maturation process of frataxin, the defec- tive protein in Friedreich ataxia. Our results definitely implicate PMPCA as the causal gene in this rare form Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a genetically heterogeneous neurode- of NPCA. This is the first time that the MPP enzyme, vital to life at the cellular generative disorder hallmarked by adult-onset loss of motor neurons and level, has been associated with a clinical phenotype in humans. Disruption fatal paralysis. Mutations in 29 genes have been linked to ALS pathogenesis of mitochondrial protein precursor cleavage represents a new avenue for a5nd0 are frequently also associated with fEroSnHtoG-t e2m0p1or5a l| dGemLAenStiGa O(FTWD,) .S COinTveLsAtigNatDio,n U ofK th |e W paWthoWge.nEeSsiHs oGf .NOPRCAGs.ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C23
.3  C23
.5 Spinocerebellar ataxia type 28, from molecular hypothesis to human Mutations in PD E10
A, resulting in a loss of PD E10
A activity cause a therapy hyperkinetic movement disorder in humans and in a mouse model. F. Maltecca1, E. Baseggio1, F. Consolato1, D. Mazza1, P. Podini2, A. Puliti3, F. Codazzi1, A. E. G. Sheridan1, R. Hinttala2, J. Uusimaa2, M. Kurian3, N. Brandon4, C. Diggle1; Quattrini2, G. Casari1; 1University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 1Vita-salute San Raffaele University and San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 3University College LOndon, London, United Kingdom, 4Astra Zeneca Neuroscience, 2San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Istituto Giannina Gaslini and University of Cambridge, MA, United States. Genoa, Milan, Italy. Clinical trials with phosphodiesterase 10A (PD E10
A) inhibitors are current- Spinocerebellar ataxia type 28 (SCA28) is a neurodegenerative disease ly underway in both Huntington’s disease and Schizophrenia. PD E10
A inac- caused by mutations of the AFG3 L2
 gene. The encoded protein assembles tivates the critical intracellular signalling molecules Cyclic AMP and cyclic into multimeric complexes (the m-AAA proteases), which exert protein GMP; it is specifically expressed in the medium spiny neurons (MSNs) of quality control in the inner mitochondrial membrane and participate to the striatum. the regulation of mitochondrial morphology. The Afg3l2 haploinsufficient In animal models PD E10
A inhibitors ameliorate symptoms of schizophre- mouse recapitulates the symptoms of SCA28 patients, presenting a progres- nia, and the striatal pathology and clinical signs of HD, providing the ratio- sive decline in motor skills caused by dark degeneration of Purkinje cells nale for these clinical trials in humans. However, very little is known about (PC-DCD) of mitochondrial origin. In this work, we define the pathogenetic the role of PD E10
A in man. mechanism of SCA28 and provide the first evidence of a pre-clinical treat- We observed two families with a very distinctive phenotype of a hyperki- ment of this disease. We demonstrated in cultured PCs that an inefficient netic movement disorder, variable mental retardation and abnormal skin buffering of stimulus-evoked Ca2+ peaks by Afg3l2-deficient mitochondria pigmentation. provokes an increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration, thus triggering PC- The pedigree structure of both families suggested a recessive disorder. DCD. Proving this mechanism, we completely recover the ataxic phenotype Whole genome autozygosity mapping and exome sequencing revealed the of SCA28 mice by genetically reducing the metabotropic glutamate recep- presence of different homozygous mutations in PD E10
A. Modeling of one tors mGluR1, and thus decreased Ca2+ influx in PCs. The same result has of the mutations in cell lines showed that there was a reduction in protein been successfully replicated by administration of an off-label therapy with levels and abnormal localization of PD E10
A to the cytosol rather than the ceftriaxone that favors the synaptic glutamate clearance. This treatment is cell membrane where it is required for its activity. effective when applied at both presymptomatic and after the ataxia onset in We constructed a knock in mouse with one of the variants, this model animal the preclinical model, thus representing a safe and immediately accessible displayed deficient motor control. The animal had reduced levels of PD E10
A therapy for presymptomatic carriers of AFG3 L2
 mutations and also SCA28 protein in the striatum, and furthermore there was a marked reduction in patients with overt symptoms. striatal PD E10
A activity, and a loss of downstream signaling activity.  C23
.4 These data show that in humans congenital loss of PD E10
 activity results in Homozygous truncating mutations in WDR73 cause a severe a movement disorder and variable cognitive impairment nephrocerebellar syndrome, part of the Galloway Mowat syndrome  C23
.6 spectrum PL P1
 mutations affecting PL P1
/DM20 alternative splicing causes E. L. Baple1,2,3, R. Jinks4, E. Puffenberger5, B. Harding6, P. Crino7, A. Fogo8, O. Wenger9, H. Hypomyelination of Early Myelinating Structures Wang10, B. Xin10, A. Koehler4, M. McGlincy4, L. Tran4, M. Provencher4, J. Smith4, S. Al Turki11, S. H. Kevelam1,2, J. R. Taube3, R. M. L. van Spaendonk4, E. Bertini5, K. Sperle3, M. B. Chioza2, R. Maroofian2, G. Harlalka2, M. Hurles11, S. Gerety11, H. Cross12, A. Heaps5, M. Tarnopolsky6, D. Tonduti7, E. M. Valente5, L. Travaglini5, E. A. Sistermans4, G. Bernard8, Morton5, L. Stempak13, F. Hildebrandt14, C. Sadowski14, J. Zaritsky15, K. Campellone16, H. C. E. Catsman-Berrevoets9, C. D. M. van Karnebeek10, J. R. Østergaard11, R. L. Friederich12, Morton5, K. Strauss5, A. H. Crosby2; M. Fawzi13, J. H. Schieving14, M. Tarailo-Graovac15, S. Orcesi16, M. E. Steenweg1,2, C. G. M. 1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2University of Exeter van Berkel1, Q. Waisfisz4, T. E. M. Abbink1,2, M. S. van der Knaap1,2,17, G. M. Hobson3,18,19, N. Medical Scool, Exeter, United Kingdom, 3University of Southampton, Southampton, United I. Wolf1,2; Kingdom, 4Franklin & Marshall College, Lancaster, PA, United States, 5Clinic for Special 1Dept. of Child Neurology, VU UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Neuroscience Campus, VU Children, Lancaster, PA, United States, 6University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Nemours Biomedical Research, Alfred I. duPont United States, 7Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United States, 4Dept. of Clinical Genetics, VU 8Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TX, United States, 9New Leaf Clinic for UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Unit for Neuromuscular & Neurodegenerative Diseases, Special Children, Mount Eaton, OH, United States, 10DDC Clinic for Special Needs Children, Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Bambino Gesu’ Children’s Research Hospital, IRCCS, Middlefield, OH, United States, 11Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Rome, Italy, 6Dept. of Pediatrics, McMaster Children’s Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada, Kingdom, 12University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, United States, 13University 7Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Dept. of Brain & Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, United States, 14Harvard Medical School, Pavia, Italy, 8Dept. of Pediatrics, Neurology & Neurosurgery, Div:of Pediatric Neurology, Boston, MA, United States, 15Nemours/Alfred I. DuPont Hospital for Children, Willmington, Montreal Children’s Hospital, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, DE, United States, 16University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, United States. 9Dept. of Pediatric Neurology, Erasmus University Hospital – Sophia Children’s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 10Div.of Biochemical Diseases, Dept. of Pediatrics, BC Children‘s Hospital, Centre for Molecular Medicine & Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, We investigated 30 Amish individuals (1-28yrs) with a severe nephrocerebel- Vancouver, BC, Canada, 11Centre for Rare diseases, Dept. of Paediatrics, Aarhus lar syndrome characterised by progressive microcephaly, visual impairment, University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 12Dept. of Child Neurology, Kaiser Permanente Pediatric Specialties, Roseville, CA, United States, 13Dept. of Pediatric Neurology, Hamad stagnant psychomotor development, abnormal extrapyramidal movements, Medical Corp, Doha, Qatar, 14Dept. of Child Neurology, Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, and steroid resistant nephrosis. Post-mortem neuropathology revealed mi- Netherlands, 15Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of British Colombia, Vancouver, crencephaly and atrophic cerebellar hemispheres with a unique pattern of BC, Canada, 16Child Neurology & Psychiatry Unit, C. Mondino National Neurological histological findings. Assuming autosomal recessive inheritance of a founder Institute, Pavia, Italy, 17Dept. of Functional Genomics, Center for Neurogenomics & mutation we used autozygosity mapping and next generation sequencing to Cognitive Research, VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 18Dept. of Biological identify the underlying molecular cause, a homozygous frameshift variant Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, United States, 19Dept. of Pediatrics, in WDR73 (c.888delT; p.Phe296Leufs*26). Interestingly, a second trunca- Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States. ting frameshift variant (c.1264_1270delATAAAAG) (NM_001080435.2) was also identified in the closely linked WHAMM gene, which was found to be homozygous in all but one affected individual. A further novel homozygous Inherited leukodystrophies represent a diagnostic challenge and many pa- frameshift variant (WDR73 c.766dupC; Arg256Profs*18) was identified in tients remain without a diagnosis. In thi s study we investigated the gene- a Bulgarian child with similar clinical features. Our functional studies re- tic etiology of the recently described X-linked disorder ‘Hypomyelination vealed that wild type WDR73 protein is expressed in human cerebral cor- of Early Myelinating StructurePsL’ P(H1EMS)in 16 patients diagnosed by brain tex, hippocampus, and cultured embryonic kidney cells and interacts with MRI criteria. Using exome sequencing, we identified in all patients unusual α- and β-tubulin, heat shock protein 90 (HSP-90), and CAD; the mTOR C1
- hemizygous mutations in the gene, located either in exon 3B (1 dele- regulated multi-enzyme complex. We show that WDR73 protein is concen- tion, 1 missenseIn a snidli c2o silent), which is spliced out in isoform DM20, or in trated at mitotic spindles and midbody microtubules during mitosis, and intron 3 (5 mutations). The frameshift deletion led to truncation of PL P1
, recombinant WDR73 mutant (p.Phe296Leufs*26, p.Arg256Profs*18) prote- but not DM20. analysis of effects of the mutations on splicing and ins are unstable displaying increased interaction with α- and β-tubulin and secondarPyL RPN1A folding showed that four mutations lPoLcPa1tedD dMe2e0p in intron 3 HSP-90. Together, our data confirm that mutation of WDR73 is responsible were predicted to destabilize a long-distance interaction struPcLtuPr1e DinM th2e0 se- for a complex nephrocerebellar syndrome best classified as part of Galloway condary RNA fragment involved in regulating / alternative Mowat syndrome spectrum of disorders. However given that the phenoty- splicing. The other four mutations were predicted to altPerL  P1
 / al- pical outcome of WHAMM mutation is currently unknown, patients doubly tern aItniv vei tsrpolicing, either by creating exonic spPlicLiPn1g/ sDilMen2c0e rs motifs, a splice h mo am o ez xy hg ibo iu ts f co or W pH osA itM M m enu ot ta ytE pio eSn .H inG a s2s0oc1ia5ti o| nG wLiAthS WGDORW73, mSCutOatTioLnA Nd sD io ten , .o Ur Ksi t |e Wor W sb tuy W da if e.f E se c S ct oi Hn ng fG rth . mOe Rl do Gc aa l R ecN rA s st er du cture of the s p inli c pe td ieo 5nn 1to sr y a m e ph i e d ea ratio a ’ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index POSTERS fibroblasts and transfected immortalized immature oligodendrocytic cells. P S01
.01 Intriguingly, in pPaLtPie1n ts with HEMS, brain structuresP tLhPa1t /nDoMrm2a0l ly myelina- Clinical experience with a SNP-based noninvasise prenatal test for te early, are hypomyelinated, in contrast to Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, 22q11.2 deletion syndrome PalLsPo1 caDuMse2d0 by alterations. This suggests that PLaPl1ternative Z. Demko1, S. J. Gross1, M. Stosic1, A. Norvez1, R. Dhamankar1, K. N. Jinnett1, P. Benn2; splicing is important for early myelination, probably by an impact on the 1Natera, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States, 2University of Connecticut Health Center, / ratio. Our data extend the phenotypic spectrum of -related Farmington, CT, United States. disorders and support the need to include intron 3 in diagnostic sequen- cing. Objective: In contrast to whole chromosome aneuploidy, microdeletion syn- dromes are smaller and thus harder to detect, and they occur with equal fre- quency in women of different maternal ages. Here we report on the clinical experience with our single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based noninva- sive prenatal test (NIPT) for the microdeletion responsible for the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (DiGeorge). Method: 21,948 maternal blood samples received between February and August 2014 were analyzed for the 22q11.2 deletion. Cell-free DNA and maternal-specific DNA were isolated from the samples. 672 SNPs in a 2.91 Mb DNA segment commonly deleted in the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome were PCR-amplified, sequenced, and analyzed using a proprietary algorithm to determine fetal and maternal copy number at the interrogated region. Fol- low-up information was sought for all high-risk cases. Results: In the study cohort, 97 (0.5%) patients were found to be at high risk for a 22q11.2 microdeletion, including two cases in which the mother was suspected to have the deletion. Fetal diagnostic confirmation was avai- lable for 58 high-risk cases: 11 were true positives and 47 were false posi- tives, resulting in a positive predictive value (PPV) of 19%. Invasive testing decisions were available for 81 high-risk cases: 60.5% had invasive testing and 39.5% declined. Ultrasound abnormalities were confirmed for 81.8% of true-positive and 10.6% of false-positive cases. Follow-up is ongoing. Conclusions: Despite the small size of the 22q11.2 microdeletion, this SNP-based NIPT was highly effective and may be considered as a first-line approach for the general pregnancy population, not just for high-risk pati- ents. PM01.02 Complete 46,XY female of 14 cases and review of the literature S. Lee1, B. Lee1, J. Park1, E. Choi1, Y. Lee1, A. Oh1, S. Park1, M. Kim2, H. Ryu1,2; 1Laboratoy of Medical Genetics, Cheil General Hospital and Women‘s Healthcare Center, seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Cheil General Hospital and Women‘s Healthcare Center, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. Introduction : The individual of phenotypically female with 46,XY karyotype is caused by various abnormality such as gonadal formation and androgen synthesis and sensitivity during sexual development. XY female individuals are rarely found andhave complex features. The degree of secondary sexual characteristics, level of hormone and presence or absence of Müllerian or- gan might be shown by various causes. Materials and Methods : Cytogenetic analysis were perform ed in 9,472 female patients at Cheil General Hospital between September 1983 and December 2014. Clinical findings, basal hormone profiles, radiological readings were investigated. Additionally, DA-DAPI staining, CBG-banding, quantitativSeR Yfluorescence-polymerase chain reaction analysis, fluorescence in situ hybridization were conducted to confirm the presence of Y chromo- some and gene. Results : Among the 9,472 individuals, 14 cases found with complete 46,XY female (0.0015 %). Indications of 12 cases were primary amenorrhea (86 %) and two cases were agenesis of uterus and ovary cyst dysgeminoma re- spectively. Six cases had no uterus and high levels of testosterone. Four cases were performed gonadectomy. Four cases were familial. Only one case was diagnosed as androgen insensitivity syndrome. Conclusions : Although further genetic testing and research is needed for an accurate diagnosis, the present report would be helpful for genetic counse- ling of XY female patient and their family, and understanding the one of the genetic etiology as the causal factor in amenorrhea. P S01
.03 aCGH in three fetus with severe intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) V. Gloning, M. Shoukier, C. Daumer-Haas, C. Bagowski, S. Minderer, T. Schramm, K. Gloning; Praenatal-Medizin Muenchen, Munich, Germany. Background: The application of aCGH technology in prenatal diagnostics enables the de- tection of submicroscopic copy number changes that are associated with clinically significant outcomes. 52 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG Objective:ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index We report three cases of severe intrauterine growth retardation due to rare gestive loci were identified: a locus on chromosome 6 already associated to chromosomal aberrations diagnosed by aCGH. Prenatal and postnatal phe- menopause (MAF 0.017; p=2.081E-07) and a second novel locus on chro- notypes are presented. mosome 11 (MAF 0.012; p= 1.34E-07). A subset of 941 women was geno- Methods and Results: typed by high-coverage exome chip. A SKAT meta-analysis was performed to Fetal growth retardation as the leading finding was seen on ultrasound highlight rare variants in the coding regions associated to AMH levels. A new in the second/third trimester of pregnancy. In each case uterine artery locus on chromosome 16 reached a suggestive p-value of 2E-05. Doppler was normal. With aCGH pathogenic submicroscopic copy number Meta-analysis will be enlarged by additional samples in order to increase changes were identified, not detectable by cytogenetic chromosomal ana- the statistical power of the analysis and confirm the suggestive loci. lysis: a) a terminal 11.4 megabase (Mb) deletion in 1q43q44, b) a 11 Mb PM01.06 duplication in 10p15.3p14 and a 1.9 Mb deletion in 17p13.3, c) a duplicati- BACs-on-Beads technology and next-generation sequencing for on in 14q11.2q12 (8.3 Mb) and deletion in 15q11.2q12 (3.2 Mb). While the aneuploidy screening in trophectoderm cells of human blastocysts copy number changes in cases a and b were de novo events, a pure deletion T. Chareonsirisuthigul1, W. Jaranasaksakul1, W. Chantratita2, S. Tritruengtassana3, B. 1q43q44 in case a and a de novo translocation der(17)t(10;17)(p13;p13) Rerkamnuaychoke1; in case b, the imbalances in case c resulted from an unbalanced inheritance 1Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine of a reciprocal translocation t(14;15)(q12;q12). Beside growth retardation, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol, Bangkok, Thailand, 2Medical Genomic Center, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand, 3BORN IVF the three young patients showed multiple dysmorphic features und further CLINIC, Bangkok, Thailand. abnormalities after birth. For all, a distinct developmental delay/mental re- tardation is expected. Conclusion: Introduction: Preimplantation genetic testing is a technique used to identify aCGH should be adopted as a first-tier genetic test in fetus with idiopathic genetic defects in embryos created through in vitro fertilization (IVF) before IUGR before routine G-banded karyotyping. The incremental information pregnancy. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was the first provided by aCGH allows prognosis prediction and hereby improves paren- technology to be widely available for provide more information by analyzing tal counselling. all chromosomes at one time. However, the throughput and cost of aCGH PM01.04 may limit widespread application in clinical laboratories. The purpose of Mutation analysis of androgen receptor gene:Multiple uses for a this study was to investigate the effectiveness of a new rapid aneuploidy single test screening test based on BACs-on-Beads (BoBs) technology and next-gene- A. Shojaei; ration sequencing (NGS). Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Iran Materials and Methods: Trophectoderm (TE) samples of 10 blastocysts University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. were subjected to analysis. The Karyolite™ BoBs kit was used to study aneu- ploidies involving any of the 24 chromosomes. Low-coverage whole genome sequencing was performed using the Ion Torrent PGM with 316 chip. The Abstract: Androgen receptor gene mutations are one of the leading causes efficiency of these both approaches were estimated by comparing results of disorders of sex development (DSD) exhibited by sexual ambiguity or sex obtained by aCGH. reversal. In this study, 2 families with patients whom diagnosed clinically Results: Whole genome amplification (WGA) products of TE cells were de- as androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) were physically and genetically tected by both BoBs and NGS technology. One embryo (10.0%) was detected examined. This evaluation carried out by cytogenetic and molecular analysis as euploid, while three embryos (30.0%) contained single chromosomal an- including karyotype and sequencing of SRY and AR genes. In family1, two euploidy. Six of these (60.0%) were with multiple chromosomal abnormali- brothers and their mother were hemizygous and heterozygous respective- ties. The results from both technologies were compared with aCGH revealed ly for c.2522G>A variant, while one of their healthy brother was comple- that both methods were concordance 100% sensitivity and specificity. tely normal hemizygous. Family 2 assessment demonstrated the c.639G>A Conclusions: Our study demonstrated both BACs-on-Beads technology and (rs6152) mutation in two siblings who were reared as girls. The SRY gene next-generation sequencing could be applied to accurately detect embryo- was intact in all of the study‘s participants. Our findings in family 1 could nic chromosomal abnormality with a flexible and cost-effective strategy and be a further proof for the pathogenicity of the c.2522G>A variant. Given the higher potential accuracy. importance of AR mutations in development of problems such as sex assign- ment in AIS patients, definitive diagnosis and phenotype-genotype corre- P S01
.07 lation could be achieved by molecular genetic tests that in turn could have Maintenance of the methylation pattern on fresh and cultured promising impacts in clinical management and also in prenatal diagnosis of Chorionic Villi (CV) in normal and Beckwith Wiedemann Syndrome prospect offspring. (BWS)-suspected pregnancies grant:Tehran University of Medical Sciences/89033010820 L. Paganini1, N. Carlessi1, S. Gangiobbe1, R. Silipigni2, S. Guerneri2, F. Lalatta3, A. Cereda4, S. Sirchia5, M. Miozzo1, S. Tabano1; P S01
.05 1Division of pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Genome wide association analysis of Anti Mϋllerian Hormone (AMH) Milano, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale in about 1,300 caucasian women highlights 2 novel suggestive loci for Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, Milano, Italy, 3Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione fertility. IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy., Milano, Italy, 4Pediatric C. Barbieri1, M. Traglia1, T. Nutile2, S. Ulivi3, L. Portas4, C. Sala1, C. Masciullo1, M. Cocca3, Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy., Milano, Italy, 5Medical L. Pagliardini5, P. Panina5, M. Ciullo2, P. Gasparini3, A. La Marca6, E. Papaleo5, M. Pirastu4, Genetics, Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy., D. Toniolo1; Milano, Italy. 1San Raffaele Hospital - Division of Genetics and Cell biology, Milan, Italy, 2Institute of Genetics and Biophysics ‘Adriano Buzzati-Traverso’, Naples, Italy, 3Institute for Maternal and Child Health–IRCCS ‘‘Burlo Garofolo’’–Trieste, University of Trieste, Trieste, BWS is an imprinting-related disorder that can be prenatally suspected fol- Italy, 4Institute of Population Genetics, National Council of Research, Sassari, Italy, lowing established clinical guidelines. Molecular confirmation is commonly 5San Raffaele Hospital - Obstetrics and Gynecology Unit, Milan, Italy, 6Mother-Infant performed on amniocytes and the possibility to use fresh (CVF) and cultu- Department, Institute of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. red (CVC) CV has never been investigated. To verify whether CVF and CVC are eligible sources of DNA, we tested by pyrosequencing in normal pregnancies the methylation percentage at: ICR1, AMH is a dimeric glycoprotein, member of the TGF-β superfamily expressed ICR2, H19 promoter, PWS/AS-ICR, MGMT and RASSF1A genes. We highligh- in the growing follicles of the ovary. AMH concentration in serum essentially ted stable methylation levels at the imprinting-driving regions ICR1 (CVF: reflects the ovarian follicular pool. AMH levels vary broadly in women du- 45.38% ± 1.77; CVC: 45.04% ± 1.81), ICR2 (CVF: 44.32% ± 1.84; CVC: 43.67% ring reproductive life, until after 40 years old when the AMH level starts to ± 2.10) and PWS/AS-ICR (CVF: 43.70% ± 5.60; CVC, 43.15% ± 3.41). Conver- decrease sharply, becoming undetectable after menopause. The discovery of sely, H19 promoter was severely hypomethylated at both CVF (11.33% ± genetic variants responsible for the high variability in AMH level could be a 1.92) and CVC (19.30% ± 4.30), and showed a significantly increased me- useful marker to predict fertility and age of menopause. thylation after culture. In two unrelated and biallelic genes, the methylation AMH levels were measured in serum of 850 healthy women collected by the remained stable at MGMT promoter and changed at RASSF1A. Italian Network of Genetic Isolates (INGI) and of 461 fertile women collec- As second step, we investigated ICR1 and ICR2 methylation level on both ted by Obstetrics and Gynecology Unit of San Raffaele Hospital, Milano. CVF and CVC of two BWS-suspected fetuses ( P1
 and  P2
).  P1
 showed hypom- A meta-analysis for AMH adjusted for age of 1311 samples was performed ethylation at ICR2 both in CVF and CVC (CVF: 17.63% ± 0.88; CVC: 16,13% ± on genotypes imputed to the lowE vSaHriaGnt 2s e0n1ri5ch |e Gd 1 L0
A0 S0
GG pOanWel,. TSwCoO sTugL-AN0 D.1 ,8 U); K P2
 | s Who Wwe Wd n .Eor Sm Hal G m .Oeth Ry Glation profiles. 53 Taken together these findings suggest that: i) ICR1 and ICR2, but not H19,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index are reliable targets for BWS prenatal methylation test in CV also after cultu- Mixed/Other Caucasian 1473 16% 44% 63% 389% Northern European 1622 19% 51% 60% 374% re; ii) similarly, PWS/AS-ICR is steadily hemimethylated in CV from healthy Southern European 1987 29% 53% 80% 286% pregnancies, independently from culture. Thus, methylation analysis of the- Unknown 2371 23% 86% 75% 499% se regions represents a very useful tool for prenatal diagnosis of imprinting Hispanic 4348 39% 115% 72% 656% East Asian 143037 935% 911% 3554% 9926% related syndromes. Southeast Asian 90603 806% 724% 925% 4680% This work was supported by intramural grant “Ricerca Corrente 2014- Middle Eastern 9522 103% 768% 106% 2623% 2015”. South Asian 7079 56% 248% 29% 1693% PM01.08 CDKN1C mutations in familial and prenatally diagnosed Beckwith- PM01.10 Wiedemann syndrome cases. p.Asn386Lys, a new putative cystic fibrosis mutation on a complex L. Calzari1, A. De Crescenzo2, A. Mussa3, M. Divizia4, M. Police5, S. Di Presa6, S. Di Candia7, allele discovered during assisted reproduction explorations, with an L. Memo8, C. Izzi9, D. Melis10, G. Ferrero3, A. Riccio10, L. Larizza1, S. Russo1; unknown phenotypical impact 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2, Università Federico II, Napoli, Italy, B. Herve1, E. Girodon2, A. Taillandier3, E. Mornet3, M. Bailly4, T. Bienvenu2, B. Simon- 3Università di Torino, Torino, Italy, 4Istituto Neuroligo Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 5Osp Bouy3, F. Vialard1, D. Molina-Gomes1; Moscati, Avellino, Italy, 6IRCCS Burlo garofalo, Trieste, Italy, 7Ospedale San Raffaele, 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHI Poissy St Germain en Laye, Poissy, France, Milano, Italy, 8Ospedale San Martino, Belluno, Italy, 9Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, AP-HP, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, 10Università Federico II, Napoli, Italy. France, 3Service de Biologie Médicale, Centre Hospitalier de Versailles – Hôpital André Mignot, Le Chesnay, France, 4Service de Biologie de la Reproduction, Gynécologie et Obstétrique, CHI Poissy Saint Germain en Laye, Poissy, France. CDKN1C (cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1) gene mapping within the 11p15.5 cluster of imprinted genes, encodes an inhibitor of several cyclin dependent kinases (Cdk) acting in the cell cycle G1 - S transition. The mo- Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive genetic disease caused by noallelic maternal expression of CDKN1C is under the control of the I C2
 mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. imprinting centre through the antisense non coding KCNQ1OT1 transcript. Almost 2,000 mutations have been described, resulting in CF and CFTR- The protein comprises three functional domains including from the N- to related disorders including male infertility by congenital absence of the vas the C-terminus a CDK binding, a PAPA and a PCNA domain. deferens (CBAVD). Here, we report a Portuguese couple undergoing assisted CDKN1C mutations underlie the Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) ac- reproduction because of CBAVD. The man was compound heterozygous for counting for 10% of sporadic cases and up to 40% of familial cases. the CF-mutation c.1000C>T (R334W) and the CFTR-RD associated complex Here we report on the clinical and molecular characterization of ten BWS allele c.[1210-34TG[13]T[5];3705T>G] (TG13T5; S1235
R). The genotype families, negative for the known 11p15 (epi)genetic alterations and 2 prena- was consistent with the phenotype. The partner carried three heterozygous tal cases diagnosed because of omphalocele. Twelve distinct mutations were variants: c.1727G>C (G576A) and c.2002C>T (R668C), which are known as detected, including 6 stop, 3 frameshift, two missense mutations and one a complex allele, per se not associated with CF but sometimes in association complex mutation, seven of which yet unreported. Most important 11/12 with a third mutation, resulting in a CF or CFTR-RD allele, and c.1158C>A mutations were maternally transmitted allowing to provide the family with (N386K), which was never reported previously. Family study led to cha- genetic counseling and to assess the recurrence in two subsequent prenatal racterize a new complex allele combining the three variants. Evaluation diagnoses. The clinical presentation of the investigated cases was heteroge- of a possible impact of the c.1158C>A (N386K) mutation by bioinformatic neous although severe in all the carriers of inactivating mutations, including tools did not suggest an effect on splicing but showed a possible effect on one case born prematurely at 28th week also displaying psychomotor delay the protein level. This mutation, in the context of a complex allele, was thus and another with autistic traits, not associated with de novo or inherited considered to be potentially associated with CF, although functional studies CNVs as shown by array CGH. would help document such an effect. This makes genetic counseling cau- Conversely the two patients with a missense mutations, predicted to be da- tious, with a 25% hypothetical risk for the couple of having a child with CF. maging by several bionformatic tools, exhibited a mild phenotype This case report illustrates the interest of thorough CFTR gene studies in CBAVD couples requesting assisted reproduction in order to provide accu- P S01
.09 rate genetic counselling. Expanded carrier screening of 311,688 individuals: the case for going beyond CF P S01
.11 I. S. Haque, G. A. Lazarin, M. Raia, H. Bellerose, E. A. Evans, J. Goldberg; An unusual presentation of a human chimera - case study and Counsyl, South San Francisco, CA, United States. investigation of the underlying mechanism by SNP array analysis. C. A. Waterman1, S. Laird1, K. H. Ellis1, H. E. White1,2, D. Morrogh3, J. J. Waters3, N. S. Thomas1, N. Savage1, V. Maloney1, F. Maggouta1, D. Hunt4; 1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury, We report our experience performing expanded carrier screening for 98 United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United recessive conditions on an ethnically-diver se group of 311,688 individuals Kingdom, 3NE Thames Regional Genetics Laboratory, Great Ormond Street Hospital primarily from the USA, using targeted genotyping and next-generation se- for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4Wessex Clinical Genetics quencing. Individuals of European ancestrycomprise 65% of the sample. All Service, Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom. tested diseases were categorized as “profound”, “severe”, or “moderate” by a recently published methodology [Lazarin et al., PLoS One 2014]. “Severe” diseases (e.g., cystic fibrosis) are those that cause intellectual disability or Human XX/XY chimerism, resulting from the fusion of two different zygotes, shorten lifespan to adolescence or earlier; “profound” diseases (e.g., Cana- is a rare finding and is usually identified in newborns with ambiguous ge- van disease) do both. nitalia. In the present study we describe an apparently normal male age 34 We find that in every ethnic group, there is a higher absolute risk of fragile X years who presented with infertility. Sperm analysis revealed a low sperm syndrome (FXS) than of spinal muscular atrophy, recommended for univer- count with decreased mobility, a diagnosis of severe oligoasthenoteratozoo- sal screening by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics; in spermia was made. The proband is otherwise healthy and has received no European groups, FXS is at least 50% as common as CF, and has higher risk blood or bone marrow transfusions. Karyotype analysis of peripheral blood than CF in all non-European groups. and subsequent FISH analysis of buccal cells showed a mixture of 46,XY and We find the absolute risk for “profound” disorders not on an ethnicity-spe- 46,XX cells. Several mechanisms have been proposed for the formation of cific panel to be 60-80% that of CF (classified as “severe”) in all European chimerism including 1) tetragametic chimera resulting from postzygotic fu- populations. Non-CF “severe” disorders are even more common, from 3.9x sion of two separate zygotes, 2) dispermic fertilization of either an oocyte CF risk in Ashkenazi to 99.3x in East Asians. and its second polar body, and 3) dispermic fertilization of two female ga- Our data show that the absolute risk for diseases in expanded carrier scree- metes arising from parthenogenetic division of a single oocyte. Comparative ning panels is comparable to or significantly higher than the risk detected QF-PCR studies of the proband and both parents provided evidence of a ge- by existing carrier screening guidelines, especially in non-Caucasian popu- netic contribution in the proband from two different sperm but no evidence lations. of a genetic contribution from a second ovum, consistent with mechanism Absolute risk relative to CF risk 2 or 3. A comparative genotyping SNP array analysis was undertaken to try Absolute Spinal to further elucidate the underlying mechanism in this case. This genetic dia- risk of CF Fragile X Profound Severe Ethnicity muscular gnosis posed a challenging genetic counselling issue but has not fundamen- (1-in-X syndrome diseases diseases births) atrophy tally altered the proposed ICSI treatment for this individual’s infertility. African 12341 75% 300% 89% 518% A5sh4kenazi 1745 14% ESH9G5% 20151  |3
 G1%LASG38O9%W, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM01.12 Reliability of chromosomal microarray-based analysis in CVS for the detection of cryptic chromosomal abnormalities and fetoplacental Microarray chromosome analysis is becoming a more and more routinely discrepancies test and its use in prenatal diagnosis has been discussed, raising controver- A. Sánchez1,2,3, I. Mademont-Soler4, E. Margarit1,2,3, V. Borobio1, S. Anna1,2,3; sial opinions. 1Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBERER, Barcelona, In order to limit incidental findings (IF) and variants of unknown signi- Spain, 4Institut d‘Investigació Biomèdica Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain. ficance (VOUS) we designed EasyChip, a low resolution oligo 8x15K array with a resolution of 3-4Mb on genomic backbone, 500Kb on subtelomeric portions and 250Kb on 43 syndromic regions. The study of chorionic villi samplings (CVS) by conventional cytogenetics Syndromic regions were selected considering morbidity, penetrance (>75%) reveals chromosomal abnormalities in 12% of cases, and in 1-2% of preg- and etiological mechanisms. nancies mosaicism is observed. In order to increase the diagnostic yield, We evaluate EasyChip on 48 samples with known anomalies, and all the im- new molecular techniques that offer higher resolution have been develo- balances were detected: 22 syndromic regions (86.7Kb-33Mb); 29 subtelo- ped, such as chromosomal microarray-based analysis (CMA). Similar to meric regions (233.8Kb-40Mb); 7 backbone regions (1.9Mb-5.5Mb). cytogenetically visible chromosomal abnormalities, cryptic chromosomal A prospective study was carried out on 32 cases of prenatal samples from abnormalities (CCA) may also be presented as confined placental mosaics, low risk pregnancies, tested with both EasyChip and a higher resolution contributing to misinterpretations. The purpose of the present work was to platform (4x180K/8x60K). determinate the frequency of CCA and confined placental mosaicism of CCA The only positive result detected by both the platforms was consistent with in CVS, and to evaluate the reliability of the strategy used. a female foetus presented with mosaicism 45,X/46X,i(X)(q10). We performed CMA in CVS of 50 pregnancies with normal karyotype or a EasyChip did not detect 7 VOUS on genomic backbone, ranged 222.1-579 balanced familial rearrangement, in both trophoblast and mesenchyma. .6Kb, evidenced by high resolution platform. Twenty two per cent of them were referred for ultrasound abnormalities EasyChip is a useful tool in prenatal diagnosis for screening purposes, as- and 78% for abnormal first trimester screening. sociated with karyotype. It can support the standard cytogenetic analysis In 94% of the CVS, CMA results could be obtained from both tissues. The for detection of submicroscopic imbalances, which could be lost especially overall frequency of reportable non-mosaic CCA was 8,5%, and in 2% of when working on not optimal quality samples. Moreover, it can detect cryp- samples a CCA was only found in trophoblast. All the CCA were diagnosed in tic imbalanced subtelomeric rearrangements and microdeletions/duplicati- the abnormal first trimester screening group. ons within 43 specific regions associated with high morbidity syndromes. Although the cohort presented is relatively small, it seems that CCA and Such a design has the advantage, over higher resolution platforms, to limit placental mosaicisms of CCA present a frequency similar to that of cytoge- the detection of VOUS or IF, which complicate genetic counselling increasing netically visible chromosomal abnormalities during the first trimester of parental anxiety, without providing certitude in pregnancy outcome. pregnancy. However, CCA do not seem to be generally associated with ultra- P S01
.15 sound abnormalities in the first trimester. The strategy used is reliable for Tissue-specific mosaicism for CNV in human miscarriages the detection of placental mosaicisms of CCA. A. A. Kashevarova1,2, N. A. Skryabin1,2, T. V. Nikitina1, E. A. Sazhenova1, D. I. Zhigalina2, I. P S01
.13 Lebedev1,2; The cleavage-stage bovine embryo is a valuable model to study 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. chromosome instability in early mammalian embryogenesis O. Tšuiko1,2, M. Zamani Esteki3, A. Destouni4, M. Catteeuw5, K. Smits5, E. Dimitriadou4, M. Nõmm6, Ü. Jaakma6, A. Kurg1, A. Salumets2, A. Van Soom5, T. Voet3, J. Vermeesch4; 1Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Introduction: Extensive load of somatic copy number variants (CNVs) has Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Competence Centre on Health Technologies, Tartu, Estonia, recently been shown in human placenta, suggesting that it may be critical 3Laboratory of Reproductive Genetics, Center of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, for normal gestation. However, it is unclear weather the entire placenta or Belgium, 4Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Center of Human Genetics, just certain placental cell types promote this phenomenon. Also it may oc- KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Department of Obstetrics, Reproduction and Herd Health, cur that prevalence of CNVs in one cell type may be essential for normal Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 6Estonian University of Life Science, Tartu, Estonia. development, while in another - responsible for embryolethality. We aimed to investigate CNVs in the only two placental tissues available from blighted ova - cytotropholast (CT) and extraembryonic mesoderm (EM). In vitro fertilization (IVF) is a widely used infertility treatment procedure, Materials and Methods: Placental tissues of 10 euploid miscarriages were but the IVF outcome may be influenced by the high rate of chromosome in- investigated using Agilent 180K microarrays. stability (CIN) found in human preimplantation embryos. Although CIN has Results: Altogether 198 CNVs were detected: 91 in EM and 107 in CT, 24 been observed in recent studies, its precise etiology remains elusive. Ho- (26%) and 50 (47%) of them were unique respectively (p=0.0032). Micro- wever, experimenting on human embryos is associated with ethical issues. deletions and microduplications were equally represented in EM (11 vs. In this study, we investigate the incidence of CIN in in vitro cleavage-stage 13), while microdeletions prevailed in CT (41 vs. 9). Unique microdeletions bovine embryos, and provide substantial proof that bovine early embryoge- significantly more frequently were detected in CT (p=0.0014). The candida- nesis is a valuable model for the study of underlying mechanisms leading to te developmentally important genes involved in tissue-specific CNV in EM CIN in an in vivo research setting. are PTPN18 (cell growth, differentiation), CF C1
 (embryonic development), 151 blastomeres from 25 cleavage-stage embryos were obtained on day 2 OCLN (vascular integrity), WIST1 (cell lineage determination and differen- and day 3 post insemination (pi) and whole-genome amplified (WGA). Sub- tiation), TBX10 (embryonic cell fate and organogenesis), in CT - CTNNA3 sequently, the samples were hybridized on the Illumina Bovine HD Bead- (inhibitor of trophoblast invasion), PTPRR (cell growth, differentiation), Chip SNP arrays. We consequently applied a modified version of the siCHILD TSPAN8 (cell development, growth, motility), miR-296 (angiogenesis), algorithm (siCHILD-bovine) and haplarithmisis for the data analysis. PCGF1 (embryogenesis). From 25 embryos analyzed, 7 were uniformly diploid (28%), while 18 em- Conclusions: The presented profiling of CNVs may be the hallmark of abnor- bryos had blastomeres with chromosomal anomalies (72%), of which 83% mal pregnancy, specifically blighted ova, as according to Kasak et al. (2015) were mosaic. Out of 124 blastomeres available for the analysis, 31% were normal gestation whole-placental material is, on the contrary, characteri- diploid, 47% had whole-chromosome abnormalities and 27% carried seg- zed by the prevalence of duplications. This study was supported by Russian mental aberrations. Moreover, segmental reciprocal gains and losses in si- Foundation for Basic Research, 14-04-32047. ster blastomeres were identified in 3 embryos. This study demonstrates that the nature of CIN in bovine cleavage-stage PM01.16 and human cleavage-stage embryos are comparable. Therefore, cattle can Cytogenetics evaluation among infertile couples in a Southern Iranian be employed as a model organism for CIN studies. Data acquired from such population; a targeted survey studies could be used to raise the success rate of human IVF outcome. D. Karim1, A. Nariman1, S. Tabei1, E. Aref-Eshghi2, E. Zare3; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences,, Shiraz, Iran, Grant reference nr: EU 7FP SARM#324509 Islamic Republic of, 2Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St PM01.14 John‘s, NL, St John‘s, NL, Canada, 3Department of Medical Biotechnology, Arak University EasyChip 8x15K: a new and useful tool for anomalies detection in low Of Medical Sciences, Arak, Iran, Islamic Republic of. risk pregnancies Introduction V. Alesi1, L. Bernardini2, M. Canestrelli1, M. Dentici3, G. Barrano1, L. Sinibaldi2, B. Dallapiccola3, A. Novelli3; : The role of cytogenetics service in diagnosis, risk manage- 1san pietro FBF hospital, rome, Italy, 2Mendel Laboratory, IRCSS Casa Sollievo della ment, and outcome of infertility is becoming more and more evident. An ab- Sofferenza Hospital, rome, Italy, 3Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, rome, Italy. normal finding can have significant consequences to assisted reproductive ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAN tD ec, h U niK qu | e sW anW d W fer. tE ilS ityH tG re. aO tmR eG nt, and provide a firm diagnosis to cou5p5lesABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index with longstanding infertility. In the present study we investigated the status SOX9, WT1, SF1, LHX9, RSPO1, FOX L2
, WNT4, DMRT1, DMRT2 genes San- oMf ectyhtoodgeonloegtiyc evaluations performed on infertile couples from a southern ger sequencing. During the first year a few main medical centres of Ukraine population of Iran. joined the project: Institute of endocrinology and metabolism of Komisa- : Couples with a history of infertility were interviewed regar- renko and Regional centres of medical genetics of Zaporizhzhya, Kherson, dRiensgu tlhtseir medical history, any referrals into cytogenetics clinic, and genetic Chernigiv, Lutsk, Poltava, Zhytomyr, Khmelnitskyi. counseling using a standard questionnaire. For the first year Ukrainian part collected 38 DNA samples from 16 DSD : A total of 438 couples were included. The mean age was 24.8 ± 5.2 cases - 15 of 46,XY DSD females and 1 of 46,XX DSD male. years. Consanguinity was found among 23.4% of the couples. The majority We expect the research will provide the opportunity to develop new genetic of the participants (98.3%) never performed any kind of cytogenetic testing tests for DSD diagnosis and to improve understanding of the molecular me- and 97.2% of them were never referred for genetic counseling. Finally, 10% chanisms of ovarian and testicular differentiation. oCfo tnhcel upsairotincsipants experienced at least one abortion and mental retardation The results on the first cohort will be discussed in details. in their familial history. SCOPES 2013-2016: Joint Research Projects : While chromosomal abnormalities are responsible for a signi- P S01
.19 ficant portion of infertilities, miscarriages, and IVF/ICSI failure, just a negli- Pathogenic compound heterozygous mutations in the ERC C2
 gene in gible number of the infertile couples in our study are offered cyotogentics a foetus with severe congenital ichthyosis and dysmorphic features: a service. Our findings highlight a shortage accessibility of such services as case report well as a lack of education amongst the involved clinicians about the cytoge- M. MIGUET1, J. THEVENON2,3, J. RIVIER E3
,4, E. SCHAEFER1, M. ANTA L5
, R. ABIDA6, A. netic causes of infertility in our target population. WEINGERTNER7, V. KREMER8, C. THAUVIN-ROBINET2,3, P. VABRE S9
, F. MORICE-PICARD10, M. GONZALE S11
, D. LIPSKER12, S. FRAITAG13, V. LAUGE L14
,15, J. MANDE L16
, H. DOLLFU S1
,15, P S01
.17 L. FAIVR E2
,3, N. CALMEL S16
, S. EL CHEHADEH1; Identification and characterization of novel fetal specific differentially 1Service de génétique médicale, Institut de génétique médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), methylated regions on chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and X Centre de référence maladies rares « anomalies du développement et syndromes M. Ioannides1, M. Hadjidaniel1, E. Papageorgiou2, P. Antoniou2, S. Kyriakou1, G. malformatifs » de l’Est, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg , Hôpital de Hautepierre, Koumbaris2, P. C. Patsalis1,3; Strasbourg, France, 2FHU TRANSLAD, Centre de référence maladies rares « anomalies du 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2NIPD Genetics LTD, développement et syndromes malformatifs » de l’Est, Centre de Génétique, Dijon, France, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Ministry of Health, Nicosia, Cyprus. 3GAD, EA4271, Génétique et Anomalies du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire de biologie moléculaire, Plateau technique de biologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 5Faculté de Médecine, Institut d’Histologie, Strasbourg, France, DNA methylation is a conserved epigenetic mark that involves the addition 6Centre de Ressources Biologiques, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, of a methyl group on carbon 5 of cytosines present in CpG dinucleotides. France, 7Centre médico-chirurgical et obstétrical, Schiltigheim, France, 8Service de cytogénétique, Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Furthermore, tissue specific methylation patterns are investigated as bio- Strasbourg, France, 9Service de dermatologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 10Service de markers for cancer and cell-free fetal DNA using various methodologies. Our génétique médicale, CHU de Bordeaux, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 11Service de group has previously confirmed the presence of methylation variability on génétique et d’embryologie médicale, CHU Paris Est, Hôpital Armand trousseau, Paris, differentially methylated regions (DMRs) on chorionic villus sampling (CVS) France, 12Service de dermatologie, Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital civil, and non-pregnant peripheral blood Strasbourg, France, 13Département de pathologie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 14Service de neuropédiatrie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 15U1112 Laboratoire de génétique médicale, samples (WBF). Despite the DNA methylation variability, the validated set Faculté de médecine, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 16Laboratoire de of DMRs was clearly distinguished between CVS and WBF samples, enabling diagnostic génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital civil, Strasbourg, for robust tissue specific methylation identification. In this study we aimed France. to expand the prenatal panel of DMRs, utilizing custom 1 million ultra-high resolution aCGH chip designed for chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and X on nor- mal/abnormal CVS and WBF. A subset of the identified DMRs was selected Background Mutations in the ERC C2
/XPD gene cause rare autosomal reces- according to established criteria and confirmed by utilizing methylated DNA sive NER (Nucleotide Excision Repair)- related diseases including tricho- immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and real-time quantitative PCR. In total we thiodystrophy (TTD), cerebrooculofacioskeletal syndrome (COFS), Cockay- confirmed the differential methylation status in 99 regions on chromoso- ne syndrome (CS) and xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), or a combination of mes 13, 18 and 21 and two on chromosome X; the majority of the DMRs XP/TTD, XP/CS or COFS/TTD. These diseases share a number of clinical fea- were found to be located on genes and associated with diseases. Interestin- tures and encompass a wide spectrum of severity, in particular TTD, charac- gly, four regions on chromosome 21 have been found to be correlated with terised by sulphur-deficient brittle hair, short stature, intellectual disability, genes that may play a role in the pathophysiology of Down syndrome. In microcephaly, facial dysmorphism and ichthyosis. To date, there have been conclusion, our work provides an expansion in the biomarker panel avai- few reports describing foetal cases with mutations in ERC C2
. Case report lable for NIPT for Down syndrome and can eventually provide the starting We describe a male foetus, the second child of healthy unrelated parents, point towards the development of assays towards the detection of all com- who died in utero at 28 weeks of pregnancy. The autopsy revealed severe mon chromosomal aneuploidies. harmonious intrauterine growth retardation (<3rd centile), delayed bone maturation, congenital ichthyosis, and facial dysmorphism including low in- PM01.18 sertion of the columella, beaked nose, large and low set ears, micrognathism Study of genetics of human disorders of sexual development in and retrognathism and upslanted palpebral fissures. The hands showed re- Ukraine in the frame of SCOPES 2013-2016: Joint Research Projects tracted broad and tapering fingers with hypoplastic nails. Caryotype and ar- L. Livshits1, N. Gunkovska1, G. Livshits1, S. Chernushin1, S. Kravchenko1, O. Bolshova2, V. ray-CGH were normal. Exome sequencing revealed compound heterozygous Pampukha1; nonsense and pathogenic missense mutations (p.Gln698* and p.Arg722Trp 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Geneitcs (National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine), respectively) in ERC C2
, that were consistent with the clinical features. One Kiev, Ukraine, 2State Institution V.P.Komisarenko Institute of Endocrinology and mutation was transmitted from each of the patient’s parents, respectively. Metabolism of the National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine. Functional studies are on going to test the patient’s NER capacities, using standardized methods. Conclusion This case confirms the power of exome sequencing in the rapid identification of rare clinically non-recognisable di- The project “Genetics of Human Disorders of Sexual Development” is fun- seases, in particular in the absence of clinical clues suggesting a diagnosis, ded by Swiss National Science Foundation and fulfilled by the University of as in severe congenital ichthyosis, a condition that includes several distinct Geneva Medical School (Switzerland), the Institute of Human Genetics (Po- subtypes with significant genetic heterogeneity. land), the Center of medical genetics and primary health care (Armenia) and PM01.20 the Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics (Ukraine). Do people from the Jewish community prefer ancestry-based or pan- The goal is to identify mutations underlying unresolved DSD phenotypes - in ethnic expanded carrier screening? novel DSD genes, or regulatory regions that lead to atypical gene expression. K. C. A. Holtkamp1, M. C. Van Maarle2, M. J. E. Schouten1, W. J. Dondorp3, P. Lakeman2, L. Identification of new genes involved in human sex determination and diffe- Henneman1; rentiation is carried out through exome sequencing and CGH microarray in 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Academic Medical Center, parallel. Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. Ukrainian partner is participating in all stages preceding the exome sequen- cing: clinical data collecting (caryotype, family history, physical examina- ti 5on 6, ultrasound, hormonal status, surge Ery S, Hhi Gst o 2lo 0g 1y) 5, c | a Gry Lo Aty Spi Gng O, D WN ,A S COBaTcLkgAroNuDnd, : UAnKc e|s WtryW-baWse.dE cSaHrrGier.O scRreGening in the Ashkenazi Jewish po- samplings (proband, parents, siblings), SRY gene deletion detecting and SRY,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index pulation entails screening for specific autosomal recessive founder mutati- pregnancy outcome ons, which are rare among the general population. As it is now technically Material and methods: We conducted a retrospective case control study. Pe- feasible to screen for many more diseases, the question arises whether this rinatal outcome of 262 cases of FEB, reported between 2007-2014, were population prefers an ancestry-based offer or a pan-ethnic expanded carrier compared to 2827 cases of pregnancies without abnormal sonographic fin- screening panel that goes beyond the diseases relatively frequent in their dings. own population, and is offered regardless of ancestry. Results: Of the 262 cases 36 cases (13.7%) were associated with maternal Methods: An online questionnaire was completed by 145 individuals from vaginal bleeding and 15 cases (8.6%) of 174 who underwent serology te- the Dutch Jewish community (≥18 years) between April and July 2014. sting had evidence of CMV seroconversion during the pregnancy as oppo- Results: 64.8% were aware of the existence of ancestry-based carrier scree- se to 0.1% in both parameters in the control group. 73 cases (27.8%) had ning. Respondents were generally positive about screening and thought that evidence of structural malformation. 122 cases underwent amniocentesis several categories of diseases should be included. About half (54%) prefer- and karyotyping, three of which had chromosomal abnormalities (2.45%). red pan-ethnic expanded carrier screening whereas 43% preferred ance- The incidence of IUGR and fetal demise was 9.23% and 6.42% as oppose stry-based screening. Reasons for preferring pan-ethnic screening included to 2.9% and 0.5% in the control group, respectively. Composite endpoint “everyone has a right to be tested”, “fear of stigmatization when offering calculation demonstrated absolute risk increase for fetal demise, IUGR, SGA, ancestry-based panels”, and “difficulties with identifying risk due to mixed low apgar score of 10% in the isolated FEB group as compared to isolated backgrounds”. “Preventing high healthcare costs” was the main perceived polyhydramnios group. Interestingly, elevated level of alpha-fetoprotein in barrier to pan-ethnic carrier screening among those in favour of ancestry- the FEB group were significantly (p<0.001) associated with preterm delive- based screening. ry and fetal demise. Conclusion: These findings show that people from the Dutch Jewish com- Conclusions: The presence of FEB is independently associated with an in- munity have a positive attitude regarding carrier screening in their commu- creased risk for IUGR and fetal demise. Elevated aFP in addition to FEB con- nity for a wide range of diseases. Costs were the main perceived barrier for tributes to adverse perinatal outcome. This information should be conside- pan-ethnic carrier screening panels. As costs of these panels are most likely red when counseling patients after FEB is diagnosed. to drop in the near future, it may be expected that these will receive more Grant references: None. support in the future. P S01
.23 The study was funded by Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Gene discovery in lethal fetal malformation phenotypes - the value of Development (grant no 209040001). human knockouts P S01
.21 I. Filges1, E. Bruder2, M. Schubach3, S. Biskup4, O. Lapaire5, I. Hoesli5, S. Schulzke6, S. Detection of a novel mutation in FANCD2 gene in a fetus with Tercanli7, P. Miny1; 1Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Pathology, University unilateral kidney agenesis and anomalies of upper limbs Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3Medical Genetics, University Hospital Charité, Berlin, S. Ivanov1, R. V. Vazharova2,3, L. Balabanski3, S. Vragaleva4, V. Dimitrova5, M. Malinov3, D. Germany, 4CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 5Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Toncheva6; Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 6Neonatology, University Children‘s Hospital Basel, 1Gynecology and Assisted Reproduction Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Basel, Switzerland, 7Centre for Ultrasound and Fetal Medicine, Basel, Switzerland. Biology, Medical genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Gynecology and Assisted Reproduction Hospital „Malinov DM“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4MC „Femina“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Medical Prenatal ultrasonography identifies an increasing number of undescribed Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. malformation phenotypes. Little attention has been paid to using whole exome and genome sequencing strategies for gene identification in fetal dis- orders that are lethal in utero, because they are extremely rare, may appear Congenital anomalies affect 1% to 2% of newborns, and approximately to be sporadic, and Mendelian inheritance can be easily missed. Some lethal 4-5% of those children have abnormalities of urinary tract and kidneys phenotypes, however, indicate an error of early development implying a ma- and 10% - have upper-extremity abnormalities. Combining of homozygo- jor malfunction of a gene with a crucial role in cellular and developmental sity mapping using SNP arrays and sequencing of target regions has been processes. successfully applied for identification of mutations causing many autosomal Hypothesizing that truncating autosomal recessive variants are an impor- recessive diseases in patients diagnosed postnatally. tant cause of early human lethality, we select families with phenotype re- We used SNP array karyotyping and next generation sequencing to cla- currence in sibs who died during pregnancy or after birth because of their rify the etiology of a polymalformative syndrome detected prenatally. On malformations. We correlate the malformation pattern, confirmed by auto- US scan at 18th g. w. the fetus of a second gravida was found to have: mild psy, to developmental pathways in embryogenesis. Genes with homozygous growth retardation, right kidney agenesis and absent radii and thumbs of or compound heterozygous variants will be considered candidates. Those both arms. harboring truncating variants will be prioritized, since loss of function vari- SNP karyotyping with Illumina Human CoreExome-12 revealed a ho- ants are more likely to be causal compared to other variant classes. mozygous chromosome region encompassing 6.1 Mb in 3p: arr[hg19] We present two novel prenatal malformation patterns indicative of the dis- 3p26.1p25.3p25.2(6206901-12352468)x2hmz. The gene FANCD2 mapped ruption of pathways involved in ciliary and midline defect phenotypes. The in the region and was found to be a good candidate for the fetal malformati- role in cell division of candidate genes identified suggests a link to these ve syndrome. We used TruSight Cancer gene panel (Illumina) and the MySeq developmental pathways. Causality is supported by cross-species phenoty- sequencing system. The fetus was found to be homozygous for a novel hy- ping. pomorphic mutation in FANCD2 gene: p.Leu699del and both parents were Identifying mutations implicated in early fetal development will improve found to be carriers of the mutation. recurrence risk counseling and allow prenatal diagnosis for future pregnan- The identification of an anomaly compatible with life during pregnancy is cies in affected families. Lethal fetal phenotypes may represent an impor- a challenge for both prospective parents and the doctor. The anomalies re- tant model to study the genetic basis of natural human knockouts and the quire an accurate diagnosis and communication of relevant information to roles of genes for which little to nothing is known. the family. Certain anomalies occur in isolation, whereas others are asso- PM01.24 ciated with systemic conditions. Prognosis of the developing fetus and re- Microarray analysis of fetal cells isolated from maternal blood productive decisions of the family largely depend on the causes behind the A. Grabowska1,2, M. Bik-Multanowski1,2, J. J. Pietrzyk1,2; disease. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Chair of Pediatrics, Jagiellonian University Medical PM01.22 College, Cracow, Poland, 2University Children’s Hospital of Cracow, Cracow, Poland. Perinatal outcome of fetal echogenic bowel T. Lanxner Battat1, E. Kachko2, L. Novak3, A. Koifman4; 1Soroka university Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Clinical research center, Soroka Introduction: Limitations of contemporary techniques of prenatal diagnosis university Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel, 3Department of public health, Faculty of necessitate the need to develop new non-invasive prenatal test. The pres- Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 4Institute of ence of microchimerism state during each pregnancy opened up new pos- Human Genetics, Soroka university Medical Center , Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, sibilities for fetal genome analysis. Despite of many studies there is still no Beer Sheva, Israel. consensus protocol for identification of fetal cells in the maternal blood. We aimed to compare the expression of maternal and fetus genomes to determi- ne potential fetal microchimeric cells markers. Introduction: The aim of this study is to describe the association between Materials and Methods: The experimental material consisted of 5 ml of peri- fetal echogenic bowel (FEB) durEinSgH thGe s2e0co1n5d |t rGimLeAstSerG aOndW ad, vSeCrsOe TpeL-ANpDh,e rUalK b l|o oWd WfroWm .wEoSmHenG i.nO thReG second trimester of pregnancy, who un5d7er- rinatal outcome and to compare additional findings that contribute to theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index went amniocentesis procedure. Analysis was based on CD34 positive cells. 5% incremental yield in fetuses with increased NT and normal karyotype. Cells were isolated from blood samples and were subsequently cultured P S01
.27 to obtain the targeted line of hematopoietic colonies. After the incubation Role of hereditary thrombophilia and antiphospholipid syndrome in period, single erythroid colonies were collected and analyzed by means of pregnancy complications and recurrent miscarriages in IVF programs microarray technology using GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 ST Array. S. Zhukovskaya, S. J. Zhukovskaya, K. Mosse, N. Rumiantsava; Results: The analysis showed statistically significant differences in the ex- Center of Reproductive Medicine, Minsk, Belarus. pression of 958 genes between maternal and fetal cells. Most of the genes (n = 591) showed higher expression in the fetus relative to the expression of the mother‘s genome. A total of 367 genes showed decreased expression in Introduction: Screening for hereditary thrombophilia and APS in women the fetus. Initial protocols were developed for culture and identification of undergoing IVF proved to reduce miscarriage and pregnancy complications fetal cells in the maternal blood. risk, to minimize thrombotic complications. Conclusions: The use of cell culture enables multiplication of the cells and Materials and Methods: 420 women with pregnancy loss or preterm birth reduces the volume of maternal blood sample necessary for the analysis. after IVF were examined for hereditary thrombophilia and APS. Women Transcriptome analysis of cells shows expression of specific genes, which diagnosed with these conditions were administered antiaggregant thera- may be used as markers for the identification of fetal cells. py (aspirin, low-molecular-weight heparin), high doses of folic acid (5 mg P S01
.25 daily), vitamin B12 (in cases of MTHFR gene polymorphism and elevated First Report of Prenatal Diagnosis for Severe Genodermatoses in homocysteine concentration). Egypt Results: 232 women (55.2%) were diagnosed with thrombophilia - 145 of K. S. Amr, G. El Kammah, M. Farag, H. Nasr, K. Gaber; them had hereditary thrombophilia (34.5%), 41 of them presented eleva- National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. ted homocysteine levels (9.8%); APS was found in 87 women (20.7%). The structure of hereditary thrombophilia carriers (145 cases): heterozygous mutation 1691G>A Leiden in F5 gene - 11 women (7.6%), heterozygous po- Introduction: Genodermatoses are mostly severe inherited disorders. A lymorphism G20210A in F2-prothrombine gene - 6 (4.1%), compound he- great success in identifying responsible genes & characterizing mutations terozygous carriers of 1691G>A Leiden + G20210A - 3 (2.1%), homozygous within such genes paved the road for DNA-based prenatal diagnosis. Ex- carriers of 677Т/Т in MTHFR gene - 38 (26.2%), compound heterozygous amples of severe genodermatoses candidate for prenatal diagnosis include carriers of 677T + 1298С in MTHFR gene - 87 (60%). IVF with appropri- autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI), Xerodema pigmentosa ate thrombotic complications prophylaxis was performed for 145 women (XPA), Sjögren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) and papillon lefeuvre syndrome with hereditary thrombophilia, 67 cases resulted in pregnancy (46.2%). (PLS) where clinical severity affects span &/or quality of life hence urging Pregnancies ended with term birth - 46 (68.7%), preterm delivery (32-36 prenatal diagnosis. weeks) - 12 (17.9%), reproductive failures - 9 (13.4%), which included 5 Materials and methods: The study included five amniotic samples (AF) from miscarriages in 1st trimester (7.5%), 3 in 2nd trimester (4.4%), 1 ectopic carrier mothers descending from five pedigrees with history of affected sibs pregnancy (1.5%). with severe genodermatoses including; two mothers of previous ARCI ca- Conclusion: Screening for hereditary thrombophilia and APS reduces risk of ses, one XPA, one SLS and one PLS. DNA was extracted from AF samples by miscarriages and pregnancy complications in IVF procedures; and should QIA gene extraction kit followed by mutational screening for XPA, TGM1, be widely recommended, especially for women with thrombotic complicati- ALDH3A2 and CTSC genes. ons or reproductive failures in anamnesis. Results: prenatal diagnosis was successfully performed in all cases. For the PM01.28 family with history of XPA, the fetus was found to be heterozygous carrier Association of a HRG polymorphism with ovarian reserve and for  E111
X mutation; For ALDH3A2 gene the fetus was affected for  E331
X response to ovarian stimulation in women undergoing assisted nonsense mutation; for TGM1 gene the two fetuses were heterozygous car- reproductive treatment riers for R264W, R143H missense mutations. The fifth AF sample PLS sho- D. Tohlob1,2, S. Roberts3, C. Cerra1,4, P. Pemberton5, L. Mohiyiddeen4, W. Newman1,6; wed homozygous wild type genotype. 1Manchester center for genomic medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, Conclusion: The high incidence of consanguinity & consequently AR rare United Kingdom, 2Clinical Pathology Departement, Faculty of medicine, Mansoura disorders combined with the lack of curative therapy, points to the impor- university, Mansoura, Egypt, 3Centre for Biostatistics, Institute of Population Health, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre (MAHSC), University of Manchester, tance of implementing preventive programs. Prenatal diagnosis and genetic Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Department of Reproductive Medicine, St. Mary‘s counseling represent an important step in prevention & alleviating the bur- Hospital, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, den of severe genodermatoses on the family & community. United Kingdom, 5Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Central Manchester Foundation PM01.26 Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Incremetal yield of Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization above Foundation Trust,Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre (MAHSC), Manchester, United Kingdom. karyotyping in Fetal Increased Nuchal Translucency - A systematic review and meta-analysis A. Borrell1, M. Grande1, F. Jansen2, Y. Blumenfeld3, A. Fisher4, A. Odibo5, M. Haak2; 1Institute Gynecology, Obstetrics and Neonatology.Hospital Clínic Barcelona, Barcelona, Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) is a plasma protein involved in many bio- Spain, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Obstetrics and Fetal Medicine, logical processes, including fibrinolysis, coagulation, apoptosis and angiHoRgeG-, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Stanford University School nesis. These processes are important in oocyte development of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 4Elliot Health System, Manchester, Manchester, and pregnancy. In a recent Swedish sitnu vdiyt,r oa homozygous variant in NH, United States, 5Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Division of Maternal Fetal c.633C>T was associated with poor ovarian respoHnRsGe during the 1assessment Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, United States. of women undergoing assessment for fertilization (IVF). The aim of our study was to investigate whether c.633C>T is associated with the ovarian reserve markers follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), an- Objective: To perform a systematic review of the literature and meta-analy- tral follicle count (AFC), and anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) and ovarian sis and estimate the incremental yield of genomic microarray over karyoty- response (numHbeRrG o f eggs retrieved, and gonadotropin dose required) to ping in fetuses with increased nuchal translucency (NT) diagnosed by first controlled ovarian hyper-stimulation. trimester prenatal ultrasound. We genotyped c.633C>T in 517 women, attending a tertiary referral Method: All articles identified in PubMed and Ovid, from January 2009 to centre for reproductive medicine, undergoing their first cycle of controlled September 2014 describing copy number variants (CNVs) in fetuses with ovarian hyper-stimulation for IVF/ICSI. We found no evidence of any signi- increased NT were included. Search terms were: fetal or prenatal, nuchal fHicRaGnt difference (p value <0.05) in FSH, AFC, AMH, the number of eggs re- translucency or cystic hygroma or ultrasound anomaly, array comparative trieved, or the gonadotropin dose used between individuals with different genomic hybridization or copy number variants, with related search terms. genotypes. Case reports and studies using conventional comparative genomic hybridi- These results indicate that this variant does not provide clinically relevant zation were excluded. data on which to base the individualization of the treatment of women Results: Seventeen publications met the inclusion criteria for the analysis. A undergoing IVF/ICSI. 5% (95% CI 2.0-8.0) incremental yield by microarray was obtained pooling Ref. 1. the results. Stratified analysis demonstrated a 4% (95% CI 2.0-7.0) incre- mental yield for isolated NT and 7.0% (95% CI 2.0-12) when other malfor- mations are present.  C5
on8clusion: The review found that the useE oS f gH enG o m2 i0 c 1 m5 ic r| o G arL raA y S prG ovO idW es, aS COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S01
.29 Genetic associations for hypospadias: review of current knowledge and replication me rearrangements. Recently, several recurrent X-chromosome microdele- L. F. M. van der Zanden1, N. van Leeuwen1, R. R. Makkinje2,3, W. F. J. Feitz4, N. tions (located in subtelomeric region of the long arm) were reported to be Roeleveld1,5; associated with male infertility in Spanish and Italian males (Lo Giacco et 1Department for Health Evidence, Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute al., 2014). The aim of our study was to test their prevalence and infertility for Health Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud association in population of men from the Czech Republic. university medical center, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Materials and Methods: 146 males with idiopathic nonobstructive infertility Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Psychiatry, Radboud university medical were compared to 109 males with normal fecundity. X-chormosome micro- center, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Urology-Pediatric urology, Radboudumc Amalia Children’s Hospital, deletions were assessed by +/- PCR with three primer pairs for each region Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatrics, Xcnv64 (Xq27.3), Xcnv67 (Xq28) and Xcnv69 (Xq28). The latter microdele- Radboudumc Amalia Children’s Hospital, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, tion was also complemented with amplification across the deleted region, Netherlands. dividing the deletion into three types. Background Results: We detected presence of Xcnv64 in 10 patients and 12 controls, Xcnv69 in 5 patients and 4 controls (3, 1 and 1 patient vs. 3, 1 and 0 control for types A, B and C respectively). Thus the frequency was comparable in Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external ge- patient and control groups (Fisher´s exact test P>>0.05). The patient with nMiteatlhiao dwsith a multifactorial etiology. We identified all genetic associations Xcnv69 type C deletion also carries Xcnv64 deletion. This may indicate a reported for hypospadias and tried to replicate the most promising ones. more extensive rearrangement with putative causal potential. Conclusion: Association of X-chromosome microdeletions at Xq27.3 and After a thorough literature search and SNP selection, we used Taqman as- Xq28 with male infertility could not be confirmed for Czech males. One pati- says to genotype seven SNPs in 816 Caucasian nonsyndromic hypospadias ent may carry a larger rearrangement that will be further dissected. pRaetsiuenlttss and 668 population-based controls derived from the AGORA data- Supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic grant No. and biobank in the Netherlands. NT/12269-5 DGKK P S01
.33 When excluding studies using microarDraGyKsK p erformed after our SNP selec- Maternal plasma microbiome detection by analyzing sequencing data tion, 36 polymorphisms in and 67 polymorphisms in 16 other genes of non-invasive prenatal test were identified. We already examined successfully in our cohort and H. Wang, F. Jiang, Y. Wang, Y. Gao; this gene was also associated with hypospadias in several other Caucasian BGI Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. populations, but much less strong in a Chinese. Many of the polymorphis- ms in other genes were found not to be associated with hypospadias, had a MAF<2% iHnS CDa1u7cBa3siaEnSsR, 1orE wSRer2e AreTpFe3ats orM dAeMleLtiDo1ns, while four SNPs had Introduction already been studied in our cohort. Therefore, we selected seven SNPs in MPS-based non-invasive prenatal test not just supply an effective method the genes ESR2 , , , and for this study. None of for detecting chromosome abnormality, but accumulate large amount of se- the SNPs was associated with hypospadias, with the possible exception of quence data of plasma cell free DNA. Main purpose of this research is unfol- rs944050 in (OR=1.5, p=0.045). This association was in the same di- ding the plasma microbiome through using NIPT sequencing data. A whole rCeocnticolnu saiso nins a Swedish study and in the opposite direction compared to a scene of exogenous organism in human blood would be presented, together Japanese study. with exploring differences between T21-positive and T21-negtive samples. Materials and Methods Summarizing all currently reported genetic association studies on hypospa- A cohort of 40,934 plasma samples undergone NIFT test was obtained. Se- dias shows that risk polymorphisms differ between populations. This stres- quencing reads mapped on human reference were filtered out. The remai- ses the importance of studying generalizability of genetic association results ning non-human reads were assembled to contigs by five different pipelines. and points towards the need for gene-environment interaction analyses. Contigs were annotated by Nucleotide database and then classified into PM01.30 different taxonomy groups. Each sample’s raw reads were then remapped A family with deafness-infertility syndrome presenting in two to the constructed reference contig set. Clustering analysis was performed. generations Moreover, non-human sequence abundance of trisome 21 samples and nor- P. Skiba, P. Karpinski, M. Sasiadek, K. Pesz; mal samples were calculated separately. Wroclaw Medical University Department of Genetics, Wroclaw, Poland. Result 15,350 contigs being annotated on nucleotide database constructed a refe- rence set and classified into 16 taxonomic categories. The non-human rate Only few families with deafness and infertility syndrome, a contiguous gene of T21-positive group and T21-negtive group did not show significant dif- deletion syndrome at 15q15.3 locus, have been described so far. ference. However, remap rate of Trisomy 21 samples was lower than that It is rare and inherited as an autosomal recessive trait (homozygous for the of non-trisomy samples. In addition, cluster analysis showed a remarkable deletion females present with deafness whereas males with infertility and correlation between microbiome abundance distribution and sampling geo- deafness). graphy locations. We present a family with two generations affected by sensorineural hearing Conclusions loss (mother and two sons). Both sons were diagnosed with infertility, one This research built a reference set of plasma microbiome and demonstrated of them had a child through assisted reproductivCeA tTeSchPnEoRl2ogy. the complexity of plasma microbita. Moreover, differences of the microbi- UsiSnTgR tChe array CGH method the deleted region in the proband has been de- ome between T21-positive and T21-negtive samples would supply evi- scribed to encompass 55 kb. It includes the gene and a major part dences for enhancing the prenatal test and assisting the detection of some of , linked to infertility and deafness, respectively. The mother of the other diseases. proband has also a homozygous deletion in the region whereas the father PM01.34 is a heterozygote. Hsa-let-7c miRNA as a potential biomarker for congenital heart For confirmation of the deletion a PCR was performed for an STR marker disease and no products have been found in the proband and the mother. O. Biro, B. Nagy, J. Schönleber, J. Rigo Jr, L. Lazar; The genotypes and the phenotypes of all affected individuals in the family Semmelweis University, 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Budapest, Hungary. are discussed in detail. A family with deafness-infertility syndrome presenting in two generations PM01.32 Background: Congenital heart defects (CHD) are the most common fetal Recurrent microdeletions at Xq27.3-Xq28 are not associated with malformations and often correlated with chromosomal abnormalities. The- infertility of males from the Czech Republic re is a great need for biomarkers which could detect CHD early with high B. Chylikova1, I. Hrdlicka1, K. Veselá1, K. Rezabek2, F. Liska1; accuracy. The miRNAs are short, non-coding RNA molecules that play im- 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Department of portant role in regulation of eukaryotic gene expression. Let-7c miRNA is Obstetrics and Gynaecology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and located on the human chromosome 21 and broadly expressed by the major General University Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic. types of cardiovascular cells. Recent studies revealed the possible role of let- 7c in heart development; therefore we hypothesize that it can be associated with CHD. Introduction: Genetic causes of mEaSleH inGfe 2rt0ili1ty5 a |r eG hLypAoSthGesOizWed, tSo CinOvoTlvLeA NPDu,r pUosKe :| BWasWed Won. EoSurH pGre.vOioRusG results, let-7c is significantly upregul5at9ed multiple types of mutations, from single gene defects to complex chromoso-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index in the circulation of mothers who has fetuses with CHD. In this study, our (1.5%) were cancelled for administrative reasons. Average turn-around- aim was to analyze the let-7c expression in diseased fetal heart samples to time was 3.3 business days. Of 85,298 reported samples, there were 2,142 confirm the miRNA’s importance in pathogenesis of CHD. (2.5%) positive results: 1,858 AD (2.2%) and 284 AS (0.3%); AS results have Patients and methods: We have collected heart samples from fetuses with significantly decreased since 2012. Informative clinical outcomes were avai- CHD and/or trisomy 21 and from healthy controls. Total-miRNA was isola- lable for 851 (39.7%) positive samples. Of 85,298 reported samples, 108 ted from the left ventricles; the quality was checked by UV-VIS spectrometry. (0.13%) AD cases were reported as putative false positives; 15 (0.02%) false Total-miRNA samples were reverse-transcribed. RT-PCR was performed on negatives were reported. The observed overall (all chromosomes) positive the cDNA templates using let-7c specific primers. U6 snRNA was used as pCorendcliuctsiivoen :value was 94.2% for AD samples and 88.9% for AD/AS samples control. combined. The overall observed negative predictive value was over 99.9%. Results: We found significant differences in the let-7c concentrations bet- Test modifications have facilitated a refinement in borderline ween the control and the diseased fetal heart samples: 0.0021±0.00075 ng/ result classification, and improvements in turn-around time and cancellati- µl vs. 0.031±0.041 ng/µl (p<0.05). The highest expression was observed in on rates.Information about clinical performance of NIPS aids in appropriate the cases of trisomy 21 with accompanying CHD. According to our studies pre- and post-test counseling. elevated let-7c expression is associated with CHD and may be ideally suited P S01
.36 as a biomarker for the disease. Comparison of two academic software (RAPIDR and WISECONDOR) P S01
.35 for aneuploidies detection using semiconductor sequencing data in a The genetic stability of human blastocysts can be effectively predicted NIPT process by the copy number of mitochochondrial DNA detected by next J. NECTOUX1, S. Schutz2, N. Chatron3, S. Brun4, P. Gueguen2, L. El Khattabi5, J. Pipoli Da generation sequencing (NGS) Fonseca6, F. Dumont6, A. Sorlin7, M. Quere8, J. Boudjarane9, C. Bonnet7, F. Letourneur6, f. f. wang1, k. Tan2, X. Y. Yin1, Y. Q. Tan2, G. Vajta1, F. Gong2, J. Wang1, B. Xiong3, W. Wang1, A. Lagarde9, C. Schluth Bolard3, E. Guichoux10, A. Campan-Fournier11, B. Arveiler12, P. G. Lin2, G. X. Lu4; Jonveaux7, M. Goossens1, C. Badens9, J. Dupont5, D. Sanlaville3, C. Ferec2, C. Bardel11, M. 1BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 2Central South University, Institute of Reproduction Vidaud1, C. Rooryck12; and Stem Cell Engineering, Changsha, China, 3Reproductive and Genetic Hospital 1Service de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, HUPC Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, of CITIC-Xiangya, Reproductive center, ChangshaHunan, China, Changsha, China, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U1078, CHRU de Brest, Brest, France, 4Reproductive and Genetic Hospital of CITIC-Xiangya, Reproductive center, Changsha, 3HCL, Service de Génétique, UCB L1
, Lyon, France, 4Maternité Centre Aliénor d’Aquitaine, China. CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 5Service de Cytogénétique, APHP-HUPC, INSERM U1016, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 6Plateforme Génomique, Inserm U1016, Summary answer Paris, France, 7Service de Génétique, CHRU Nancy-INSERM U954-Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France, 8Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de l’Archet II, CHU de Nice, Nice, France, 9Département de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU de Marseille, Marseille, France, Is the copy number of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA ) correlated to the gene- 10Plateforme Génome Transcriptome de Bordeaux, INRA Cestas, Bordeaux, France, 11HCL, tic stability and developmental potentiality of blastocysts? Service de Biostatistique, UCB L1
, Lyon, France, 12Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU WStuhodlye dgeesniogmn,e P aamrtpicliifpicaantitosn/ mofa stienrgilael-sc,e slel tatnindg n, emxte tgheondersation sequencing Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. (NGS) can be used to analyze embryo genome and mtDNA. A retrospective study was performed at the Reproductive and Genetic Hos- Based on a statistical analysis of low coverage genome sequencing data, pital of CITIC-Xiangya, and BGI-Health, China, involving 440 couples with in- non-invasive prenatal testing of aneuploidies is being provided in a growing dications to in vitro fertilization treatment, 1528 blastocysts were biopsied numbers of countries. It has proved a major improvement versus classic and frozen embryo transplant was carried out using embryos with balanced screening strategies but still requires invasive procedures when positive. genome. Embryos were subjected to preimplantation genetic diagnosis/ Using five hundred samples included in our French multicenter study, we sMcareinen riensgu ultssin agn nde txht eg ernoelera otifo cnh saenqcueencing (NGS-PGD/PGS) between Octo- aim to validate two different published bioinformatics tools for aneuploidy ber 2011 and September 2014. calling. All patients included had an indicated invasive sampling to achieve fetal karyotype in parallel. The sequencing data covered 5.5% ± 1.2% of the whole human genome WISECONDOR (WIthin SamplE COpy Number aberration DetectOR) and RA- and 98.7% ±3.1% of mtDNA.The copy number of mtDNA in euploid bla- PIDR (Reliable Accurate Prenatal non-Invasive Diagnosis R package) both stocysts was significantly lower than that of the chromosomally abnormal require a reference set of euploid samples. RAPIDR establishes a baseline for blastocysts(291.46 vs 317.39,P<0.001). Significantly reduced copy number confrontation with unknown samples. WISECONDOR uses a “within samp- of mtDNA was also found in blastocysts from young women (age≤35 years) le” normalization algorithm made from the reference set and preventing comparing to blastocysts from the aged women(300.07 vs 322.07,P=0.002). from inter-individual variation. They both use a bin segmentation approach Similarly, The copy number of mtDNA also correlated to the development to take into account the GC-content bias. Different QC metrics are used. Fetal rate of the embryo and the blastocyst quality, blastocysts with higher ran- fraction, a well-known cause for false negative, can be estimated for male kLiinmgi tcaotniotaninsed considerably fewer copies of mtDNA than blastocysts with pregnancies via RAPIDR. WISECONDOR uses an inter-chromosomal concor- lower ranking and poor development(P<0.001). dance test to reduce technical noise. A training set of 50 samples has shown comparable performances regarding False Negative and False Positive rates Complete pregnancy outcomes could not be obtained as some blastocysts for main aneuploidies (T21, T18, T13). The study will focus on the practi- were not transferred yet. Future data collection is warranted. cality for use in routine diagnosis (time of calculation, necessary resources, setting up), reliability of QC metrics and potential discrepancies. PM01.37 Both applications were initially developed using data from Illumina dye se- Utilization of noninvasive prenatal screening and its relevance to quencing technologies. In this study we will demonstrate that semiconduc- clinical practice: Update on clinical outcome metrics on over 85,000 tors sequencing data fit to these two turnkey methods. cases P. Taneja, H. Snyder, E. de Feo, K. Kruglyak, M. Halks-Miller, K. Curnow, S. Bhatt; PM01.38 Illumina, Redwood City, CA, United States. False negative NIPT results for trisomy 13, 18 and 21: risk figures Objective: derived from cytogenetic investigations in chorionic villi D. Van Opstal, M. Srebniak, J. Polak, F. de Vries, C. van den Berg, R. H. Galjaard; The Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. verifi® noninvasive prenatal screen (NIPS) has been available through Background Illumina’s accredited clinical lab since February 2012. Professional socie- ties have published statements supporting the use of NIPS and recommend : Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) demonstrated a small continued test performance monitoring. In follow-up to Illumina’s first pu- chance for a false positive and false negative result. This is partly due to the blished clinical experience paper (Futch et al, June 2013), this study high- fact that the fetal DNA in maternal plasma is derived from the cytotropho- lMigehthtso cdo: ntinued efforts to provide clinically relevant metrics for chromoso- blast of chorionic villi (CV). This cytotrophoblast is not always represen- mes 21, 18, and 13. tative for the fetus because of its embryonic origin (trophoblast) and the Outcome information (karyotype or birth outcome) was requested existence of chromosomal mosaicism. Therefore, accurate cytogenetic stu- from providers for singleton samples reported as aneuploidy detected (AD) dies in CV involve the investigation of both cytotrophoblast (STC-villi) and oRre ssuulstsp:e cted (AS) for chromosomes 21, 18, or 13. Voluntary outcome repor- mesenchymal core, the latter having the same embryonic origin as the fetus ting was encouraged for all discordant outcomes. itsetlhf.o Wdes :c alculated the risk for a false negative trisomy 13, 18 and 21 NIPT Of 86,658 cases, 85,298 (98.4%) met inclusion criteria for NIPS re- result of a biological nature based on our experience with CV. su6l0t reporting, 101 (0.1%) were cancelleE d S foH r G te c2 h0 ni1 ca5 l r| e G asL onA sS aG ndO 1W 25, 9 S COMTeLANDA, llU caKs e|s W of WfetWal t.rEisSoHmyG 1.3O, 1R8G and 21 among 5967 CV samples ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index pregnancies at high risk that were cytogenetically investigated in our centre tCroancecslu sshioown sno evidence of segmental abnormality and may suggest the pla- bReetswueltesn: January 2000 and December 2011, were retrospectively studied centa is mostly 45,X. for the presence of a normal karyotype or mosaicism < 30% in STC-villi. : Isochromosomes arise from an error in centromere division 404 cases of trisomies 13, 18 and 21 were found amongst 5967 during meiosis or mitosis. Most are de novo and mosaic in origin, conse- samples. Of these 404 cases, 14 (3,7%) had a normal or low mosaic karyo- quently having variable impact on developing embryologic tissues. As NIPT type in STC-villi and therefore would potentially be missed with NIPT. It in- reflects placenta tissue, results may be concordant or discordant with am- vCoolnvceldu 2si %on (5/242) of all trisomy 21 cases and 7.3% (9/123) of all trisomy niocentesis studies. NIPT can lend insight into the timing and origin of such 18 cases. complex events and help explain inconsistencies between testing modali- : In 1:426 (14/5967) NIPT samples of patients at high risk, a tri- ties. somy 18 or 21 will be missed due to the biological phenomenon of absence PM01.42 of the chromosome aberration in the cytotrophoblast. Comparison of NIPT clinical performance in 72,382 high-risk P S01
.39 pregnant women and 40,287 low-risk pregnant women Identification of 22q11 microdeletions by noninvasive prenatal Y. Gao, H. Zhang, F. Jiang, F. Chen, W. Wang; testing (NIPT) - one year of clinical experience BGI, Shenzhen, China. R. M. McCullough1, T. Boomer1, J. Wardrop1, J. Hume1, W. B. Paxton1, N. Dharajiya1, J. Saldivar1, T. Monroe2, D. H. Farkas3; 1Sequenom Laboratories, San Diego, CA, United States, 2Sequenom Laboratories, NIPT has been applied in prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy with re- Morrisville, NC, United States, 3Sequenom Laboratories, Grand Rapids, MI, United States. markable advances. However, clinical data from large scale of NIPT practice in the general population has not been reported. We prospectively analyze NIPT performance in 147,314 pregnancies with singleton and twins from Introduction: NIPT for fetal aneuploidies has become routine practice in 508 hospitals from January 1, 2012 to August 31, 2013, which is the largest pregnancy management. A whole genome approach enables detecting sub- clinical experience to-date. NIPT sensitivity and specificity were validated chromosomal events by employing a novel algorithm that uses low coverage by karyotyping confirmation for positive cases and clinical follow-up of ne- sequencing data. The output for detected fetal microdeletion events is akin gative cases, showing comparable if not better performance comparing to to data from conventional microarray analysis of invasive testing. previous studies in small scale of high-risk population in detecting T21, T18, Methods: Maternal blood samples submitted to Sequenom Laboratories and T13. A performance comparison was also performed between the high- were subjected to DNA extraction and library preparation followed by who- risk group and the low-risk group, which were divided based on maternal le genome massively parallel sequencing. Sequencing data were analyzed age, prenatal screening results, nuchal translucency measurement, family using an algorithm to detect subchromosomal events such as 22q11 micro- history and previous pregnancy of aneuploidy, showing the equivalent ef- deletions. Results: The MaterniT21® PLUS test identified 32 cases with a fectiveness of NIPT in the low-risk population as in the high-risk popula- 22q11 deletion. For twenty-one cases diagnostic invasive testing was per- tion. In the total population, NIPT false positive and false negative results formed and for all cases the 22q11 deletion was confirmed. Eleven cases did were investigated for their corresponding reasons. Biological factors such as not have invasive testing results available. Seven of these cases had clinical maternal background and mosaicism were the major reasons causing NIPT findings of complex heart defects or Tetralogy of Fallot consistent with the false positive and false negative results. Our data supports the use of NIPT in NIPT result. For the remaining four cases, no clinical signs were identified the general population to screen for T21, T18, and T13. and outcomes were pending. Thus far no confirmed false positives have P S01
.43 been identified. One of the confirmed cases was a twin gestation where one Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing for the most common aneuploidies twin was positive for the 22q deletion. (trisomies 21, 18, and 13) using a semiconductor-sequencing Conclusion: It is imperative when testing for rare conditions that tests per- platform: a French multicenter pilot study form with the utmost specificity to yield high positive predictive values. By S. Brun1, P. Gueguen2, L. El Khattabi3, N. Chatron4, J. Nectoux5, S. Schutz2, J. Pipoli da using a whole genome sequencing approach, we have demonstrated that this Fonseca6, E. Guichoux7, A. Sorlin8, M. Quere9, J. Boudjarane10, C. Bonnet8, F. Letourneur6, objective is achievable. This abstract provides further evidence to broaden C. Schluth-Bolard4, P. Jonveaux8, C. Bardel11, V. Paquis-Fluckinger9, S. Bannwarth9, B. the scope of non-invasive testing to detect subchromosomal deletion/dupli- Arveiler12, M. Goossens13, C. Badens10, J. Dupont3, C. Rooryck12, D. Sanlaville4, C. Ferec2, cation events and the potential to derive fetal karyotypes in the future. M. Vidaud5; 1Maternité Centre Aliénor d’Aquitaine, CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 2Laboratoire PM01.40 de génétique moléculaire, INSERM U1078, CHRU de Brest, Brest, France, 3Service de When isochromosomes and noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) Cytogénétique, APHP-HUPC, INSERM U1016, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, collide: The technical and clinical challenges of piecing together 4HCL, Service de Génétique, UCB L1
, Lyon, France, 5Service de Biochimie et Génétique puzzling cases Moléculaire, HUPC Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 6Plateforme génomique – Inserm T. A. Boomer1, N. D. Loia2, L. Bensen3, M. N. Strecker4, J. Wardrop1, T. J. Monroe5, R. U1016, Paris, France, 7Plateforme Génome Transcriptome de Bordeaux, INRA Cestas, McCullough1, J. Saldivar1, N. Dharajiya1; Bordeaux, France, 8Service de génétique-CHRU Nancy-INSERM U954-Université de 1Sequenom Laboratories, San Diego, CA, United States, 2New Jersey Perinatal Associates, Lorraine, Nancy, France, 9Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de l’Archet II, CHU Livingston, NJ, United States, 3St. Joseph‘s Hospital - Perinatal Assessment Unit, Tucson, de Nice, Nice, France, 10Département de génétique médicale, CHU Timone, Marseille, AZ, United States, 4CombiMatrix, Irvine, CA, United States, 5Sequenom Laboratories, France, 11HCL, Service de Biostatistique, CNRS UMR 5558, UCB L1
, Lyon, France, 12Service Morrisville, NC, United States. de Génétique Médicale, CHU Bordeaux, Université Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 13Service de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, HUPC Hôpital Cochin, Bordeaux, France. Background :Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) uses circulating cell free DNA for the evaluation of fetal chromosomal abnormalities. Whole genome Combined first-trimester screening has improved prenatal screening for sequencing combined with advanced bioinformatics enables detailed inter- trisomy 21. However the number of unnecessary invasive diagnostic proce- rogation of a variety of complex chromosomal changes. Here we highlight dures still remains high. Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) using massi- tCharseee 1c:a mseos si n4v7o,XlvXin,+gi (is1o8c)h(rpo1m0s)o[3m]e/s4 6an,XdX r[e1l6a]te their NIPT results to dia- vely parallel sequencing of cell-free fetal DNA from maternal plasma, which gnostic and clinical outcomes. is now part of the prenatal landscape, should drastically diminish the risk associated with invasive techniques. Several publications have established NIPT performed at 12 weeks gestation indicated Trisomy 18. CVS chromo- NIPT’s effectiveness using mainly the Illumina sequencing technology. somes revealed a mosaic marker chromosome and microarray detected an A French consortium of seven academic hospitals collaborates to validate a 18p duplication. Fetal ultrasound was normal. Amniocentesis chromosomes common protocol and to evaluate the efficiency and reliability of NIPT of the rCeavseea 2le:d i dmico(sYa)ic(iqs1m1 f.2or) [a1 5su]pernumerary isochromosome 18p. NIPT traces most common chromosomal aneuploidies using a semiconductor-sequen- corroborated duplication of 18p. cing platform. Indeed many French laboratories are already equipped with this technology. NIPT performed at 12 weeks gestation indicated Turner Syndrome. Fetal ul- A total of 500 pregnant women (between 12.3 and 35 weeks of gestation) trasound showed male genitalia. Amniocentesis chromosomes and microar- who presented a high risk of aneuploidy and underwent fetal karyotyping rCaays er e3v:e 4a6le,dX ,ia(nX )is(oqd1i0c)e[n1t3ri]c/ 4Yp5., XD[i7s]cordant NIPT results may suggest the were included in a prospective study. 15 % of these patients presented a placenta is mostly 45,X, though traces reflect presence of Yp material. fetus with one of the most common aneuploidies: trisomies 21, 18 and 13. The NIPT results matched the fetal karyotyping results in all of the cases: all NIPT performed at 10 weeks gestation indicated Turner Syndrome. Fetal trisomies were detected. The analysis of whole genome sequencing data (in- ultrasound was normal other than a clubbed foot. Amniocentesis chromo- cluding notably librairies quantification, total raw reads per sample, estima- somes revealed a mosaic karyotyEpSe HinGclu 2d0in1g 5an | iGsoLchArSomGoOsoWme, SXqC. ONTIPLTA NtDe o, fU pKla s|m Wa WfetaWl D.ENSAH frGac.tOionR)G enabled us to establish the quality crit6e1riaABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Clinic of gynecology and obstetrics, Medical faculty, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Toxicology and Genetics, required for its use in routine diagnosis. The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Macedonian Academy of Sciences NIPT using a semiconductor-sequencing platform is a rapid and cost-effec- and Arts, Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D. Efremov”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 4School for Biological tive alternative technology, and represents an attractive approach for large and Biomedical sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom. scale population NIPT. PM01.44 Validation of abnormal non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) by Introduction: RhD blood group incompatibility between an RhD-negative conventional testing technologies - Tel Aviv Medical Center experience mother and an RhD-positive fetus followed by allosensitization and pro- M. Goldstein1, A. Bar-Shira1, D. Barel1, S. Simchoni1, H. More1, D. Konik1, T. Naiman1, I. duction of maternal anti-D antibodies is still the major reason for hemolytic Kaplan-Ber1, A. Orr-Urtreger1,2, Y. Yaron1,2, A. Reches1; 1The Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2The Sackler disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN). Routine antenatal and postnatal Faculty of Medicine,Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. anti-D prophylaxis has reduced the risk of RhD alloimmunization to 0.05- 0.4%. However about 10-20% of RhD-negative mothers would receive un- necessary prophylaxis. Non-invasive diagnostic methods employing cell free Accurate assessment of fetal aneuploidy risk is important for genetic coun- fetal DNA (cffDNA) from maternal blood overcome the risks associated with seling in order to facilitate informed reproductive choices while avoiding invasive procedures used for fetal RHD genotyping. unnecessary pregnancy loss due to invasive testing. Recent non-invasive Materials and Methods: We aimed to evaluate the results from non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) using cell free DNA screens for common aneuploi- fetal RHD typing using cffDNA from maternal plasma in a group of 24 RhD- dies and some microdeletion syndromes. This technology is offered in Is- negative women with confirmed singleton pregnancy before receiving their rael since 2012 as an out-of-pocket service. Abnormal results are usually first prophylactic dose of anti-RhD-IgG. RHD genotyping was done using followed-up with invasive testing. We hereby describe our experience with real-time PCR amplification of exon 5 and 7 of RHD gene. such cases. Results: Of the 24 RhD-negative pregnant women 5 (20.8%) were in the first During the years 2013-2014, twenty one women underwent invasive testing trimester (7±2 GW) and 19 (79.1%) were in their second trimester (20.4±2.6 in our institution due to abnormal NIPT results. These included 10 cases at GW). 20.8% (5/24) were in their third pregnancy and in the second trime- risk for trisomy 21, 5 for sex chromosome aneuploidy (SCA), 2 for trisomy ster. Non-invasive fetal-RhD typing showed that 20.8% (5/24) of the fetuses 13, one for trisomy 18 and 3 for a suspected microdeletion. QF-PCR was per- were RHD negative. Three of them were in the second trimester and 2 in the formed in 14 of the 18 cases at risk for aneuploidy, all cases underwent full first trimester, but to mothers in their second and third pregnancy. karyotyping. Chromosome microarray analysis (CMA) was performed for Conclusions: These results although limited, clearly show that non-invasive cases at risk for microdeletions. fetal-RhD typing using cffDNA from maternal plasma can be used as a me- The overall rate of discordant results in our series was 40%. The highest de- thod in clinical practice for targeted anti-RhD prophylaxis and improvement tection rate was for Down syndrome with a positive predictive value (PPV) of management of RHD fetomaternal incompatibility. of 90%. The PPV for SCA was 60% (3 of 5). None of the 3 cases suspected for P S01
.49 trisomies 13 and 18 were confirmed by karyotyping. Likewise, none of the 3 Experiences of high-risk pregnant women who were offered a choice cases suspected for microdeletion were detected by CMA. between non-invasive prenatal testing, invasive testing or no follow- Validation of abnormal NIPT results by conventional invasive procedures up test remains the gold standard and is essential for establishing fetal status, also R. V. van Schendel1, G. C. M. L. Page-Christiaens2, L. Beulen3, C. M. Bilardo4, M. A. de demonstrating the importance of physician education regarding the limita- Boer1, A. B. C. Coumans5, B. H. W. Faas3, I. M. van Langen4, K. D. Lichtenbelt2, M. C. van Maarle6, M. V. E. Macville5, D. Oepkes7, E. Pajkrt6, L. Henneman1; tions of NIPT. 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center P S01
.45 Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Massively Parallel Sequencing (MPS) reliably identifies trisomy 21, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Maastricht 18, and 13 in maternal plasma with low-level fetal cell-free DNA UMC+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 6Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, fractions. 7Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. S. Bono, F. Pizzuti, M. Mariano, A. Polverari, S. Duca, G. Cottone, A. Nuccitelli, M. Sessa, F. Spinella, M. Baldi, F. Fiorentino; GENOMA GROUP, Rome, Italy. Objective: The TRIDENT study evaluates the implementation of non-invasi- ve prenatal testing (NIPT) in the Dutch healthcare system. Here we report on the preferences and experiences of high-risk pregnant women who were Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) detects common fetal aneuploidies by offered a choice between NIPT, invasive testing or no follow-up test. analyzing cell-free DNA (cfDNA). Current methods use massive parallel se- Methods: A nationwide prospective cohort study among pregnant women quencing (MPS) or targeted sequencing. Several studies have reported that at high-risk for fetal aneuploidy because of first-trimester screening re- NIPT accuracy is substantially affected by low-level of fetal fraction (FF), re- sults (risk >1:200) or medical history. Questionnaires were completed after ferred as to the fetal component of total (maternal + fetal) cfDNA. Targeted counselling (n=1,106, 86% response) and after test-results (n=686, 67% sequencing-based NIPT approaches use a 4% FF cut-off, below this value a response), at seven (of the eight) prenatal diagnostic centres. redraw is requested. However, data describing the limit of detection (LOD) Results: The majority of respondents (92%) preferred NIPT, 5% invasive at low FFs is lacking. Here, we determine the LOD for a MPS-based NIPT. testing, 2% were unsure, and 1% declined testing. Main reason to prefer Serial dilutions were made using 26 confirmed fetal aneuploidy samples NIPT was safety for the child (92%). Of the 60 women preferring invasive with a known FF. Each aneuploidy sample was mixed with a euploid samp- testing, 52% did so because of test-accuracy, 25% desired more rapid test- le to create 6 samples with effective aneuploid FFs of 1-4%. Additionally, results, 5% because it provides more information, and 18% reported other NIPT was performed on 1998 pregnancies with confirmed outcomes. Fe- reasons. Most women (92%) felt that they made a well-informed decision, tal fraction was determined in aneuploid and male samples using MPS tag and 75% reported that this decision was easy to make. Intention to termi- counting. nate the pregnancy for Down syndrome was lower among women choosing Dilution experiments revealed a LOD of 2% for Trisomy (T) 21, and 1.5% NIPT (58%) vs. invasive testing (87%). Women were highly satisfied with for T18 and T13. All (26/26) aneuploidy pregnancy samples were detec- NIPT. However, 64% perceived the waiting time for NIPT results (mean:11 ted; 15.4% (4/26) had a FF of 2-4%, none were <2%. Of 1056 euploid male days (range 5-32)) as too long, while 3% in retrospect would have preferred samples, 23 (2.2%) had a FF <2% and 64 (6.1%) had a FF between 2-4%. All a different follow-up test, mostly to avoid the long waiting time. NIPT data were concordant. Conclusion: Most pregnant women felt they could make an informed deci- Our MPS-based NIPT detected aneuploidies down to 2% FF; 6% of samples sion. The majority prefers NIPT, mainly because it has no miscarriage risk. had a FF in the 2-4% range. Assay LOD should be determined prior to clini- Reducing turnaround time for test-results is our next challenge in meeting cal application, as this establishes an appropriate cut-off that lowers the risk women’s needs. of false negative results and avoids unnecessary test cancellations. PM01.50 PM01.46 Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) of aneuploidy by means of Non invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of RHD using cell free fetal next-generation sequencing (NGS) in high-risk pregnancies of fetal DNA (cffDNA) from maternal plasma as a method for targeted anti abnormalities. The first experience in Russia. RhD prophylaxis E. Shubina1, E. Baranova2, N. Karetnikova1, D. Korostin1, A. Ekimov1, A. Gus1, V. M. Madjunkov1,2, S. Madjunkova3,2, M. Mircevska3, T. Madgett4, N. Avent4, D. Plaseska- Bakharev1, N. Tetruashvili1, D. Trofimov1, G. Sukhikh1; Karanfilska3; 1Federal State Budget Institution „Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and 62 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Perinatology“ Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal State Budget Institution, Moscow, Russian Federation. assay in a blinded set of 480 ccfDNA samples with fetal genotypes ortho- gonally validated by the MaterniT21® PLUS Laboratory Developed Test. Introduction: General prenatal screening estimates only indirect markers, Samples were sequenced at a mean depth of 2.3 million reads per sample such as fetal ultrasound and maternal serum biomarkers. Chorionic villus with 432 (90%) assayed samples returning a result. Using orthogonal NIPT sampling or amniocentesis are highly precision but carry a risk of 1-3% of results as a reference for each individual, we detected 31/31 T21 samples cases procedure-related miscarriage. Non-invasive prenatal testing is active- and 14/16 T18 samples. No false positive results were observed. This stu- ly put into practice after discovered fetal cell-free DNA in maternal blood. dy introduces a novel NIPT aneuploidy detection approach using targeted Objective: To evaluate the possibility of using non-invasive prenatal testing sequencing of paired homologous regions and establishes proof of concept of aneuploidy by means of next-generation sequencing (NGS) in high-risk for a low-cost, highly scalable method for the identification of selected fetal pregnancies of chromosomal fetal abnormalities. Materials and Methods: aneuploidies with performance and non-reportable rates similar to some Chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis was done on 200 pregnant wo- other published methods. men at 11-14 (n=165) or 17-20 (n=35) weeks of gestation due to abnormal P S01
.53 maternal serum screening, increase in nuchal translucency and advanced Discordant results for sex chromosomal aneuploidies from maternal age. Pregnant women also donate blood samples before having the noninvasive prenatal testing invasive test. NIPT samples were analyzed using low-coverage whole-geno- R. RAYNOVA, I. Bradinova, K. Vladimirova, A. Savov; me sequencing of plasma cell-free DNA. Z-score was used for fetal aneuplo- National Genetic Laboratory,University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, idy detection and the results were validated by karyotyping confirmation. Bulgaria. Results: Aneuploidies were confirmed in 17 of 17 T21-positive cases, 8 of 8 T18-positive cases, and 1 of 2 T13-positive cases. 2 false negative cases were identified, both T21 cases, and 1 false positive case - T13. The principal In the human fetus sex chromosome aneuploidies (SCA) have the same pre- factor contributing to NIPT false positive result was placental mosaicism, valence as the common autosomal aneuploidies 21, 18, 13. Non-invasive whereas false negative results were due to low fetal fraction (<4%). prenatal testing (NIPT) of cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) for fetal aneuploidy Conclusions: At this time, NIPT may be an option for women classified as risk assessment has been shown to be both highly sensitive and highly spe- high-risk of aneuploidy, especially in pregnant women with advanced age. cific for trisomy 21. However, it is less sensitive for trisomies 18, 13 and Additional studies are needed to introduce NIPT into the routine workflow sex chromosome aneuploidies. Discrepancies between positive NIPT result of prenatal care. and fetal karyotype on chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis may oc- cur. The source of aneuploidy may be due to maternal mosaicism, maternal P S01
.51 malignancy, true fetal mosaicism, a demised co-twin, an anembryonic sac, Non-invasive prenatal screening plus (NIPS+) for fetal trisomy 2 and confined placental mosaicism. trisomy 5 mosaicism cases H. Chia-Cheng1,2, L. Tzu-Hung3, S. Yi-Ning1,3,4; We present two cases of a 31-year-old woman, pregnant in 18 gestational 1Sofiva Genomics, Co., Ctd., Taipei, Taiwan, 2Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics weeks and a 34-year-old woman, also pregnant in 18 gestational weeks. and Proteomics, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, Both were referred to our Unit for amniocentesis due to positive NIPT for 3Dianthus Maternal Fetal Medicine Clinic, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department of Obstetrics and SCA: risk for monosomy X, for the first patient and risk for Kleinfelter’s syn- Gynecology, School of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. drome for the second. The ultrasound scans were unremarkable. DNA was extracted from uncultured amniocytes, amplified with commercial QF-PCR kit and analyzed on ABI 3130. Karyotyping was performed on cultu- Background: Non-invasive prenatal screening plus (NIPS+) has been proven red amniocytes using standard protocol. to be a powerful method for the routinely detection of trisomies 21, 18 and QF-PCR and cytogenetic analysis showed normal results, SCA were exclu- 13. However, few cases have been reported about other rare aneuploidies. ded. Here we describe two cases of fetal trisomy 2 mosaicism and trisomy 5 mo- Both pregnancies were still ongoing, with no pathological findings on fetal saicism identified by NIPS+. morphology ultrasound scans. Cytogenetic and molecular-genetic analyses Methods: We sequenced cell free DNA isolated from maternal plasma ob- are to be done after delivery to reveal the source of the discordant results. tained at 13 and 22 weeks of gestation from two health pregnant woman We expect maternal mosaicism and confined placental mosaicism to be the with a singleton pregnancy. The sequenced data were mapped to human main causes. genome sequence (hg19). Z-scores were calculated for all the 23 pairs of PM01.54 chromosomes. Noninvasive Prenatal Testing after discovery of fetal malformation by Results: Z-score increasing significantly of chromosome 2 and 5 were obser- ultrasound: two years of experience in France ved in these two cases and the Z-score values were 2.80 and 10, respectively. G. VIOT, C. BERNABE DUPONT, L. LOHMANN, P. ERNAULT, F. JACQUEMARD; The results were confirmed by karyotyping of amniotic fluid cells and sho- American Hospital of Neuilly, NEUILLY sur SEINE, France. wed 47,XY,+2 and 47,XY,+5[5]/46,XY[35] mosaicism karyotypes. Conclusion: This study show NIPS+ can provide information on other rare chromosomal abnormalities. It can provide useful information for the Detection of fetal DNA in maternal blood allows non-invasive prenatal te- further investigation and practice of NIPS+. sting (NIPT) of aneuploidy with very high sensitivity and specificity. Using PM01.52 NGS, this approach can be proposed to women with higher age, with history Noninvasive detection of fetal aneuploidies using targeted sequencing of trisomy, with positive test for aneuploidy or in case of parental balanced of paired homologous regions translocation involving chromosomes 13-18-21. T. J. Jensen1, S. K. Kim1, G. Hogg1, C. K. Ellison1, Y. Sun1, J. Fox1, H. Tao1, E. McCarthy1, From January 2013 to December 2014, 2304 tests were carried out in your B. Sagoe1, M. Abdellatef1, A. R. Mazloom1, J. Tynan1, T. Burcham2, D. van den Boom2, M. unit mainly because of advanced maternal age or abnormal first trimester Ehrich2; screening (FTS). For 91 women (3.9%), fetal DNA was proposed while scan 1Sequenom Laboratories, San Diego, CA, United States, 2Sequenom, Inc., San Diego, CA, detected fetal malformations (28.5%: thick nuchal translucency; 21.4%: United States. soft signs of trisomy 21; 12.85%: intrauterine growth retardation; other: 37.27%). For 2 cases, the result was positive for trisomy 21. Classically, fetal DNA testing is not a good option in case of ultrasonic mal- Current clinical laboratory offerings for noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) formations. For all these women, we granted the request for specific rea- determine the presence or absence of fetal aneuploidies using aligned sons: refusal of patients to perform an invasive procedure due to the risk sequence read counting methods or by leveraging single nucleotide poly- of induced miscarriages, risk of premature delivery or history of premature morphisms (SNPs). We hypothesized that using the relative abundance of labor, decision to continue the pregnancy whatever the outcome, assisted paired homologous regions may enable an alternative way to detect fetal procreation history. Genetic counseling is mandatory before testing. Test aneuploidies noninvasively. This study describes the evaluation of paired limitations were explained. Ultrasound evaluation in our unit was also per- homologous regions for the detection of trisomy 21 (T21) and trisomy 18 formed. Clinical evaluation of newborns and follow-up were always practi- (T18). Assays for 1,060 amplification targets were designed to determine ced after birth. fetal aneuploidy status, fetal sex, and the proportion of fetal DNA present in In some specific situations, NIPT can be performed after genetic counseling a sample. Circulating cell free (ccf) DNA was extracted from the plasma of and explanation of its limitations. In the near future, it appears important pregnant female donors and all target regions were co-amplified in a single to evaluate the help of this non-invasive approach, mainly after discovery of reaction. Amplified products were evaluated using massively parallel se- soft signs in favor of Down syndrome. quencing (Illumina) and homolog ratios were determined based on the read depth from each homolog. We meE aS suH reG d 2 th0 e 1 p5 er f| o G rmL aA ncS eG oO f thW e , d S evC eO lopT eL dA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 63ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S01
.55 Novel homozygous NLR P7
 mutation in a Cypriot patient with recurrent hydatidiform molar pregnancies 7.6% had triploidy, 9.1% had monosomy X, 1.5% had sex-chromosome aneu- T. Delikurt1, I. Touitou2, G. Sarrabay2, V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou1,3, G. A. Tanteles1; somies, 5.8% were molar pregnancies and 14.2% had copy number variants 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics; Clinical Genetics Clinic, Nicosia, Cyprus, (CNV) including microdeletions/microduplications and cryptic unbalanced 2Laboratory of Rare and Autoinflammatory Diseases, Montpellier, France, 3Makarios rearrangements (Table 1). The highest diagnostic yield was observed in the Medical Center; Clinical Genetics Clinic, Nicosia, Cyprus. 1st trimester specimens 67.9%, followed by 20.3% in the 2nd and 9.2% in the 3rd trimester. We confirmed that maternal age is correlated with the likelihood of autosomal trisomies but not with triploidy, sex chromosome Hydatidiform mole (HM) is an aberrant human pregnancy associated with aneusomies, molar pregnancy, or CNVs. abnormal embryonic development and has, in the majority of sporadic ca- Conclusion: This algorithm, based on uncultured specimens, has replaced ses, a multifactorial basis. In Western countries, HM occurs once in every standard cytogenetic analysis method in testing of perinatal samples and 600 pregnancies, however, this rate has been reported to be higher in other resulted in a substantially higher diagnostic yield and improved diagnostic parts of the world including the Middle East. Recurrent hydatidiform molar rate. Establishing the cause of a miscarriage and stillbirth has clinical and (RHM) pregnancies are rare and are defined by the occurrence of at least reproductive implications and results in changes in the management of fu- two HM pregnancies in the same patient. Recently, mutations in two diffe- ture pregnancies, such as the decision to undertake preimplantation genetic rent genes namely, NLR P7
 and KHD C3
L have been identified as a cause of testing. familial RHM pregnancies. We present a 37 year old Cypriot patient with PM01.58 a history of four (three of which were histologically confirmed) HM preg- Introducing CMA (chromosomal microarray) analysis into the nancies. NLR P7
 mutation analysis revealed that the index case was homozy- advanced IVF lab gous for the p.Leu820Cysfs*29 (c.2458delC) mutation in exon 7 of this gene. T. Frumkin1, T. Shwartz1, T. Cohen1, V. Gold1, S. Peleg1, L. Malki1, B. Almog1, D. Ben-Yosef1, This is a novel mutation, not previously reported in the literature. To our Y. Yaron2, A. Amit1, A. Reches2, M. Malcov1; knowledge, this is the first Cypriot case with a history of RHM pregnancies 1Racine IVF Unit, Department of Ob/Gyn, Lis Maternity Hospital, Sourasky Medical in which a causative maternal-effect in the form of NLR P7
 homozygosity has Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Genetic Institute, Lis Maternity been identified. Hospital, Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel. PM01.56 First successful story of preimplantation genetic diagnosis for Introduction pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration B. Panthan; It is widely accepted that a main cause for IVF failure is an- Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. euploidity of the embryos. It is also claimed that normal morphokinetics of early embryos, as demonstrated by the EmbryoScope, are correlated with normal chromosomal constitution. Introducing CMA technique to the IVF Here we report the first successful story of Preimplantation Genetic Diagno- lab is aimed to contribute a reliable and objective test for the selection of sis (PGD) for Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration (PKAN). eAmimbryo with the best prognosis. This may enable the transfer of a single We received a referral from Pediatric Neurologist concerning genetic dia- embryo without decreasing pregnancy rates. gnosis and reproductive option for the couples bearing the first child affec- Mate Troia al sasnedss m tehteh aodddsitive prediction value of CMA for embryo selection, ted by this particular disorder. A 2-year-old Thai boy was born from non- compare to the known morphokinetic parameters. consanguineous parPeAnNtsK, 2d eveloped dystonia and neurological deterioration For CMA analysis 21 PGD embryos, that were not sui- after the age of 1 and died within 1 year after establishing clinical diagnosis. table for transfer, were re-biopsied on day 5-6. Single cells were subjected to DNA sequencing of in the patient’s leukocytes revealed novel homo- whole genome amplification followed by array hybridization (BlueGenome, zygous g.21In7-3V8itGro> C, whereas the parents were identified as carriers. Genetic 24 sure+) and scanning. CMA results were compared with morphokinetic counseling for PGD was performed to the couples and the ethical clearance pRaersaumltester: PB localization, timing and synchronization of cells division and was done. fertilization (IVF) and Intra Cytoplasmic Sperm Injection EmbryScope‘s score. (ICSI) with PGD was performed. All of embryos were biopsied in the clea- CMA results of 21 analyzed embryos were divided into 5 groups: vage stage and subsequently performed for whole-genome amplification. normal chromosomal constitution (3), X monosomy (2), unbalanced trans- Genetic status was diagnosed with the linkage analysis using family-specific location (6), single trisomy (3) and chaotic chromosomal constitution (7). short-tandem repeat markers and direct mutation testing using SNaPSHOT Two out of 3 normal euploid embryos were graded with very low morpho- Mini-sequencing. The aneuploidy screening was performed by Next-Gene- kCionnectliuc ssicoonre and 7 embryos with chaotic chromosomal constitution were ration Sequencing-based strategy. There were seven embryos from these graded with various scores. couples: two likely affected, three likely carriers, one likely unaffected and This preliminary study demonstrates that the ploidity of cleava- one failed in the target genome amplification. Aneuploidy screening was ge stage embryos can still be determined only by an invasive CMA method. done before making decision of embryo transfer and only one unaffected We suggest that timing and synchrony of cell cycles are probably dissatisfac- embryo passed the screening. Thereafter, this embryo was transferred in tory morphokinetic parameters for predicting embryo chromosomal consti- frozen thawed cycle and the pregnancy was successful. The confirmation tution; however, other parameters may be better ones. was done by amniocentesis, which showed the consistent result to PGD. At P S01
.59 38 weeks of gestational age, a healthy male baby was born. Clinical utility of blastocyst biopsy and vitrification for P S01
.57 Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis by haplotyping (PGH) and Algorithm for efficient analysis of perinatal samples: a three-year sequencing for Marfan syndrome caused by a de-novo FBN1 mutation. prospective study P. Renwick1, J. Ward1, E. Ronaldson1, J. Campbell2, C. Ogilvie1; K. Wou1, Y. Hyun2, D. Chitayat1,3,4, K. Chong1,3,4, S. Keating2, P. Shannon2, E. Kolomietz2; 1Centre for Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, 2Viapath Genetics, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Background Canada, 4Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The PGH for monogenic disease requires prior construction of haplotypes Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. around the gene of interest using appropriate family members with known disease status to assign phase to the haplotypes prior to undergoing IVF to generate embryos for testing. In the absence of affected relatives, mutation- Objective: To evaluate the performance of a clinical algorithm for direct ge- carrying haplotypes cannot be identified. netic analysis done on fetal/neonatal tissue. We have therefore developed a strategy for de novo mutations which assigns Methods: Study samples consisted of tissues obtained from miscarriage, phase during the PGD cycle; this strategy is facilitated by our blastocyst bio- stillbirth and neonatal demise during the time period from July 1st, 2011 psy and vitrification programme. to June 30th, 2014. QF-PCR analysis was the initial test performed on all Methods specimens followed by chromosomal microarray analysis done on the nor- Grand-parental samples were used to construct haplotypes for each partner, mal QF-PCR specimens. leaving phase to be set during the case. Nine eggs were collected; four bla- Results: A total of 1071 of 1195 submitted specimens were confirmed as of stocysts were biopsied and vitrified. Due to allele drop out, phase can only true fetal origin. Of those 1071 informative specimens, 30.8% yielded ab- be accurately set when the mutation is present. Three embryos, arrested at normal results. Of the latter, 57.6% had abnormal QF-PCR and 42.1% had earlier stages with visible cells, were therefore collected to optimise finding ab6n4ormal microarray result. Autosomal tErisSoHmGies 2 w0e1re5 d |e GtecLteAdS iGn 6O1W.2%, S, CO thT e L mA uN taD tio, n U inK a| W sibW linW g e. mES brH yoG . . SO amR pG les underwent MDA-based wholeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index genome amplification and tested using linked FBN1 polymorphic markers, Conclusions: This study demonstrates that MPS on a Nextseq 500 or Ion in conjunction with DNA sequencing of the de novo maternal c.2719C>T al- Proton instrument can be applied for the detection of chromosomal abnor- lele. malities in PGD embryos. MPS can serve as a more cost-effective and flexible Results technology for PGD. Of the 7 tested samples, 3 were heterozygous for the mutation; linkage con- PM01.62 firmed their presence on the same maternal haplotype. Two of the four bi- Human placental genome is enriched in somatic genomic opsied embryos carried the opposite maternal FBN1 haplotype and will be rearrangements replaced in frozen embryo transfers. L. Kasak1, K. Rull1,2, P. Vaas1,2, P. Teesalu1,2, M. Laan1; Conclusion 1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Women‘s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Our blastocyst biopsy and vitrification programme has enabled a novel Estonia. strategy for PGD for carriers of de novo mutations. Extensive work up on gametes or sacrifice of viable embryos in a cycle, required by previous ap- proaches, has been circumvented. Placenta is a temporary, but an indispensable organ in human pregnancy. PM01.60 Similarly to cancer, it is characterized by highly invasive nature facilitating The first experience with detection of aneuploidy using next- effective implantation of the embryo and its function to support fetal nu- generation sequencing within preimplantation genetic diagnosis trition, growth and development. Rapid multiplication and invasiveness of I. Soldatova, L. Krautova, M. Putzova, S. Horackova, I. Maresova, R. Kren, J. Mika, D. cancerous cells is facilitated by rearrangements in their genomes. So far only Stejskal; cancerous tissues have been described with high profile of somatic copy GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic. number variations (CNVs). We hypothesized that similarly to cancer, somatic genomic rearrangements are promoted to support placental function. We report for the first time an Due to rapid development of genetic methods evolved in routine check of extensive load of somatic CNVs, especially duplications, in the human pla- embryos suitable for transfer after preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) cental genomes across gestation and suggest that this phenomenon may be of monogenic diseases, we have introduced the next-generation sequencing critical for placental development and function to guarantee the normal pro- (NGS) for detection of aneuploidies. Our aim is to join the both methods gression of pregnancy. Identified placental somatic CNVs were significantly together for routine examination and to increase probability to transfer enriched in genes involved in cell adhesion, immunity, development, cell healthy embryos without chromosomal aneuploidies and unaffected alleles cycle. Overrepresentation of imprinted genes in somatic duplications sugge- of monogenic disease from parents. sted that amplified gene copies may represent an alternative mechanism to The products derived from MDA of the embryos five days of age were sub- support parent-of-origin specific gene expression. The discovery may have jected to the PGD analysis and sequenced in the next step using Ion Proton clinical implications as placentas from pregnancy complications exhibited Sequencing machine and Ion Fragment Library Kit. altered CNV profiles. Also, in prenatal testing based on cell-free DNA shed From June 2014 we have analysed twenty one families undergoing the PGD into the maternal circulation by the placenta, extensive placental somatic of monogenic diseases with the aneuploidy detection using the NGS se- CNVs and mosaicism may interfere with the reliable detection of fetal CNV quencing. Till now the total number of biopsied embryos has been sixty-six; profile. forty-three embryos have been concluded as suitable for the transfer after REFERENCE: Kasak et al. Extensive load of somatic CNVs in the human pla- the PGD but this number of embryos was decreased to thirty-one by the re- centa. Sci. Rep. 5, 8342 (2015). asons of the NGS results. Twelve embryos were eliminated after NGS - : one GRANTS: Wellcome Trust (070191/Z/03/A); Estonian Research Council triploid embryo , one embryo with trisomy of chromosome 21, two embryos (ETF9030, SF0180022s12); ERDF, project HAPPY PREGNANCY (3.2.0701.12- with monosomy of chromosome 4, two embryos with monosomy of chro- 0047) mosome 16, two embryos with trisomy of chromosome 16, one embryo with P S01
.63 monosomy of chromosome 18 in mosaic form and two chaotic embryos. Investigation of the polygenic genetics of Pre-eclampsia and its We concluded to involve NGS after the PGD during IVF is effective and sui- relationship with other phenotypes table. Thereby, we are able to decrease risk of abortions after IVF caused by N. O. Williams1, F. Dudbridge2, S. Chappell3, C. Franklin1, R. McGinnis1, On behalf of the the aneuploidies of the transferred embryos. InterPregGen Consortium; 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2London School of P S01
.61 Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 3University of Nottingham, Shallow whole genome sequencing is well suited for the detection Nottingham, United Kingdom. of chromosomal aberrations in human blastocysts during preimplantation genetic diagnosis A. Dheedene1, L. Deleye2, D. De Coninck2, T. Sante1, C. Christodoulou3, B. Heindryckx3, E. Van den Abbeel3, P. De Sutter3, D. Deforce2, B. Menten1, F. Van Nieuwerburgh2; Pre-eclampsia (PE) is a potentially life-threatening disorder characterised 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Laboratory by hypertension and proteinuria after the 20th week of pregnancy. Although of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department for no single-locus PE associations have been replicated or achieved genome- Reproductive Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. wide statistical significance in PE mothers or offspring (“fetal cases”), we evaluated evidence for shared DNA variants responsible for PE and 6 other disease phenotypes of Wellcome Trust Case-Control Consortium 1 (WTC- Introduction: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for chromosomal C C1
) by using polygenic score analysis (PGSA) and genome-wide complex rearrangements is widely used to avoid transferring embryos with genomic trait analysis (GCTA) methods (Nature 460:748-752,2009; AmJHumGenet aberrations. Currently, genomic microarrays are predominantly used for 88:76-82,2011). For PGSA, GWAS SNPs with p-values below specific cut- the detection of unbalanced structural abnormalities and aneuploidies in points were identified in PE “Discovery” meta-analysis results from com- embryos from parents at risk. In this study we evaluate whether massive bined totals of 3830 maternal or 2650 fetal PE cases and ~47,000 controls parallel sequencing (MPS) can be used in PGD for detecting chromosomal from the InterPregGen Consortium, deCODE, and ALSPAC. For GCTA, indivi- abnormalities. dual-level SNP GWAS genotypes from InterPregGen (1900 maternal or 1000 Materials and Methods: 15 patients with a balanced structural rearrange- fetal UK cases, 5500 UK controls) were tested for correlation with WTCC C1
 ment were included in the study: 8 reciprocal translocations, 4 Robertso- phenotypes (~2000 UK cases, 3000 UK controls for each disease). Both PGSA nian translocations, 2 inversions and one insertional translocation. Whole and GCTA found significant evidence (p<0.001) for shared genetic variants genome amplification and microarray analysis (24sure+, Illumina) was responsible for the WTCC C1
 Hypertension phenotype and maternal PE de- performed on 47 trophectoderm samples from the cohort. In the current spite strict exclusion of pre-pregnancy hypertensives from our maternal study, low coverage MPS on a Nextseq 500 (Illumina) and Ion Proton (Life cases. No significant evidence of variant sharing between maternal or fetal Technologies) instrument was performed in parallel for those 47 amplified PE and any other WTCC C1
 phenotype was observed by PGSA or GCTA. GCTA samples. Aberrations were detected using the QDNAseq algorithm. indicates that maternal and fetal PE arise from large numbers of causative Results: An average read count per sample of 11 and 10 million was ob- variants spread throughout the genome with the heritability contributed by tained on the Nextseq 500 and the Ion Proton instrument respectively. In each chromoso2me being approx2imately proportional to chromosome length total, 6 normal and 41 abnormal embryos were analysed. All aberrations (maternal PE r=0.86; fetal PE r=0.59). previously detected with arrayCGH could be readily detected in the MPS Funding: European Union Seventh Framework Programme grant no. data and were correctly identified. The smallest detected abnormality was a 282540;Wellcome Trust (WT090355/A/09/Z, WT090355/B/09/Z). 5 Mb deletion/duplication hence equaling or even exceeding the resolution ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 65 of the routinely used microarrays.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM01.64 PM01.66 Design of a preconception carrier-screening panel including more The clinical utility of genetic testing of tissues from pregnancy losses: than 200 genes associated to recessive and X-linked disorders. Our the results of an ACGS audit. experience sequencing DNA samples from 48 Spanish healthy semen C. A. Waterman1, N. Bown2, L. Cresswell3, C. Delmege4, C. English2, G. Fews5, L. Gaunt6, donors L. Grimsley7, S. J. Imrie8, A. Kulkarni9, K. Mann10, K. Marks9, K. Martin11, M. Wall12, D. J. Lezana1, C. Palma1, J. Lopez1, I. Manrique1, P. Carrasco1, S. Carmona1, C. Torres1, S. McMullan5; Zamora2, A. Yoldi2, A. Vaquero2, J. Ramirez2, J. Castilla2, J. Lopez1; 1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury, 1MGC Genetaq, Malaga, Spain, 2Ceifer, Granada, Spain. United Kingdom, 2Northern Genetics Service, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Cytogenetics Department, University Hospitals of Introduction: Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 4Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 5West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Genomic Diagnostics NMeaxtte-rgieanlesr aantido nM seetqhuoednsc:i ng (NGS) methods allow genetic testing for many Laboratory, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University disorders with high fidelity, quick turnaround time and a lower cost. Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7NE Thames Regional Genetics Laboratory, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, DNA from 48 healthy semen donors, with previous negative studies for the London, United Kingdom, 8West of Scotland Genetic Services, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 9SW Thames Regional Genetics Laboratory, St George’s Healthcare NHS Trust, London, most prevalent genetic disorders in Spain: Fragile X syndrome type 1, spinal United Kingdom, 10Genetics Department , Viapath Analytics, Guy‘s Hospital, London, muscular atrophy and cystic fibrosis (32 common mutations). United Kingdom, 11Clinical Cytogenetics Laboratory, Nottingham University Hospitals, Design and testing of a NGS gene panel including 203 genes for recessive Nottingham, United Kingdom, 12Cytogenetics Department, Royal Marsden Hospital, and X-linked disorders genes (106 complete coding and splicing region ana- London, United Kingdom. lRyesissu, l9t7s: partial analysis). Paired-end sequencing, alignment with BWA, and variant calling using GATK. Since the publication of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecolo- Mean coverage: 308,76X (SD=62,62). Regions with >20X coverage: 99,53% gists green top guidelines for the investigation and treatment of couples ex- (SD=0,22). periencing recurrent miscarriages, many UK regional genetics laboratories Pathogenic variants (PV) and likely pathogenic variants (LPV) per donor: have implemented the proposals and have ceased offering parental karyoty- 2,04 (SD=1,50). ping burdt instead are offering a range of genetic testing strategies for tissues Variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUCS) per donor: 6,69 from 3 and subsequent miscarriages. The range of tests offered includes (SD=2,44). QF-PCR, subtelomere MLPA, karyotyping and array CGH. Combinations Thirty nine donors presentedC aFtT Rleast 1 PV/LPV.C YAPll2 1oAf 2them prBeTsDented of these tests are also being used to investigate later gestation pregnancy VPCUCCBS. DUOX2 SL C12
A3 POMGNT1 PAH losses and fetal losses where phenotypic anomalies have been noted. The Most PVC/FLTPRV were found in: (12 donors), (10), (7), ACGS scientific subcommittee has instigated an audit of the outcomes of (5), (4), (4), CY P21
A2 (4), (3). these tests with respect to gestational age and the presence or absence of Most of PV/LPV were low penetrance variants or associated to non- fetal anomalies. The data is being used to examine the clinical utility of this classical phBeTnDotype. High rate of PV/PPV could be due to co- testing in i) providing a likely cause for the pregnancy loss, ii) identifying capture of pseudogene and false positive calls because of the methodology couples with a balanced rearrangement where there is a risk of recurrence, eCmonpcloluyseido. ns: variants obtained were associated with mild phenotype, iii) identifying which couples may benefit from prenatal genetic testing or consistent with population allele frequencies described. PGD, and iv) establishing the proportion of cases where there is substantial CFTR risk of a future affected live born child. Outcomes have been measured in Taking together all these results, some aspects should be considered: the terms of failure rates, diagnostic yield and the significance of genetic fin- need to fully analyze and to confirm the results with gold-standard dings to the management of future pregnancies for couples. The evidence to methodology for genes with pseudogenes or high homology sequences, wh- date supports the development of a more targeted and consistent approach ether or not to analyze genes associated to mild phenotypes, and the high to genetic testing of fetal loss. number of VUCS obtained. P S01
.67 P S01
.65 Early pregnancy loss and polymorphism in xenobiotics detoxification Contribution of chromosomal abnormalities and genes of the major genes histocompatibility complex to early pregnancy losses K. Saraev, A. Rodionov, E. Mashkina; I. Tkach1, K. Sosnina1, N. Huleyuk1, O. Terpylyak1, D. Zastavna1, H. Akopyan1, A. Weise2, N. Southern federal university, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. Kosyakova2, T. Liehr2; 1Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine, 2Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. Pregnancy loss and other pregnancy complication can be connected with environmental and lifestyle risk factor, among which effect of chemical compounds is the strongest. Effects of xenobiotics can be modified by allele Background: Pregnancy losses (PL) in 60% to 80% of the cases are asso- variants of xenobiotic detoxificaItleio4n6 2eVnazly CmYePs1 pAh1asAer gI 4o7r HIIi.s A A tDoHta1lB ofG 7lu14 w8o7-- ciated with chromosomal abnormalities in embryos or fetuses. Immunolo- mLyesn A wLDitHh eIa1r0ly5 Vpr GegSnTaPn1cy loss and 101 control patients were examined by a gic factors contribute to PL especially at the early stages of gestation. In par- case-control methodology. The , , ticular, 45% of cases of the early pregnancy losses (EPL) are accompanied Glu487Lys, ALDH polymorphisms were genotyped by allele-specific by immunologic intolerance to the fetus. One of the main factors involved in polymerase chain reaction. Our data demonstrated that the heterozygous immune responses is the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) encoded genotypes rate were higher in the pregnancy loss patients by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) gene locus. (12.71%) compared to the control group (2.0%). There was no difference Aims: The determination of chromosomal abnormalities in samples from between two groups detected for othsetr polynmd orphisms. However, presence EPL and allelic polymorphism of HLA-DRB1 and DQA1 genes in couples of polymorphic variants of genes of 1 and 2 AdLeDtoHx2ificaGtSioTnP 1phases can have with RM. additive effect and cause multifactorial pathology risk increase. It is shown, Methods: Banding cytogenetic analysis; interphase mFISH analysis with the that combinationA LoDf pHo2l,y AmDoHr1pBhi иc vGaSrTiaPn1t s of и genes in geno- probe panel for chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, X and Y; DNA type results in 5 fold pregnancy loss risk increase. Combination of polymor- extraction by salting method, PCR, agarose gel electrophoresis. phic variants of genes in genotype results in 9 fold Results: Cytogenetic and molecular-cytogenetic investigations of EPL ma- pregnancy loss risks tincreasned. The results demonstrated that combination of terial identified karyotype anomalies in 32.4% of cases with prevalence allele variants of 1 and 2 detoxification phases in woman genotype in- of autosomal trisomy - 42.65%, triploidy - 30.38% and monosomy X - creases the risk of early pregnancy loss. This study was supported by the 19.11%. Complex analysis of frequency and distribution of allelic variants federal assignment № 6.98.2014/К from Russian Ministry of Science and of genes HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQA1 allowed to establish alleles DRB1*0301, Education. DRB1*1101-1104 and DQA1*0501 to be aggressor alleles in women with RPL. The cumulative homology of allelic polymorphism of more than 50% PM01.68 of HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQA1 loci between partners increases the risk of Blastocyst trophectoderm biopsy and Preimplantation Genetic RPL by almost four times. Conclusion: Detected chromosome aneuploidies Diagnosis/Screening for aneuploidy using Array-Comparative in samples from products of conception and changes in the MHC genes can Genomic Hybridization: one-year results cause the failure of a couples reproductive function and can lead to an early I. Loddo1, F. M. R. Pileio2, C. Liuzzo1, S. Briuglia1, C. Salpietro1; fetal loss. 1UOC Genetics and Pediatric Immunology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 2GATJC This work was partially supported by the West-Ukrainian BioMedical Re- 66 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG search Center grant.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index IVF, Gioia Tauro, Italy. genetics, IPG, Charleroi Gosselies, Belgium. Introduction: Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis/Screening (PGD/PGS) is Objectives the earliest form of prenatal diagnosis and allows identification of genetic Since 2013, samples for prenatal diagnosis in Belgium are analysed by Chro- abnormalities in embryos produced in vitro, prior to their transfer into the mosomal Microarray Analysis. Interpretation of prenatal copy number va- uterus. riants (CNV) remains difficult given the limited phenotypic information. An The identification and transfer of embryos with normal set of chromosomes Ad Hoc Committee tries to resolve uncertain cases based on literature and allow to increase the implant rate per transfer and significantly reduce the experiences with similar variants. A Belgian MicroArray Prenatal (BEMAP- likelihood of miscarriage. RE) database studies the association between laboratory, ultrasound and Materials and Methods: Array-CGH is performed on trophectoderm cells. postnatal data. The biopsy of blastocyst during the fifth or sixth day of culture, ensures a Method remarkable accuracy of the results of the genetic analysis, a significant re- Our database was customised in consultation with the Centers for Medical duction in the risk of mosaicism, and the absence of impairment in regular Genetics to import, consult and extract genotype-phenotype data. Prenatal embryonic development. cases in which a pathogenic CNV/UV(unclassified variant) >400kb was de- Results:During the last year 690 embryos were processed from ICSI cycles tected, are imported. Phenotypic data are added postpartum and at the age performed on 313 infertile couples. In 11% of cases there weren’t clear re- of 2-3 years. Meta-analysis is performed based on genotype-phenotype data sults due to detection of DNA fragmentation or low concentration of DNA. from hundreds of cases. There was a result in 91% of embryos analyzed. Of these: 63% were found Results to be normal; 37% were found with chromosomal abnormalities. Reporting policy is determined by classification of CNVs (benign, UV and The pregnancy rate obtained by the transfer of embryos undergoing PGD, pathogenic). If UVs have intragenic deletions/duplications in a known gene; resulted to b e free of chromosomal abnormalities, was 14.6% higher, com- are mentioned in literature and/or databases; consist of deletions/duplica- pared to the transfer of embryos without PGD. tions covering more than 18 genes or comprise an X-linked gene in a XY fe- Conclusions:The intention of the PGD/PGS is to improve live births rates tus, likeliness of pathogenicity is evaluated. In case of strong arguments for after IVF treatment.PGD/PGS offers one more chance during IVF treatment pathogenicity, parents are tested. They are reported if parental phenotype is to increase the selection of embryos for certain groups of patients, including potentially divergent or if de novo. Known pathogenic variants, risk factors those with advanced maternal age, repeated failure of IVF cycles, repea- with high penetrance or ultrasound anomalies and actionable incidental fin- ted miscarriages in parents with normal karyotype or carriers of balanced dings are reported. Since 2013, 7875 arrays were performed; 293 (3.72 %) translocations. were reported as pathogenic. P S01
.69 Conclusions Premature ovarian failure (POF/POI) and array-comparative genomic The BEMAPRE database is a source of scientific, clinical and ethical studies; hybridization (aCGH) allows easy communication among Belgian genetic centers and will be made A. Beke1, H. Piko2, I. Haltrich3, J. Csomor4, A. Matolcsy4, J. J. Rigo1, V. Karcagi2, G. Fekete3; available to other scientists. Most recent data are presented. 11st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, P S01
.71 2National Institute of Enviromental Health, Dept. of Molecular Genetics and Diagnostics, Chromosomal Microarray (CMA) for prenatal referrals with abnormal Budapest, Hungary, 32nd Dept. of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, ultrasound scan findings: experiences of moving to a frontline NHS 41st Dept. of Pathology and Cancer Research, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. diagnostic service in the West Midlands, UK S. J. Hamilton1, G. K. Hall1, M. Drozniewska1, F. S. Togneri1, S. K. Allen1, D. Williams2, D. J. McMullan1; 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom, Background: One of the frequent reasons of the unsuccessful conception 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham, United Kingdom. is the premature ovarian failure/primary ovarian insufficiency (POF/POI) that is defined as the loss of functional follicles below the age of 40 years, and the incidence of this abnormality is 0.1% among the 30-40 years age Prenatal testing by CMA has been established in the West Midlands Regio- group. Among the genetic causes the most common one involves the X chro- nal Genetics Laboratory (WMRGL) at Birmingham Women’s Hospital (BWH) mosome, as in Turner syndrome, partial X deletion and X-autosome trans- since 2009 via involvement in a local project (243 referrals) and the MRC- locations. funded EACH project (125 referrals), with cytogenetic analysis performed Methods: Here we report a case of a woman referred to genetic counsel- concurrently on all samples tested as a stipulation of project criteria ling because of POF. Genetic testing of the 27 year old female patient was From October 2014, all patients in the West Midlands presenting with carried out due to suspected POF/POI. Molecular and cytogenetic analyses abnormal ultrasound scan (USS) findings and/or an NT measurement of were performed. We evaluated the FMR1 gene analysis using Southern blot >3.5mm have been offered CMA instead of karyotyping, following exclusion technique and Primed PCR. We performed the FISH method and the stan- of common aneuploidy by QF-PCR. To date >200 CMA analyses have been dard cytogenetic analyses by G-banding also. In order to detect the exact performed using the ISCA v2.0 8x60k platform. breakpoints, we used a special cytogenetic array ISCA plus CGH array. Only CNVs interpreted to be clearly linked to USS findings or CNVs which are Results: We detected a large 67.355 Mb size deletion on the X chromosome determined to be clearly pathogenic, irrespective of USS, are reported. Gene at the critical region (ChrX q21.31-q28) which is associated with the POF/ content and evidence of overlapping CNVs/syndromes in the literature are POI phenotype. At this region the concerned genes were those ones that the main criteria used to assign pathogenicity classifications. Abnormality the different studies published as POF/POI associated (POF1B; BHLHB9; rate for reportable anomalies is 9.6%. CNVs considered to be sub-microsco- DACH2; DIAPH2, FMR1; FMR2; XPNPE P2
; PGRM C1
, CEN P1
, BCOR L1
). pic (likely to be undetected by karyotyping) were observed in 4.9% of refer- Conclusions: We conclude that the karyotyping is definitely helpful in the rals, consistent with larger published studies. evaluation of POF patients to identify the non submicroscopic chromosomal Decisions regarding clinical reporting and assignment of pathogenicity re- rearrangement, and using the array CGH technique we can contribute to the main challenging in the current absence of a National UK consensus and most efficient detection and mapping of exact deletion breakpoints of the within the fast turn-around-times mandated in the prenatal setting. A local deleted Xq region. review panel including both Consultant Clinical Scientists and Consultant PM01.70 Clinical Geneticists is therefore convened virtually to support clinical re- The Belgian MicroArray Prenatal (BEMAPRE) database. porting. Several complex cases highlighting the need for this approach will J. Muys1, K. Janssens2, O. Vanakker3, C. Vilain4, G. Smits4, C. Bandelier5, S. Bulk6, J. Caberg6, be discussed, as will issues encountered in rolling out array-based testing A. De Leener4, M. De Rademaeker7, T. de Ravel8, J. Desir9, A. Destree9, A. Dheedene3, across the whole West Midlands. S. Gaillez6, B. Grisart9, A. Hellin6, S. Janssens3, K. Keymolen7, B. Menten3, B. Pichon4, M. Ravoet5, N. Revencu5, S. Rombout9, C. Staessens7, A. Van Den Bogaert7, K. Van Den PM01.72 Bogaert8, J. Vermeesch8, Y. Sznajer5, B. Blaumeiser2, Y. Jacquemyn1, K. Devriendt8; Prenatal detection of a mosaic structurally abnormal chromosome 18 1University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, 2Center for Medical genetics, S. L. Britton; Universiteit Antwerpen, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Center for Medical genetics, Universiteit Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Gent, Ghent, Belgium, 4Center for Medical genetics, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 5Center for Medical genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain, Belgium, 6Center for Medical genetics, Université de Liège, Liège, Belgium, Prenatal detection of a mosaic structurally abnormal chromosome 18 7Center for Medical genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 8Center for Prenatal detection of true mosaicism involving an autosomal structural im- Medical genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 9Center for Medical balance is a rare occurrence. An amniotic fluid sample was received at 20 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANwDe,e UksK g e|s WtatWionW fo.lEloSwHinGg a.ObnRoGrmal ultrasound scan findings includin6g 7bi-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index lateral ventriculomegaly, possible neural tube defect and a cardiac anomaly. abnormal scan were DGV (n=47), skeletal dysplasia (n=26) and CF (n=20). QF-PCR analysis showed no evidence of aneuploidy for chromosomes 13 or Five DGV referrals were affected, three with skeletal dysplasia and one with 21. However, the chromosome 18 markers, D18 S978
 and D18 S390
, were BWS. There were no positive CF cases referred with echogenic bowel. AF trisomic and there was marked skewing of D18 S391
 towards the trisomic comprised the majority of abnormal scan referrals (88%) in contrast most range. However, the centomeric marker D18 S1002
 gave a normal result. cases referred through family history were received as CVS (68%). Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) studies using the chromosome 18 Additional referrals from abnormal scans, technological advances and in- centromeric probe showed two signals with no evidence of mosaicism. To- creases in the number of genetic tests available are all likely to affect the gether, the QF-PCR and FISH findings were suggestive of a mosaic, structu- future delivery of prenatal genetic testing. rally abnormal chromosome 18. The QF-PCR result for chromosome 18 was P S01
.75 reported as being uninterpretable. Primary ovarian failure in two women with Xq deletion Subsequent cytogenetic analysis identified a mosaic, structurally abnormal V. JAUFFRET1, C. RAVE L2
, E. CHEROT1, C. DUBOURG3, M. BLAYAU3, M. P. BEAUMONT- chromosome 18 in 26% of cells examined. The complex nature of the im- EPINETT E3
, S. ODENT4, M. A. BELAUD-ROTUREAU1, S. JAILLARD1; balance could not be fully characterised by G-banding. FISH studies with a 1Service de Cytogénétique et Biologie Cellulaire, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 2Service wcp18 showed that no other chromosome was involved in the rearrange- de Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 3Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique Médicale, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 4Service de ment and 18p and 18q subtelomeric probes showed that there was both loss Génétique Clinique, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France. of 18q and gain of 18p mdaet enroivaol. Array CGH was used to further characterise the abnormality. The parental karyotypes were normal indicating that the abnormality had arisen in the fetus. Such cases present counselling Primary ovarian failure (POF) is a pathology characterized by an absence of dilemmas in terms of the uncertainty in predicting the level and distribution the normal ovarian function before the age of 40 years. It can be suspected of abnormal cells in the fetus. by amenorrhea or premature menopause. Aetiologies are heterogeneous P S01
.73 and chromosomal abnormalities can represent 15 to 20 % of reported cau- Non-invasive versus invasive prenatal diagnosis: What do pregnant ses. Nine critical regions (Premature Ovarian Failure POF 1 to 9) were de- couples choose? scribed among which POF1 and POF2 loci localized on the long arm of chro- S. L. van der Steen1, S. R. Riedijk1, K. E. M. Diderich1, D. Van Opstal1, M. Polak2, M. F. C. M. mFMoRso1me X (respectively Xq26-XqD28IA aPnHd2 Xq13.3-XXq P2
N1P.1E)P. A2mong candidZaFtXe Knapen1, J. M. J. Cornette1, K. Prinsen1, A. T. J. I. Go1, A. Tibben3, R. J. H. Galjaard1; 1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Erasmus University, Rotterdam, genes involved in ovarian development localized in these regions, besides Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. (Xq27.3), we can pinpoint (Xqi2n2 s)i,t u (Xq25) and (Xp22.2-p21.3) genes. Non-invasive versus invasive prenatal diagnosis: What do pregnant Karyotype, DNA microarray and fluorescent hybridization were per- couples choose? formed in two woFmMRen1 presenting POF. Background: The first patient presented a terminal 14.4 Mb Xq27.2q28 deletionD IiAnPcHlu2- Women at increased risk of common trisomies can opt eit- ding POF1 with as the principal candidate gene. The second patient her for non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) or invasive prenatal diagnosis presented an interstitial 8,4 Mb Xq23.2q22.1 duplication including (PND) using a SNP array at 0.5 Mb resolution. Array detects more clinically in POF2 and a terminal 53,5 Mb Xq22.1q28 deletion including POF1. These rReelesevaanrct ha nqoumeasltiieosn, sa:n d anomalies with variable penetrance and expressi- two rearrangements are the result of an inversion-duplication-deletion me- on, while NIPT only aims to detect trisomy 13, 18 and 21. chanism not mediated by non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR). What do pregnant couples with an abnormal first The presence of a Xq deletion involving POF1 in these two patients conso- tMriemtheostde:r screening result choose: NIPT or array? Which motivations do lidates the role of this region in the occurrence of a POF. Furthermore, no pregnant couples have for this choice? caseD oIAf PinHv2e rsion-duplication-deletion of the long arm of chromosome X in Pregnant women (N=183) and 59 of their partners participated women presenting POF has been reported in literaturDeI.A LPoHss2 of function of after they were counselled by an obstetrician. Individually, women and their the gene has already been described as responsible of POF. Never- Rpaerstunletrss: filled out a questionnaire assessing anxiety, ambivalence and infor- theless, the role of duplications involving POF2 and remain to be med choice, that was previously designed and published. established. Eighty-four percent of the women chose NIPT and 16% chose array. PM01.76 The main reason for choosing NIPT was to prevent the risk of a miscarriage The modifier gene of Prokineticin 1 variant in human early pregnancy and not wanting to test for ‘more than necessary’. Women who opted for an M. Su; array were inclined to obtain more genetic information to be ‘prepared for Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng-Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan. tChoen fculutusrieo’,n a: nd to mobili se adequate care if needed. Most mentioned they preferred a quicker test result that was completely certain. While mostparticipants chose NIPT over invasive PND with array, our study shows that for a significant number of pregnant women and Aim: One common missense variant of PROK1-V67I was suggested to play as their partners, the opportunity to learn more about the health of their un- a modifier in PROK1-PROKR system of human early pregnancy. To explore born child might outweigh the miscarriage risk of an invasive procedure. It the modifier mechanism of PROK1-V67I, we studies for functional compa- therefore seems justified to keep offering this choice. rison in gene expression level and cell functions of V67I and its wild type (WT) in transiently transfected cells. PM01.74 Material and Methods: We investigated transcript expression of V67I and Audit of prenatal samples referred for specific molecular tests to the WT in HTR-8/SV neo and HEK293 cells using quantitative RT-PCR, and pro- Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory between 2012 and 2014 tein levels of cell lysate and supernatant of culture medium in HTR-8/SV S. Thomas, A. Callaway, K. Ellis, M. Bateman; neo, JAR and Ishikawa and HEK293 cells using ELISA method. Transient- Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom. ly V67I- or WT-transfected HTR-8/SV neo and HEK293 cells were used to evaluate cell proliferation, cell invasion, tubal formation, and intracellular calcium mobilization. Prenatal testing is a significant component of Molecular Genetic Diagnostic Results: The gene expression level of both transcript and protein were down- Laboratories because of the wide range of tests required and the rapid re- regulated in all cell lines, ranging from 20% to 70% compared with WT. The porting time. The WRGL received 86, 80 and 91 prenatal referrals for speci- ligand activities of V67I and WT on cell proliferation, cell invasion, calcium fic molecular tests in 2012, 2013 and 2014 respectively. influx and tubal formation were of no difference. Both PROK1 allele promo- There was a slight excess (55%) of amniotic fluid compared to CVS. The tests ted cell invasion and induced intracellular calcium influx activities, whereas most frequently requested were DGV (n=51), sequencing (49 referrals for they have no significant effect on cell proliferation, and tubal formation. In 34 different genes), UPD (n=39), CF (n=38), and skeletal dysplasia (n=29). conclusion, the common variant of PROK1 (V67I) may play as a modifier in Across all referrals, 49/257 results were abnormal. However, pick up was PROK1-PROKR system through down-regulation of PROK1 expression. Our 0/21 for cases with an apparently de novo mutation in a previous pregnan- investigation may provide a general modification mechanism for impact on cy, 15/46 for recessive conditions and 21/47 for dominant and X-linked con- disease severity of PROK1-related pathophysiology. ditions. Of 139 referrals with an “intermediate” risk, 11 were affected: this category mainly comprised abnormal scans (9/101) and inherited Robert- P S01
.77 sonian translocations (0/32). The Baby Bio Bank: a collection of biological samples and medical Abnormal scans accounted for 42% of all referrals, increasing from 34% data from 2500 families affected by recurrent miscarriage, preterm in 6 2 8012 to 45% in 2014; pick-up rate alsoE SinHcrGea s2e0d 1fr5om | G0/ L2
A9 SinG 2O01W2 t,o S COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 2/31 in 2013 and 7/41 in 2014. The most common tests indicated by anABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index birth, intrauterine growth restriction and pre-eclampsia available to researchers internationally N. SOLANKY1, S. Abu-Amero1, K. Rogers2, S. White2, A. Perez Miranda1, W. Baird1, C. Sertoli-cell-only (SCO) syndrome, also called germ cell aplasia, describes a Williamson2, M. Johnson2, L. Regan2, G. Moore1; condition of the testes in which only Sertoli cells line the seminiferous tubu- 1Institute of Child Health, UCL, London,, United Kingdom, 2Imperial College, London,, les and is diagnosed by testicular biopsy. SCOs is considered as irreversible United Kingdom. infertility. SCO syndrome, a histological diagnosis, consists of multifactorial reasons including Y microdeletions, kleinefelter syndrome, cystic fibrosis gene mutations, XYY syndrome, cryptorchidism, radiation, cytotoxic drugs The Baby Bio Bank is a unique collection of over 55000 biological samp- and viral infections. The etiology of the disease is currently unknown on the les collected from pregnancies complicated with recurrent miscarriage, other hand it is believed that autosomal gene defects could lead to SCOs. The preterm labour, fetal growth restriction, preeclampsia and uncomplicated aim of this study is detecting autosomal genetic defects and determining pregnancies, available to researchers internationally interested in under- candidate genes in SCOs infertile men. Single nucleotide polymorphism + standing pregnancy complications. Samples are being taken from the three comparative genomic hybridization microarray technology (SNP+CGH ar- key members of the family, mother, father and baby, allowing hereditary fac- ray) was performed on 39 SCOs infertile patients in the study. Array CGH tors from both parents to be tracked compares the patient’s genome against a reference genome and identifies Mothers and their partners were recruited from antenatal clinics and wards uncover deletions, amplifications, ploidy abnormalities and loss of heterozy- from participating hospitals across London. Blood samples for DNA, serum gosity (LOH). We examined a link between defected spermatogenesis genes and plasma, were collected from all consenting participants, plus urine from and infertility. Detected amplifications and deletions in several genes are the mother. On the birth of the baby, we collected placental tissue, mem- namely, SHBG, CO L1
A1, HOXD9, SYC E1
, EMX2, EMX2OS, CATSPER2 and loss branes, umbilical cord and cord blood. As all the samples are intended for of heterozygosity in several genes are namely SPATA gene family (SPATA18, DNA, RNA and protein isolation, they were collected, processed and stored SPATA17, SPATA16, SPATA12, SPATA4, SPATA2), TSSK gene family (TSSK3, to the highest possible scientific standards. Quality control audits followed TSSK4, TSSK6), DNALI1, DNAH5, DNAH11, SPAG16, SPAG8, DMRT1, DMRT2, by downstream applications such as real-time PCR and sequencing have FSHR, LHCGR, GNRHR, SPACA1, SPACA3, TSGA10, SMCP, KIT, TCT E3
, TEX14, shown clearly that the samples are of high quality and can be used with con- FGF8. Amplifications and deletions were detected on some of the genes who fidence by researchers. play a role in epigenetic changes. Epigenetic genes (H19, KCNQ1, IGF2, CD- The biological specimens have restricted value without clinical information. KN1C) are expected to be linked with male infertility. We include clinical information relating to factors affecting pregnancy such PM01.80 as parental height, weight and relevant medical history such as diabetes, Detection of sex chromosome aneuploidies using quantitative hypertension and smoking. Importantly, we also collect fetal outcome data fluorescent PCR such as gestational age, birthweight and mode of delivery. B. Nagy, O. Biro, G. R. Nagy, L. Lazar, J. Schönleber, J. Rigo Jr; We have successfully recruited over 2500 participants and interested re- Semmelweis University, 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Budapest, Hungary. searchers are able to apply to use the samples and data. More information on the Baby Bio Bank is available at http://www.ucl.ac.uk/babybiobank in- cluding the Baby Bio Bank protocol and information about the application Background: Aneuploidies are the most frequent chromosomal abnormali- procedure. ties at birth. Autosomal aneuploidies cause serious malformations like triso- PM01.78 my 21, trisomy 18 and trisomy 13. However sex chromosome aneuploidies Association study of differentially expressed genes regulatory SNPs are causing less severe syndromes. For the detection of these the “gold stan- and preeclampsia: results of a pilot study in Russia dard” method is the cytogenetic analysis of fetal cells, karyograms shows E. Trifonova1, T. Gabidulina2, V. Serebrova1, V. Stepanov1; all numerical and structural abnormalities, but it takes 2-4 weeks to get the 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2The Institute for Obstetrics reports. Molecular biological methods were developed to evercome on the and Gynecology, Tomsk, Russian Federation. long culture time, FISH and quantitative fluorescent PCR were introduced. In this work we show our experience with a commercial kit for the detection of sex chromosome aneuploidies. Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-specific disorder that leads among the causes Methods: We analysed 20.173 amniotic fluid samples in a period of 2006- of maternal and infant morbidity and mortality worldwide. Prevention, ear- 2013 in our department. A conventional cytogenetic analysis was perfor- ly detection, and specific treatment of preeclampsia are hindered by the fact med on the samples. We checked the reliability of quantitative fluorescent that the etiology has remained unknown. Current consensus implicates pla- PCR and DNA fragment analyis on those samples where sex chromosomal cental and endothelial dysfunction, inflammation and genetics in develop- aneuploidy was diagnosed. ment of preeclampsia. Our prior genome-wide transcriptional profiling of Results: From the 20.173 amniotic fluid samples we found 50 samples with placental tissue led to a novel set of 63 preeclampsia candidate genes. In this sex chromosome aneuploidy. There were 19 samples showing 46, XO, 17 report, we present preliminary study on the role of regulatory sites in some samples with 46, XXY, 9 samples with 47, XXX and 5 samples with 47, XYY of these genes in the genetic susceptibility to preeclampsia. We analyzed 48 karyotypes. The applied quantitative fluorescent PCR and DNA fragment regulatory SNPs (rSNPs) in 23 differentially expressed genes in 519 patients analyses method is suitable to detect all abnormal sex chromosome aneu- with preeclampsia and 718 women with uncomplicated pregnancies from ploidies. Russian, Buryat and Yakut populations using MassArray iPLEX (Sequenom). Conclusions: Quantitative fluorescent PCR is a fast and reliable method for We have detected significant associations for preeclampsia with 15 rSNPs detection of sex chromosome aneuploidies. in 11 genes (CORO2A, NDRG1, SASH1, BHLH E40
, PLIN2, SYD E1
, LHB, HK2, P S01
.81 INHA, ZNF175, PP P1
R12C). These genes were associated with such biolo- Clinical outcomes for patients with single-nucleotide polymorphism gical processes as synthesis and functional activity of hormones, protein (SNP)-based noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) suggestive of fetal binding, ligand-receptor interaction and binding with DNA. Interestingly, sex chromosome trisomy only one gene (CORO2A) has been associated with preeclampsia in all three T. McKanna1, M. Stosic1, K. O‘Brien2, Z. Demko1, S. J. Gross1; populations. These results demonstrate a significant role of genetic variabi- 1Natera, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States, 2Quest Diagnostics, Nichols Institute, San lity of the differentially expressed genes regulatory sites in the formation of Juan Capistrano, CA, United States. susceptibility to pre-eclampsia in different ethnic groups. Nevertheless, the clinical significance of these findings remains to be determined. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant №14- Objective: To determine the clinical outcomes for patients within a gene- 04-01467). ral screening population who received an NIPT result indicating a fetal sex P S01
.79 chromosome trisomy (SCT). Autosomal gene defects investigation of male infertility in germ cell Method: 51,884 consecutive cases were collected from participating clinics aplasia cases over 10 months. Isolated cell-free DNA was amplified and sequenced at G. Koc1, A. Ozdemir2, G. Girgin1, T. Avcilar1, D. Kirac3, K. Ulucan4, C. Akbal5, A. Guney1; 19,488 SNPs covering chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, and Y; data was analy- 1Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, zed using a proprietary algorithm. Follow-up information was sought for Turkey, 2Department of Urology, Zeynep Kamil Women and Children Training and suspected SCT cases. Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Yeditepe University, Faculty of Results: 65 (0.1%) clinical samples were identified by NIPT as suggestive Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Marmara University, Faculty of Dentistry , Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Marmara University, of SCTs: XXX, XXY, or XYY. All were low-risk for fetal aneuploidy at other Faculty of Medicine, Department of Urology, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey. interrogated chromosomes. Mean maternal age was 33.9 years and mean gestational age was 15.3 weeks. Karyotype information was available for 19 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANcDas,e Us: K17 | tWruWe pWos.itEivSeHs (G5 .XOXRX,G 9 XXY, 3 XYY) and 2 false positives (X6X9X).ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index This resulted in an overall positive predictive value (PPV) of 89.5%, with polythelia, cryptorchidism and hypotonia were observed. These symptoms PPVs for XXX, XXY, and XYY of 71.4%, 100%, and 100%, respectively. Of the coincided with SGBS diagnosis, so molecular genetic testing of GP C3
 gene 46 patients without confirmation, 25 declined invasive testing, and no data was performed. Deletion of exons 5-8 in GP C3
 gene was detected. is available for the remainder. Information about invasive confirmation de- In 2011 the same mother gives birth to a healthy son. The third pregnancy cisions was available in 44 cases: 17 (38.6%) had invasive confirmation and (2012) ended in miscarriage at the 13th week of gestation after CVS. Sono- 27 (61.4%) declined; two of the cases that declined invasive confirmation graphy of fetus showed increase NT (3.1mm), enlarge liver and diaphragma- had genetic testing at birth. Follow-up is ongoing. tic hernia. The familial mutation was detected. Conclusions: Results of this SNP-based approach for SCTs demonstrate good PM01.84 PPVs in clinical practice. Confirmation rate for these disorders in a clinical Prenatal whole genome SNP array diagnosis: relevance of unexpected setting was limited as invasive testing was pursued in less than half of cases abnormal results in pregnancies with and without ultrasound where invasive testing decisions were known. anomalies PM01.82 M. Joosten, K. E. M. Diderich, D. Van Opstal, L. C. P. Govaerts, S. R. Riedijk, A. K. E. Prinsen, Why is there a relatively low uptake of prenatal diagnosis for sickle F. A. T. De Vries, R. J. H. Galjaard, M. I. Srebniak; Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. cell disease? P. Lakeman1, K. F. L. Douma2, A. Zwagemaker3, H. E. Peters3, K. C. A. Holtkamp4, L. Background: Henneman4, C. L. Harteveld5, M. Peters3; 1Academic Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, We routinely perform SNP array analysis as a first-tier test 2Academic Medical Center, Department of Medical Psychology, Amsterdam, Netherlands, for all prenatal indications. Array detects more clinically relevant anomalies 3Academic Medical Center, Emma Children’s Hospital, Department of Paediatric including pathogenic aberrations that are not related to the indication. The Haematology, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4VU University Medical Center, Department of chance of finding these so-called unexpected diagnoses (UD) is one of the Clinical Genetics, Section of Community Genetics, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Leiden University Medical Center, Department of reasons that the use of array in prenatal diagnosis is controversial. We will Clinical Genetics, Hemoglobinopathies lab (LDGA), Leiden, Netherlands. sMheotwh othdes :relevance of detecting UDs, based on the nature, prevalence, coun- seling and outcome of the affected pregnancies. In 2010-2014 3,326 patients were referred for prenatal SNP Background: In the Netherlands, each year 40 to 60 children with sickle cell array testing (Illumina): 1,682 pregnancies with and 1,644 without ultra- disease (SCD) are born. The uptake of prenatal diagnosis (PND) for SCD is sound anomalies. All cases of UD were discussed in a multidisciplinary team relatively low: an estimated 5 to 7.5% of couples at risk choose PND. Does consisting of laboratory specialists and clinical geneticists before disclosure. this reflect an informed choice? The aim was to explore factors affecting this ARlel spualttise:nts received pre- and post-test counseling. Psychological help was uptake. available if required. Methods: Factors involved in reproductive decision-making of couples at In 1:208 (16/3,326) cases an UD was found. Eleven were severe risk for offspring with SCD were explored by: a) performing semi-structured early-onset untreatable diseases. In 9/11 severe cases (e.g. Duchenne mus- interviews with 21 parents of a child identified with SCD after symptoms cular dystrophy, Angelman syndrome) the UD helped the couples in making (n=13) or by neonatal screening (n=8) (2009); and b) analysing 15 papers a decision about the course of their pregnancy. In 1 case the UD (22q11 de- (PubMed;1988-2013). letion) was found later in the pregnancy when termination was no longer Results: Factors resulting in refraining from PND for SCD were: having no aC opnocslsuibsiiloitny. In this case delivery was transferred to a tertiary hospital. No experience with SCD, not experiencing SCD as severe, fear for miscarria- severe late-onset diseases were detected. ges, keeping the child’s diagnosis (and own carrier status) secret, fear for : We will show that in the great majority the UD was relevant stigmatization, religion, a strong wish to have a child, as well as insufficient for counseling and pregnancy management. This adds another reason to the knowledge about SCD amongst couples at risk and care providers. Those known recommendations to use SNP array for all prenatal indications. who considered PND, had experience with disease symptoms, were in early P S01
.85 pregnancy (when pregnant) instead of later gestational age, wanted to be Molecular cytogenetic examination of female somatic gonadal cells in prepared before birth, had higher socio-economic status, more often single cryopreserved ovarian tissues: detection of chromosomal aneuploidy marital status, and more extensively adopted the Dutch culture. and mosaicism. Conclusion: Lack of understanding about the severity of SCD, perceiving J. Chrudimská1, T. Borgbo2,3, M. D. Libik1, L. Dvořáková1, H. Zůnová4, J. Drabova5, N. high risks for obstetric complications and cultural aspects resulted in re- Ptáková1, M. Macek jr.1, C. Y. Andersen3, M. Macek sr.1; 1Charles University - 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, fraining from PND for SCD. Improving knowledge among couples at risk and Czech Republic, 2Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 3Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, care providers is important and counselling should be repeated. Future non- Denmark, 4University of Chemistry and technology Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, invasive testing might influence the uptake for PND for SCD. 5University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. P S01
.83 Prenatally suspected and after the birth confirmed Simpson-Golabi- Behmel syndrome: familial case We studied somatic ovary cells (SOCs) by molecular cytogenetic methods E. Benusiene1,2, S. Tumene3,2, A. Matuleviciene1,2, R. Meskiene1,2, V. Kucinskas1,2; since they have an important role in nurturing of oocytes. 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, DNA from ovarian tissue cells of females in their reproductive age (women Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu 29 +/-0.,8 years) who had their ovarian tissue cryopreserved and consented Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, to research was subjected chromosomal aneuploidy screening by VeriSeq Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. (Illumina), MLPA (Subtelomeric mix, MRC Holland), QF-PCR (Devyser) and arrayCGH examinations (24Sure V3, Illumina). VeriSeq detected low level mosaicism in 4/39 cases (10.3%) with monosomy We present fetal ultrasound, newborn clinical and molecular testing fin- of chromosome 19, trisomy 4, 21 (isolated) and combined with trisomies 4, dings in a case of Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) diagnosed 12. QF-PCR did not confirm trisomy 21 mosaicism revealed by VeriSeq, since prenatally and confirmed after the birth. In the first pregnancy (2009), ul- it is below the detection limit of QF-PCR. On the other hand, MLPA (sub- trasound examination at 29 weeks of gestation revealed fetal macrosomia telomeric mix) revealed duplications/deletions of long and short arms in (parameters>99‰), macroglossia, depressed nasal bridge, hypertelorism, 5/36 (13.9 %): dupl. chrom. 21p (gene STCH), associated in 2/5 cases with nephromegaly, clinodactyly and polyhydramnios. del. chrom. 16p (DECR2), in 2/7 with deletion of chromosome 16q (GA S8
), The differential diagnosis between overgrowth syndromes was performed, in 1/5 with dupl. chrom. 2p/3p (AC P1
), including del. chrom. 13p (PSP C1
). but most of these syndromes share the same pathological findings, so it was All suspective results will be expanded by centromeric mix and verified by difficult to differentiate them prenatally. However, after comprehensive lite- a-CGH, including low level mosaicism from the VeriSeq assay. rature analysis, we notice specific phenotype sings in mother as suspected Although the biological significance of these observations is currently not mutation carrier (Golabi and Rosen, 1984) and fetal facial 3D evaluation, clear, our pilot study indicates that molecular cytogenetic testing in SOCs gender, absence of omphalocele and CNS structural defects enabled to con- could provide additional evidence on the genetic quality of cryopreserved centrate on SGBS as the most probable diagnosis. Since the molecular ge- ovaries and thus improve outcomes of assisted reproduction from this tis- netic testing of GP C3
 and GP C4
 genes in Lithuania was impossible at that sue. Supported by FNM00064203, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022, NF-CZ11-PDP-3- moment, genetic counselling after delivery was recommended. 003-2014, LD14073 and IGA NT13770. Child (male) was born at 34 weeks of gestation via s/c. After the birth brea- thing insufficiency, macrosomia, macrocephaly, broad forehead, hypertelo- ri 7sm 0, depressed nasal bridge, macrostomEiaS, mHaGcr 2og0lo1s5si a|, GmLidAlinSeG gOroWove, sS COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG under the lower lip, epicanthus, low-set ears, clinodactyly, brachydactyly,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM01.86 Nuclear envelope remodelling during human spermiogenesis involves somatic B-type lamins and a spermatid specific B3 lamin isoform decision for termination. In this study, the risk of the congenital anomalies R. Elkhatib1, G. Longepied1, M. Paci1, V. Achard2, J. Grillo2, N. Levy1, M. Mitchell1, C. due to radiation exposure was calculated and the importance of „teratolo- Metzler-Guillemain1,2; gical counseling“ was demonsrated to avoid unnecessary pregnancy termi- 1Inserm - Aix Marseille Université UMR_ S910
, Marseille, France, 2APHM Hôpital La nations. 139 pregnant women with the history of radiation exposure were Conception, Marseille, France. evaluated via medical records, retrospectively. Fetal radiation dose was gi- ven between 0.01-10.30 (Med. 0.75±1.59 R) to women exposed to radiation for diagnostic purposes, being unaware of their pregnancy. 65% of those The nuclear lamina (NL) is a filamentous protein meshwork, composed es- pregnant women were suggested to terminate their pregnancy while others sentially of lamins, situated between the inner nuclear membrane and the were also adviced that their babies may have congenital abnormalities at chromatin. Evidence from rodents suggests a role for the NL during sper- some level before admitted for teratological counseling. Only 6 women ter- miogenesis. The mouse spermatid NL is composed of the ubiquitous lamin minated their pregnancy following teratological counseling. Of remaining B1 and the spermatid-specific lamin B3, an N-terminally truncated isoform 133 pregnants, 3 were terminated for medical purposes while 4 were resul- of lamin B2. To explore the NL in human spermatids, we used RT-PCR on ted as spontaneous abortion. Remaining 126 pregnancies lasted as normal RNA extracted from spermatozoa (remnants of spermatid transcripts) and birth and none of the babies had abnormalities checked by physical exami- immunofluorescence on human testis to reveal a lamin B3 transcript pre- nation. In conclusion, we suggest that teratological counseling is necessary sent in human spermatids, and B-type lamins as the only lamins detectable to reduce the anxiety of families and it is an effective method to prevent in human spermatids. Unlike the mouse, we detected lamin B2 expression in unnecessary pregnancy terminations. human spermatids. Like the mouse proteins, we show that human lamin B3, P S01
.89 but not lamin B2, induces nuclear deformation, when ectopically expressed Comparison of microRNA expression in chorionic tissue of healthy in HeLa cells. We detected B-type lamins at the nuclear periphery in human and trisomic fetuses spermatids, except in the region covered by the acrosome, and as sperma- I. Svobodová, S. Pospisilova, E. Pazourkova, M. Korabecna, A. Horinek; tids mature the B-type lamins recede towards the flagellum. Only lamin B1 General faculty hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic. remains detectable on 33-47% of ejaculated spermatozoa. On spermatozoa selected for normal head density, however, this fell to <6%, suggesting that loss of the NL signal may accompany sperm nucleus compaction. We also show that the presence of lamin B2 transcripts is variable in human sper- Recently, there is an effort to associate specific pregnancy pathologies, espe- matozoa samples. The similarities between lamin expression during human cially risk of preeclampsia, with particular miRNAs in plasma, which could and rodent spermiogenesis, strengthens evidence that the NL and lamin B3 serve as biomarkers for the detection of the corresponding pathology and have conserved functions during the remodelling of the mammalian sper- so enable its early diagnosis. Direct miRNA analysis in the trisomic placental matid nucleus. tissue is an unexplored topic yet. P S01
.87 The aim of this study was to compare physiological and pathological gravi- Familial cases of severe oligozoospermia associated with a dities at level of placental miRNAs expression. homozygous nonsense mutation in a meiotic gene of unknown The chorionic villi samples (thCVS)th collected for the purposes of invasive pre- function natal diagnosis between 11 -14 gestational weeks from patients with in- M. J. Mitchell1, E. Streichemberger1, G. Longepied1, V. Delague1, C. Metzler-Guillemain1,2, creased fetal trisomy risk were examined. We supposed the differences in N. Levy1, A. Megarbane3; presence and concentration of the specific miRNAs between the group of 1Inserm - Aix Marseille Université UMR_ S910
, Marseille, France, 2APHM Hôpital La 16 CVS samples with cytogenetically confirmed fetal trisomy of 21, and 10 Conception, Marseille, France, 3St Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon. samples with normal karyotype. The expression of 381 miRNA pattern (Ta- qMan® Array Human MicroRNA A Cards) was determined using real-time PCR technology in both groups of samples. The results were then statisti- Gametogenesis is central to human biology, ensuring the faithful and effici- cally evaluated via ExpressionSuite and qBase software. Mammalian small ent transmission of genetic and epigenetic information to the next generati- nuclear RNA U6 in combination with small nucleolar RNA RNU48 was used on. An estimated 10% of couples have difficulty conceiving their own child as endogenous controls for appropriate results normalization. and in 40% of cases there is evidence of a male cause, most often reduced The nonparametric Mann-Whitney test was applied to the both group’s ex- sperm production. Assisted reproductive techniques provide solutions for pression data. many couples, but in most cases the primary cause of infertility, and the con- The group of 20 miRNAs which were significantly elevated in placental sequences for future generations, remain undetermined, with only a handful tissue of trisomic pregnancies was determined. The p-values ranged from of causal mutations identified. 0.008 to 0.05. The miRNA which most significantly differed between both We have studied a consanguineous family in which five of the six sons have groups was miR-542-5p. The current results will be subsequently verified severe oligozoospermia, 0.05x106 sperm per ml (normal = > 20x106). in maternal circulation. Genome-wide linkage analysis identified a critical region of homozygosity, Supported by the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic RVO VFN64165. containing 134 genes (LOD score Z=3.1 at θ=0.01). Sequencing the entire PM01.90 region revealed a single coding variant that was homozygous in the five Azoospermia and trisomy 18p syndrome: a fortuitous association? A oligozoospermic sons, heterozygous in the father and absent from public patient report and a review of the literature databases. The variant, p.Glu101Ter, is in a gene of unknown function that G. Jedraszak1, H. Copin2, M. Demailly3, C. Quibel2, M. Gallet2, M. Benkhalifa2, A. Receveur2; we have termed OZF13 (Oligozoospermia factor 13), and is predicted to pre- 1Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire - CHU d’Amiens, AMIENS, France, 2Laboratoire de vent expression of the protein. We have sequenced OZF13 in 100 infertile Cytogénétique et Biologie de la Reproduction - CHU d’Amiens, AMIENS, France, 3Service men with severe oligozoospermia or azoospermia and identified a unique d’Urologie et Transplantation - CHU d’Amiens, AMIENS, France. missense variant affecting a conserved amino acid. In human and mouse, we show that OZF13 predominates in the testis and localises to the cyto- plasm of spermatocytes. We conclude that OZF13 is required for efficient Complete, isolated trisomy of the short arm of chromosome 18 is very rare. progression through meiosis, and we have created a mouse model to study To date, only 24 cases of trisomy 18p have been reported in the literature, the effects of OZF13 loss on spermatogenesis and gamete quality. making it difficult to define a potentially associated phenotype. However, PM01.88 the available evidence suggests that few clinical features are shared by the- Could teratological counseling be used as an effective method in the se patients: only variable intellectual disability, variable facial dysmorphism prevention of unnecessary pregnancy losses among women exposed and epilepsy are reported in a few patients. Although three inherited cases to diagnostic radiation of trisomy 18p have already been reported, all were of maternal origin. M. Seven1, E. Fenercioglu1, E. Koparır2, E. Kirtas1, H. Ulucan1, E. Kirat1, A. Koparır1, M. We report on a patient carrying an isolated complete trisomy 18p transloca- Demir1; ted to the short arm of chromosome 14 and presenting with facial dysmor- 1Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Kanuni Sultan phism, mild intellectual disability and non-obstructive azoospermia. Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. Chromosomal abnormalities are more frequent in infertile men with poor sperm quality than the general population. Both numerical and structural chromosomal aberrations have been already reported within the context of Women are commonly exposed by radiation in the radiology and nuclear azoospermia. To our knowledge, this is the first patient with trisomy 18p to medicine departments being unaware of their pregnancies. In such situati- present a fertility impairment due to totally altered spermatogenesis and ons, mothers have often deep concern about possibility of having baby with MoreoE veS r,H faG i2 lie0 s1 a5 | G suL aA llyS fG acO edW to, mSC akO T thL eA NaDzo, oUspKe r|m Wia.W AlWtho.EuSghH fGer.tOilitRy Gdisorders were not mentioned in the 7fo 1ur the congenital anomalies. m re u e previous reports of men with trisomy 18p, none of the latter had children.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM02.02 The CO L4
A4 p.Gly533Asp mutation is prevalent in Czech Romani We suggest that azoospermia is a previously uncharacterized feature of tri- families with Alport syndrome somy 18p syndrome. We further hypothesize that two mechanisms could P. Plevova1, P. Turska1, P. Vojta2, A. Balcar1, D. Cerna1, J. Dusek3, J. Stepankova4, J. be responsible of the fertility impairment: a meiotic synapsis defect due to Nemeckova5, E. Zemankova6; the additional 18p arm that blocks meiosis, and/or overexpression of a gene 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, located on the 18p chromosome involved in the normal testicular develop- 2Institute of Molecular and Translation Medicine, Palacký University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3Department of Pediatrics, 2nd Medical Faculty of the Charles University and ment. University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Nephrology, Institute P S01
.91 of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Department of Medical Case report: male patients with normal phenotype and various Genetics, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 6Gennet Lab, s.r.o., Pribram, Y-chromosome rearrangements Czech Republic. K. Goldmann; Centre for Reproductive Genetics, Munich, Germany. CO- LIn4tAro5d,CuOctLi4oAn3: AlpoCrtO sLy4nAd4r ome is characterized by progressive hereditary nephritis, hearing loss and ocular anomalies. The disease is caused by Introduction and gene mutations. CO L4
A5 Chromosomal rearrangements of the Y-chromosome are known causes for Materials and Methods: Twelve patients with hematuria and sensorineural male infertility. Microdeletions in the azoospermia factor (AZF) regions are hearing loss were included, in whom cCarOrLie4rAs3hi CpO oLf4 pA.4G ly62 C4
OALs4pA 5 found in up to 15% of azoospermic or severely oligospermic men (1). mutation (the most frequent one in Czech patients) was excluded. Sequen- Material & Methods cing of the whole coding sequence of the , and genes Here we present data from four patients with normal phenotype, but abnor- was performed using either Sanger sequencing on ABI3130 (1 patient) or mal sperm count and infertility. For all patients, we performed conventional the ALPOCROTL M4AA5S TR kCitO (LM4Au3lt iplicom) with subsequent next generation se- karyotyping and revealed various rearrangements affecting the Y-chromo- quencing at Illumina platform (11 patients). MLPA was performed to detect some. For more detailed analysis, we performed diagnostics on either mole- genomic and rearrangements. In one patient wholegenome cular-cytogenetic or molecular genetic level. SNP arrCaOyL w4aAs4 performed. Results Results: Five of the twelve patients carried c.1598G>A, p.Gly533Asp muta- Screening of the AZFa, AZFb, and AZFc revealed a partial deletion of AZFb in tioCnO in L4
 A3 C OgLe4nAe 4in either homozygous (4 patients) or heterozygous (1 one patient, a partial deletion of AZFb and AZFc in the second one and in the patCiOenLt4)A s3tate. All the homozygots also carried the same 44 polymorphisms third one, we revealed a complete deletion of AZFb and AZFc. Here, none of in or genes in homozygous state. MLPA excluded deletion the 36 most common mutations in CFTR-gene were found. These data are in of , thus making deletion of the whole region unprobable. SNP array concordance with the previously diagnosed oligozoospermia and azoosper- showCOedL 4loAs3s of hCeOte4rAo4zy gosity of 250 Mb at various sites of the genome of mia respectively. Interestingly, we could determine a deletion of the PAR2 in one patient due to consanguinity, including 48 Mb at 2q32.1 to 2q37.1 regi- two patients using FISH and additionally a duplication of the PAR1 in one on ( and CO L4
A4genes are localised at 2q36.3). All the patients with of those. We performed SNParray analysis in two patients to determine the the mutation were of Romani origin. constitution of the Y-chromosome. Analysis of one revealed an unclear de- Conclusion: The p.Gly533Asp mutation is prevalent in Czech Alport letion pattern in the region Yq11.223-q11.23. The analysis of the other one syndrome patients of Romani origin, consanguinity being responsible for its resulted in a huge deletion on Yq11.221-q12. frequent occurrence in homozygous state. Conclusions Acknowledgements: The work was supported by IGA MZ CR, project No. We will provide detailed case comparison which shows, that performing ad- NT12246. ditional FISH and SNParrays can help to clarify the aberration status of the P S02
.03 Y-chromosome. Phenotypic and genotypic findings in a large cohort of patients with Literature: eye anomalies 1. Mc Lachlan RI, Mallidis C, Ma K, Bhasin S & de Kretser DM. Genetic disor- S. L. Broadgate1, N. Chassaing2, R. J. Holt1, P. Calvas2, N. K. Ragge1,3; ders and spermatogenesis. Reprod Fertil Dev. 10(1):97-104. 1998. 1Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2CHU Toulouse, Service de P S02
.01 Génétique Médicale, Toulouse, France, 3Birmingham Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom. SL C24
A5 recent albinism gene (OCA6): detection of a homozygous mutation in two patient from French Guiana E. Lasseaux1, A. Bertelotti2, C. Plaisant1, A. Trimouille1, F. Morice-Picard1, C. Rooryck- Thambo1, D. Lacombe1, P. Brousse2, P. Couppie2, B. Arveiler1; Anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma (AMC) are genetically hete- 1CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 2A. Rosemon Hospital Dermatology Departement, rogeneous conditions responsible for ~25% of childhood blindness. We ai- Cayenne, France. med to identify causative genes in 311 AMC subjects recruited through a UK national study. Clinical phenotyping and genetic analysis were performed using various methods: single gene sequencing, MLPA, aCGH, custom panel Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is an autosomal recessive disorder charac- and exome sequencing. Our cohort was subdivided into phenotypic sub- terized by hypomelanosis of the skin, hair, and eyes, associated with redu- groups for analysis: 56 participants (18%) had bilateral anophthalmia/seve- ced visual acuity, nystagmus, and photophobia. Recently, two new types of re microphthalmia, 37 (12%) had bilateral microphthalmia (+/- coloboma), albinism non syndromic have been identified OCA6 (SL C24
A5) and OCA7 175 (56%) had unilateral anophthalmia/microphthalmia (+/- contralateral ( C10
orf11).(1) defects), and 43 (14%) had other phenotypes e.g. isolated colobomas or Pe- Cases : Two women, aged 22 and 65 years, lived in a village along the Ma- ters’ Anomaly. Thirty-four of the 56 severe cases received a diagnosis, in- roni River in South America. They were not from the same family. They had cluding deletion/mutations in: SOX2 (15 [27%]), OTX2 (7 [14%]), VSX2 (3 a particular albinism, with similar clinical ophtalmologic characteristics : [5.4%]), ALDH1A3 (2 [3.6%]), TFA P2
A (2 [3.6%]), FOX E3
 (2 [3.6%]), also brown iris, photophobia, reduced visual acuity and nystagmus,but their hair one each: PAX6, STRA6, BM P7
, GJA8. SOX2 (7.4%), OTX2 (3.5%) and FO- was blond at birth and become darker with age. Their skin was light brown. X E3
 (1.6%) were the most common causative genes identified, with VX S2
, They were sensitive to the sun exposure and might turn brown. The second BM P7
, CHD7 and TFA P2
A each accounting for 1%. Seventy-two participants patient had a significant pachydermia with age (2). who initially received single gene screening proceeded to 187 targeted gene We analyzed these patients by Next Generation Sequencing technology with sequencing. Pathogenic variants in known genes were found in 5 (including a panel of genes involved in syndromic and non syndromic OCA (TYR, OCA2, CHD7 and FOX E3
); a further 51 had variants of unknown significance (VUS) TYR P1
,SL C45
A2, GPR143, HPS 1 to 6, SL C24
A5, MITF, PAX3, SOX10, EDN3, in known/candidate genes. Of 15 participants with whole exome analysis; EDNRB). We found the same homozygous variant in these two patients, 3 had pathogenic variants in known genes (including PAX6 and BCOR) and c.521G>A/ p.Arg174Lys in exon 5 of SL C24
A5 gene. This variant had never 9 had VUS. This study represents the largest reported phenotype-genotype been described before in the literature. This variant was not reported in the study of patients with eye anomalies. To date, 21.5% of participants have international database of mutations HGMD. There is no frequency data in a definitive diagnosis and a further 24.4% have VUS and are undergoing ESP, EXAC, dbSNP. The prediction software Polyphen and Mutation taster further analysis. predicted this variant as probably damaging. Our finding of a novel homozygous mutation in SL C24
A5 in two patients from french Guiana strengthens the importance of screening this gene in OCA (3). (1 7) 2 Wei et al., 2013 (2) Montoliu et al. 201 E4
S (3H) GM o2ri0ce1-5Pi c|a GrdL eAt aSl.G,20O1W3 , SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM02.04 PM02.06 Novel variants in OLFM2 in patients with developmental eye disease Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss due to TMPRS S3
 R. J. Holt1, S. A. U. İşeri2, S. Broadgate1, R. G. Dunn3, A. Gallagher4, C. Ogilvie5, N. K. mutations in Slovenia Ragge1,6; K. Trebusak Podkrajsek1,2, G. Klancar1, J. Kovac1, T. Battelino1,2, S. Battelino3,2; 1Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2İstanbul University, Istanbul, 1University Medical Centre Ljubljana, University Children’s Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Turkey, 3Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4Worcestershire 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3University Medical Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, Worcester, United Kingdom, 5Kings College London, London, Centre Ljubljana, Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Cervicofacial Surgery, United Kingdom, 6Birmingham Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Ljubljana, Slovenia. Kingdom. Introduction: Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) Microphthalmia, anophthalmia and coloboma are developmental anomalies is usually prelingual, nonprogressive and severe to profound. Up to date it of the eye and occur in approximately 3 in 10,000 births. They are a he- was accounted to mutations in 55 genes (Hereditary Hearing Loss Home- terogeneous group of genetic conditions, with 111 genes identified based page, http://hereditaryhearingloss.org), where the number is still rising. on published case reports and genetic databases. We identified a hetero- TMPRS S3
 gene mutations account for less than 1 % of autosomal recessive zygous de novo deletion of chromosome 19p13.2 affecting a minimum of nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) in Caucasians. In Slovenians, 26.6 % 46kb spanning regions of Olfactomedin 2 (OLFM2) and collagen, type V, al- of congenitally deaf patients and 11 % of progressive hearing loss patients pha 3 (CO L5
A3) by array CGH in a patient with bilateral microphthalmia had biallelic GJB2 mutations, where other genetic causes of ARNSHL were and cloudy vascularised corneas. While CO L5
A3 has not been implicated in not exploited so far. mammalian eye function, Olfm2 is expressed in the retina and ganglion cells Material and Methods: Targeted next generation sequencing in the index during mouse eye development. OLFM2 has also been implicated in open- family with congenitally deaf parents and their son was performed initially, angle glaucoma and elevated intraocular pressure in a Japanese population. followed by Sanger sequencing of selected TMPRS S3
 region in 35 patients Therefore, we screened the exons and flanking regions of OLFM2 for vari- with ARNSHL and no mutation identified in GJB2 or GJB6 genes. ants in a cohort of 261 patients with developmental eye anomalies using Results: Next generation sequencing in the index family revealed that a son LightScanner® technology, with subsequent validation by Sanger sequen- and his mother were homozygous for TMPRS S3
 c.208delC (p.His70Thrfs*19) cing. We identified novel mutations in three members of this cohort. These variant. Father was digenic compound heterozygote for the same variant included two variants in the 5’ untranslated region (UTR) of OLFM2 and an and common GJB2 c.35delG variant. Additionally, we identified 3 patients intronic C>A 20bp 5’ of exon 5. Of the 5’ UTR variants, one is a 4bp insertion/ homozygous for TMPRS S3
 c.208delC in a cohort of ARNSHL patients. deletion and the second is a G/C substitution, both occurring approximately Conclusions: TMPRS S3
 mutations detected in altogether 13,1% of the stu- 60bp 5’ of translation start site, separated by only 4bp and predicted to af- died patients seem to be an important cause of ARNSHL in Slovenia resul- fect transcription factor binding. ting in uniform phenotype with profound congenital hearing loss and satisf- We suggest that OLFM2 is a new gene for eye developmental anomalies, in actory hearing and speech recognition after cochlear implantation. particular associated with microphthalmia, and should be included when P S02
.07 considering eye genes to screen in these conditions. Early-onset Behr syndrome due to compound heterozygous mutations P S02
.05 in OPA1 SF3B2, a novel candidate gene for autosomal dominant retinitis D. Bonneau1,2, E. Colin2, M. Rio3, I. Desguerre4, C. Barnerias4, D. Rodriguez5, S. N’Guyen6, pigmentosa, encodes a component of the U2 small nuclear G. Lenaers1, V. Procaccio1,2, P. Reynier1,2; ribonucleoprotein 1UMR CNRS 6214 - INSERM 1083, Angers, France, 2Département de Biochimie et C. Van Cauwenbergh1, M. Karlstetter2, K. Vleminckx1,3, G. Manes4, T. Langmann2, C. Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Angers, France, 3AP-HP, Service de Génétique Hamel4, European Retinal Disease Consortium (ERDC), B. P. Leroy5,6, F. Coppieters1, E. De Médicale, Hôpital Necker,, Paris, France, 4AP-HP, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Baere1; Necker, Paris, France, 5AP-HP, Service de Neuropédiatrie , Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of France, 6Département de Neuropédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Angers, Ophthalmology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Department of Biomedical France. Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 4INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Dept of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 6Division of Ophthalmology, The Children’s Hospital Behr syndrome (MIM#210000) is characterized by early-onset optic neu- of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. ropathy associated with ataxia, spasticity, peripheral neuropathy and de- velopmental delay. Although this disorder is believed to be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, it might be heterogeneous encompassing The aim of this study was to identify and functionally characterize a novel several etioOloPgAie1s. Recently, we reported two brothe OrsP Aa1ffected with adult- candidate gene for autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP). Ten in- onset Behr-like syndrome caused by a heterozygous mutation in the optic dividuals of a Belgian adRP family in which known adRP loci were excluded atrophy 1 ( ) gene. Heterozygous mutations in , a gene encoding underwent genome-wide linkage analysis, resulting in two novel candidate for a dynamin-related GTPase involved in mitochondrial dynamics and mtD- loci with a maximum LOD score of 1.7. Whole exome sequencing in two af- NA maintenance, are the main causes of autosomal dominant optic atrophy fected individuals (HiSeq, Illumina) revealed a missense variant c.2417A>G (DOA). As many as 20% of persons carrying heterozygous OPA1 mutations p.(Tyr806Cys) in the SF3B2 gene encoding the splicing factor 3b, subunit 2. are affected with the so-called ‘DOA plus’ consisting in optic neuropathy as- The Tyr residue is highly conserved, several predictions suggest an effect on sociated with extra-ocular signs including deafness, ataxia, peripheral neu- protein function. The change is predicted to disrupt a phosphorylation site. ropathy and mitochondrial myopathyO wPiAth1 multiple mtDNA deletions. The variant co-segregates with adRP and is absent in 300 controls. No addi- We here report four children affected with early-onset Behr syndrome tional SF3B2 mutations were found in 472 unrelated adRP patients (ERDC caused by compound heterozygous mutations. These four children consortium). Ubiquitous expression of SF3B2 was demonstrated in human are affected with a strikingly similar early-onset neurological syndrome as- tissues, including retina and RPE. Localization in perinuclear and nuclear sociating severe optic neuropathy (4/4), cerebellar ataxia with cerebellar areas was shown in 661W mouse cells. Sf3b2 knockdown in Xenopus was atrophy at MRI (4/4), peripheral neuropathy (4/4), digestive involvement performed using targeted injection of a splicing blocking morpholino (Gene- (2/4) and deafness (1/4). Tools), showing gross developmental anomalies affecting the eye. To date, compound heterozygosity in OPA1 has been proven in 6 patients In conclusion, SF3B2 was identified as a novel candidate gene for adRP. (including those reported here) all affected with severe early-onset syndro- SF3B2 is required for binding of the U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein mic optic atrophy. (snRNP) to the branchpoint and is involved in early spliceosome assem- Intriguingly, the same variant p.Ile382Met, involving a highly conserved re- bly. Protein-protein interactions have been identified between SF3B2, sidue in the OPA1 GTPase domain, was recurrently found in five of six pati- SNRN P200
 and PRPF8, two proteins implicated in adRP. So far, of the seven ents in this series. Although the p.Ile382Met mutation on its own might have known adRP genes involved in splicing, six encode components of the U4/ only mild consequences, it may combine with another mutation to induce U6-U5 triple small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (tri-snRNP) complex. Our stu- a severe pathological condition which is consistent with a semi-dominant dy potentially involves other components of the spliceosome apart from the mode of inheritance. tri-snRNP complex in adRP. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 73ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S02
.09 PM02.12 Novel gene identified by exome sequencing analysis in a Colombian Mutations in Collagen, type XVII, alpha 1 (CO L17
A1) cause Epithelial family affected by autosomal recessive congenital cataract Recurrent Erosion Dystrophy (ERED) L. C. Hernandez1, O. A. Moreno1, A. Fernandez2, M. C. Lattig1; A. E. Davidson1, F. Jonsson2, B. Byström2, L. J. Backman2, T. G. Kellgren2, S. J. Tuft1,3, T. 1Universidad de los Andes, Bogota, Colombia, 2Hospital Militar, Bogota, Colombia. Koskela4, P. Rydén2, O. Sandgren2, P. Danielson2, A. J. Hardcastle1, I. Golovleva2; 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 2Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden, 3Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Koskelas Eye Clinic, Umeå, Sweden. Congenital cataract is a Mendelian disorder that affects the eye lens, a non- vascular transparent tissue, causing distortions of the light giving an opaque appearance and loss of transparency that leads to vision problems. This con- Epithelial recurrent erosion dystrophy (ERED) is an autosomal dominant dition is the worldwide leading cause of visual impairment and blindness condition associated with painful corneal epithelial erosions, typically star- for children (Chan, Wai H. et al. 2012). Several genes are known to be re- ting within the first decade of life. Between attacks the corneal epithelium sponsible for the autosomic dominant type of cataract, the most common in either appears normal or there are a small number of epithelial micro-cysts, the world population. However recessive inheritance has also been reported consistent with a healing epithelial erosion. Sub-epithelial haze may then and it is usually associated with other ocular conditions that worsen the vi- progress over several decades, which can lead to central corneal scaring. sion making it difficult to treat (Kondo, Y., et al. 2013). In this study, a family Our goal was to identify the genetic cause of ERED. A large, genealogical- of healthy parents and three affected children with zonular, nuclear conge- ly expanded, ERED pedigree of northern Swedish origin was identified nital cataract (two sons and one daughter) is described. Exome sequencing and whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed using DNA from dis- using SureSelect Human All Exon 50Mb V4 (50X depth) was performed to parate branches of the family. A novel, non-synonymous CO L17
A1 variant, uncover the genes responsible for the condition in the family. Bioinformatic c.2816C>T, p.(Thr939Ile), was found to co-segregate with disease in the ex- analysis using the reference genome GRCh37 did not find variants in any tended pedigree. CO L17
A1 encodes collagen type XVII alpha 1, a structural of the known genes, however we did identify a novel homozygous variant component of hemidesmosomes (multi-protein complexes that provides P.Gly377fs in exon 7 of the SL C37
A4 gene (NM_001164280.1). According attachment for basal epithelial cells to the underlying basement membra- to polyphen (Adzhubei IA. et al. 2010) this variant is considered damaging. ne) and thus represents an excellent candidate gene for ERED. Previously, Mutations in this gene have been found in patients with glycogen storage di- in a family with a similar ERED-like phenotype, disease was shown to be sease, however the individuals in our family show no clinical manifestations linked to Chr10q23-q24 encompassing CO L17
A1, but the authors reported of the disease. We might speculate that an abnormal glucose homeostasis that no mutation was identified (Sullivan, et al., 2003). Our re-evaluation caused by this mutation might lead to an accumulation of sorbitol forming of this data suggested that the synonymous CO L17
A1 variant, c.3156C>T a sugar cataract. p.(Gly1052Gly), that co-segregated with disease could create a cryptic spli- Funded by proyectos de investigación 2014-1, Facultad de Ciencias. Unian- ce donor site. We experimentally confirmed that this synonymous variant des leads to aberrant pre-mRNA splicing of the CO L17
A1 transcript in vitro, and P S02
.11 we suggest that both of these ERED-like corneal dystrophies are allelic and Characterization and mutational spectrum of 33 choroideremia can be attributed to mutations in CO L17
A1. families R. Sanchez-Alcudia1,2, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, M. A. Lopez-Martinez1,2, M. Garcia-Hoyos1,3, L. P S02
.13 R. J. da Silva1,2,4, N. Sanchez-Bolivar1,2, M. Corton1,2, A. Avila-Fernandez1,2, I. Lorda1,2, M. J. STX3: A novel gene linked to autosomal recessive congenital cataract, Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, B. Garcia-Sandoval5, M. I. Lopez-Molina5, F. Blanco-Kelly1,2, C. Ayuso1,2; intellectual disability phenotype in a consanguineous Tunisian family 1Department of Genetics, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz M. Chograni1, F. S. Alkuraya2, H. Chaabouni-Bouhamed1; University Hospital (IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid, Spain, 2Centre for Biomedical Network 1Faculte de medecine University Tunis Elmanar, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Department of Genetics, Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Present address: Instituto King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. de Medicina Genomica, Valencia, Spain, 4Universidad de Mogi das Cruzes, São Paulo, Brazil, 5Department of Ophtalmology, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz University Hospital (IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid, Spain. Introduction One-third of congenital cataract cases have a genetic cause. Today about 39 loci are involved in isolated or primary cataracts; several complex syndro- Choroideremia (CHM) is an X-linked chorioretinal dystrophy affecting 1 in mes including cataract with multiple anomalies and intellectual disability 50,000 people. Typically, males develop initial symptoms from night blind- have been mapped. Here is the first report of gene identification in inherited ness to peripheral visual field loss leadCinHgM t o complete blindness. Female congenital cataracts associated only with intellectual disability. carriers are generally asymptomatic, although mild symptoms can be ob- Materials and Methods served. It is caused by mutations in the gene that encodes Rab escort A total of 3 affected patients and 2 unaffected parents belonging to a consan- protein 1 (REP-1), an essential component of Rab geranylgeranyl transfera- guineous Tunisian family with congenital cataract associated to intellectual se (Rab GGTase) that controls cellular trafficking in secretory and vesicular disability were analysed. pathways. Homozygosity mapping, a successful method in identifying genetic defects We characterized 33 out of 45 unrelated families with clinical diagnoses of in consanguineous families, we carried out a genome wide scan for the five CHM. The molecular diagnostic pipeline followed include haplotype ana- members. lysis, direct sequencing, RNA studies, combined MLPA and qF-CPHCMR, CGH Moreover, we used the integrated Systems Tool for Eye gene discovery (iSy- arrays, cytogenetic studies and, in a family, whole exome sequencing. The TE) for the identification of lens specific genes with high or low expression. mutational spectrum included complete or partial deletions of gene Results being the most frequent mutations identified (13 families; 39%). Among GWS identified 2 homozygous candidate regions at chromosome 11 (p11.2- them, exon 9 deletion was recurrent affecting three families (10%). Second- p11.12) and (q11-q13.1). These regions were analysed by the iSyTE allo- ly, most pathogenic alleles carried nonsense mutations (11 families; 33%). wing the identification of less-highly expressed lens disease-associated Mutation p.Arg293* was the most frequent one, being present in four fa- genes to non-syndromic congenital cataract. Four genes (STX3 (11q12.1), milies (12%) from diverse geographical origins: Spanish, Portuguese and CCD C86
 (11q12.2), SL C3
A2 (11q12.2) and SL C15
A3 (11q13)) were selec- Polish. Frameshift p.Thr175fs* mutation was found in one Spanish and one ted according to their early expression in lens development. All exons, exon- Portuguese families. intron junctions were sequenced. By analyzing the results we identified a Our diagnostic pipeline allowed us to achieve the molecular characterizati- novel missense mutation c.122A>G in STX3 gene which results in p. E41
G. on in 73% of cases. The remainder cases should be clinically reviewed. Al- Bioinformatics analysis suggested a deleterious effect of this mutation on ternatively, other mutations in uncovered regions or in other genes can be protein structure and function. the cause. To identify the causative mutations in CHM patients is essential in Conclusion pFIaSt(iePnIt:1 m3/a0n0ag2e2m6)e,n CtI aBnEdR EtoR ,t hFeJD im HpOrSoPvIeTmAeLn Bt IoOfB tAheNrKa,p FieUsN fDocAuLsUeCdE o, nO NcoCrE- We report for the first time a missense mutation of a novel lens specific r2e0c1ti3n,g S tAhReA p BriOmRaRryE LgLe nIeStCiIcI Id(eCfDec1t2./00676). gene STX3 in a phenotype associating AR congenital cataract and intellectu- al disability. This study highlighted the genetic heterogeneity of congenital cataract. 74 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM02.14 PM02.16 Application of custom-designed high resolution CGH array in Identification of deafness genes in Israeli Jewish and Brazilian diagnosis of patients with congenital eye malformations families using Next Generation Sequencing platforms L. Rodrigues Jacy da Silva1,2,3, F. Blanco-Kelly1,2, C. Villaverde1,2, N. Reyes1,2, C. Velez1,2, E. F. T. A. Martins1,2, Z. Brownstein1, M. Birkan1, M. Sokolov1, O. Isakov3, H. Baris-Feldman4, Guillen-Navarro4, J. Rosell5, M. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, C. Ayuso1,2, M. Corton1,2; M. Frydman5, R. Sharony6, N. Shomron3, E. L. Sartorato2, K. B. Avraham1; 1Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital (IIS- 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of FJD-UAM), Madrid, Spain, 2Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Human Molecular Genetics Lab, Molecular (CIBERER), ISCIII,, Madrid, Spain, 3University of Mogi das Cruzes, Sao Paulo, Brazil, Biology and Genetic Engineering Center, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil, 4University Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 5University Hospital Son 3Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 5Danek Gartner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 6Genetic Institute, Meir Medical Center, Kfar Saba, Israel. Introduction: Congenital eye malformations are very highly heterogeneous conditions displaying a wide spectrum of overlapping phenotypes that can occur isolated or taking part of a syndrome. They include pan-ophthalmic Introduction: One in every 500 individuals presents severe to profound disorders such as anophthalmia, microphthalmia (A/M) and aniridia, and sensorineural hearing loss. According to the World Health Organization, also anomalies restricted only to the anterior or posterior segment. Our hearing loss is the most common sensory impairment. It is estimated that aim was to design and validate a customized high-resolution CGH array to 60% of congenital hearing loss may be due to genetic mutations, with high search for rearrangements across eye developmental genes causing ocular genetic heterogeneity. Over 80 genes are known to be involved in hearing malformations. loss. Traditional diagnostic techniques have become slow and costly for Material and Methods: A custom whole-genome oligonucleotide CGH array screening this large number of genes. High-throughput platforms based on (Agilent, 4x180K format) was designed to cover all exonic, intronic and re- Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) have provided an optimal solution for gulatory regions from 160 eye developmental genes and the WAGR-related diagnostics. locus at 11p13, using 130K probes. In addition, 44K thousand backbone Materials and Methods: We employed Targeted Genomic Enrichment (TGE) probes were added to cover the remained non-target genomic regions. and massively parallel sequencing to capture the exons of 284 genes as- Forty-eight patients with several phenotypes were analysed, including syn- sociated with deafness in humans and mice. We performed whole exome dromic and isolated forms of A/M, aniridia, coloboma, anterior segment sequencing (WES) on a portion of the families. A bioinformatics workflow dysgenesis and nerve optic hypoplasia that mostly were previously tested was implemented, providing an output of potential causative variants. The by MLPA for PAX6 or SOX2 deletions. segregation of a subset of variants was examined in families and controls. Results: In 4 patients, our custom aCGH allowed detect larger 11p13 dele- When relevant, functional analysis was performed. tions than the previously found by MLPA and then, refined chromosomal Results: One Brazilian and 67 Israeli Jewish families were evaluated. Vari- breakpoints. In a syndromic patient with bilateral anophthalmia, a 14q22.3- ants in over 20 genes, including TM C1
, POU3F4, MYO6, and MYO15A, were q23.2 microdeletion was detected encompassing OTX2 and SIX6, both ge- identified, solving 38% of the cases in the Jewish Israeli population. A MYH9 nes associated with A/M and septo-optic dysplasia. Non-polymorphic copy mutation segregated with deafness in the Brazilian family. number changes were also found at several candidate chromosomal regi- Conclusions: These results demonstrate that diagnostics for deafness can ons. Rearrangements ranged from 6.2Mb to 55kb. be performed optimally using NGS, leading to a better understanding of the Conclusions: Our custom aCGH represents an accurate tool for the analysis genetic profile of hearing impaired populations and mechanisms of hearing of genomic rearrangements in eye developmental diseases. loss. This work was granted by FIS (C P12
/03256), MINECO (SAF2013-46943-R) This work was supported by NIH/NIDCD grant R01-D C011835
 and São Pau- and Fundación Mutua Madrileña. lo Research Foundation (FAPESP), project number 2013/05823-5. P S02
.15 P S02
.17 Spectrum of mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in TGFBI- A genome-wide association study provides evidence of sex-specific associated corneal dystrophies involvement of Chr1p35.1 (ZSCAN20-TLR12P) and Chr8p23.1 C. J. Evans1, A. E. Davidson1, N. Carnt2, N. Veli2, S. J. Tuft2,1, A. J. Hardcastle1; (HMGB1 P46
) with diabetic neuropathic pain 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 2Moorfields Eye Hospital, M. Weihua1, H. A. Deshmukh1, L. A. Donnelly1, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium London, United Kingdom. 2 (WTCC C2
), Surrogate markers for Micro- and Macro-vascular hard endpoints for Innovative diabetes Tools (SUMMIT, N. Torrance1, A. D. Morris2, H. H. Colhoun1, C. N. A. TGFBI Palmer1, B. H. Smith1; 1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Autosomal dominant gain-of-function mutations in are responsible United Kingdom. for a diverse range of corneal dystropThGiFeBs Ii ncluding Reis-Bücklers (RBCD), Thiel-Behnke (TBCD), granular (GCD) and lattice corneal dystrophies (LCD). Here we investigated theT sGpFeBcItrum of mutations in patients with a cor- Neuropathic pain is defined as pain arising as a direct consequence of a lesi- neal dystrophy attending Moorfields Eye Hospital. In total, 58 unrelated pro- on or a disease affecting the somatosensory system and it affects around 1 in bands with a suspected -associated corneal phenotype were screened 4 diabetic patients in the UK.The purpose of this genome-wide association for mutations by direct sequencing. The most commonly identified mutati- study was to identify genetic contributors to diabetic neuropathic pain. ons occurred at two known mutation hotspot residues of the TGFBI protein, We obtained a GWAS dataset of 6,927 diabetic individuals from the Genetics Arg-124 and Arg-555. The mutations included c.370C>T; p.(Arg124Cys) in of Diabetes Audit and Research Tayside (GoDARTS) project and accessed the 17 probands, c.1664G>A; p.(Arg555Gln) in 16, c.1663C>T; p.(Arg555Trp) in prescription history of these individuals. Cases of neuropathic pain were de- 11 and c.371G>A; p.(Arg124His) in 5 patients. The phenotypes associated fined as diabetic patients with a multiple prescription history of at least one with each mutation were LCD, TBCD, GCD1 and GCD2, respectively. Howe- of five drugs specifically indicated for the treatment of neuropathic pain. ver, the hotspot mutation c.371G>T; p.(Arg124Leu) associated with an RBCD Controls were diabetic individuals who were not prescribed any of these phenotype was only observed in one proband. Interestingly, the c.1868G>A; drugs, nor amitriptyline, carbamazepine, or nortriptyline. Those who had p.(Gly623Asp) mutation was identified in 4 patients, with clinical features one use of the five specific neuropathic pain drugs were further excluded of RBCD, LCD or both, indicating a lack of genotype-phenotype correlation. from controls. Logistic regression analyses were performed to test genetic Two probands with LCD had c.1859C>A; p.(Ala620Asp) and c.1877A>G; associations, adjusting with covariates. p.(HTiGs6F2B6IArg) mutations anGd SoNn e proband with RBCD had a c.1874T>A; Overall, 961 diabetic neuropathic pain cases and 3,260 diabetic controls p.(Val625Asp) mutation. One patient with LCD, TwGhFoB wI as mutation negative were identified. We found a cluster in the Chr1p35.1 (ZSCAN20-TLR12P) for , had a mutationT iGnF BI that resulted in a re-diagnosis to Meretoja with a lowest P value of 2.74 x 10-7 at rs71647933 in females and a cluster syndrome. In summary, a limited spectrum of mutations is respon- in the Chr8p23.1, next to HMGB1 P46
 with a lowest P value of 8.02x 10-7 sible for the majority of -associated corneal dystrophies. Mutations at rs6986153 in males. The narrow-sense heritability of neuropathic pain affecting residues Arg-124 and Arg-555 show strong genotype-phenotype from the overall dataset was 14.7%. Sex-specific narrow sense heritability correlation, whereas mutations affecting other residues show more variable was higher in males (30.0%) than in females (14.7%). phenotypic expression. This GWAS on diabetic neuropathic pain provides evidence for the sex- specific involvement of Chr1p35.1 (ZSCAN20-TLR12P) and Chr8p23.1 (HMGB1 P46
) with the disorder, indicating the need for of further research. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 75ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM02.18 1Unit of medical genetics and oncogenetics, CHU Fes, fes, Morocco, 2ORL department Comprehensive evaluation of the FBN1, LTB P2
 and ADAMTS L4
 genes University Hospital Hassan II Fes, fes, Morocco. in 207 patients with ectopia lentis B. L. Callewaert1, S. Van Nuffel1, L. De Potter1, E. De Bals1, J. De Backer1, O. Vanakker1, H. Van Esch2, M. Biervliet3, J. Désir4, J. Vandenende5, A. De Paepe1, B. Leroy1, P. Coucke1; Non syndromic sensorineural hearing impairment is inherited in a predo- 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Center for minantly autosomal recessive manner inD uFp N t oB 7 10 % of cases. The gene more Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Center for Medical often involved is GJB2, encoding the gap junction protein Connexin 26. To Genetics, University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, 4Department of Medical date, no clinical characterization of the inner-ear defects has been Genetics, Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 5Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. reported in our population, which precludes the provision of prognostic in- formation and genetic counseling. The aim of our study was to determine the prevalence and spectrum of GJB2 mutations, in Moroccan patients and estimate the carrier frequency of the Ectopia lentis (EL) can occur isolated or within a syndromal constellati- 35delG mutation in the general population. on. The most prevalent cause of congenital EL is Marfan Syndrome (MFS), Genomic DNA was isolated from 60 families/unrelated patients with reces- which requires a lifelong cardiovascular follow-up. Because of the evolving sive or sporadic deafness. Molecular studies were performed using PCR and phenotype, FBN1 testing is often requested in children with EL. In patients direct sequencing to screen for GJB2 mutations. without an FBN1 mutation, the absence of a definite diagnosis may cause Of the 34 cases of family deafness, 9 patients had the 35delG homozygous psychological distress and unnecessary examinations. Recently, mutations mutation with a frequeGnJcBy2 of 26.47%. In sporadic cases the frequency was in LTB P2
 and ADAMTS L4
 have been implicated in congenital glaucoma and 15,4 %. We also identified two other mutations: G200R and G59R. microspherophakia with EL, and EL et pupillae, respectively. Our data suggest that mutations are the leading cause of moderate- We analyzed the FBN1, ADAMTS L4
 and LTB P2
 genes in 207 probands refer- to-profound congenital inherited deafness in Moroccan population. The ab- red for EL over a period of 22 months using a step-wise PCR-based next-ge- sence of genetic alterations in the other cases (78.34%) clearly suggests the neration sequencing approach. One hundred fifty-four probands harbored involvement of other genes that require further genetic analysis. an FBN1 mutation (of which 47 fulfilled the 2010 Ghent criteria for MFS) and 53 did not (of which 9 patients fulfilled the criteria). Of these 53 patients, PM02.22 four harbored biallelic mutations in ADAMTS L4
 (c.767_786del; c.2237G>A, Multi-Trait Genome-wide Association Studies (GWAS) to investigate c.2021_2022delCT, c.2977C>T, c.963dup). One proband had a homozygous hearing function and interactions with BMI and blood pressure LTB P2
 mutation (c.4964A>G; p.Tyr1655Cys). In another proband only one D. Vuckovic1, M. P. Concas2, M. La Bianca3, M. Pirastu2, P. Gasparini4, G. Girotto1; heterozygous LTB P2
 mutation (c.3850C>T, p.Arg1284Cys) was found. 1DMS - University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute of Population Genetics, National Research Council of Italy, Sassari, Italy, 3Medical Genetics - IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, FBN1 is the primary gene to screen in EL (mutation detection rate 75%) Italy, 4DMS - University of Trieste/IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. but if negative should be followed to include ADAMTS L4
 and LTB P2
 as this reveals a final diagnosis for 11% of the remaining patients (and even up to 15% if the MFS criteria are not met). Our prospective data further indicate The genetic bases of complex traits such as Normal Hearing Function (NHF) that a FBN1 mutation is found in 92.2% of all patients fulfilling the 2010 and Age-Related Hearing Loss (ARHL) are largely unknown. Multivariate Ghent criteria for MFS. GWAS is a new and powerful tool for detecting candidate genes. Here, it Methusalem grant of Ghent University to ADP: 01M01108. was applied to simultaneously analyse hearing thresholds and also combine P S02
.19 them with Body Mass Index (BMI) and Blood Pressure (BP), as potentially Clinical utility of targeted Nextgen sequencing and array CGH panels interacting traits. along with mitochondrial genome analysis for inherited eye diseases A meta-analysis of 2059 subjects from isolated cohorts of Italy and Cen- S. P. Shankar1,2, J. Yan1, Z. Whitt1, B. Bunke1, C. d. Silva1, S. Richards1, M. Hegde1, J. J. tral Asia were analysed by multivariate linear mixed model regression Alexander1; (Zhou&Stephens 2014) and results were combined, based on inverse-va- 1Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States. riance weights (R-package MultiMeta). After adjusting for sex, age and rela- tedness, the following traits were tested: (a) 4 HT (0.5, 2, 4, 8 kHz); (b) HT and BMI and (c) HTC aYnPd4 BB1P . CNT- PNrAePli2m inary results for HT (a) identified the following top SNPs: rs181948008 Introduction: Next generation sequencing (NGS) panels are increasingly (p=4e-09) within MM P20
gene, rs1523730 (p=3.04E-07) close to used in molecular diagnosis of genetically heterogeneous eye diseases. We a gene located within the deafness locus DFNB13 and rs72984055 report the yield of these tests in a clinical setting. (p=2.27E-07) within (other metalloproteinases were already invol- Materials and methods: We custom designed a comprehensive panel that ved in hearing loss). In order to investigate previous epidemiological data in included NGS and array comparative genome hybridization (aCGH) for 208 which higher BMI was associated with poorer hearinPgR (ICMu2rh, an et al. 2013), nuclear genes and mitochondrial genome sequencing. We also offered tar- a genome-wide analysis (b) was performed revealing suggestive associa- geted nextgen panels for specific conditions such as retinitis pigmentosa. tion with rs62418085 (p=2.47E-07) located within a gene already 222 individuals with eye diseases were tested using comprehensive or tar- associated with fatty acid levels. Up-to-date results will be presented and geted nextgen sequencing, mitochondrial genome testing and/or array CGH discussed. panels. In conclusion, the multivariate approach can give significant boost in stati- Results: We found pathogenic variants in 71/222 (32%) individuals. Of the- stical power for correlated traits and allows investigating genetic bases for se positive results, 59 were identified by comprehensive or targeted nextgen different related traits. panels alone, 12 individuals had pathogenic copy number variants identi- fied on aCGH, of which 6 were for dominant conditions and 6 for a second re- P S02
.23 cessive change. In 10 of these individuals, one definitive pathogenic variant New mutation found within OTOR gene involved in deafness in two was identified, the second was a variant of unknown significance. Another Sudanese families from Al-Jazirah state- Sudan: using Next Generation 14 individuals had variants that need additional analysis to determine signi- Sequencing (NGS) ficance. No pathogenic mitochondrial variants related to eye disorders were S. M. O. Sarour1, A. M. Zayed2, M. O. M. Ibrahim1, D. E. M. Albadry3, M. M. Hassan4,5, O. E. found in 99 individuals that had testing. . Yousif6, M. A. Salih7,8; 1faculty of medicine -University of Khartoum, khartoum, Sudan, 2Faculty of medical Conclusions: Nextgen sequence analysis alone identified ~27% conclusive Laboratory Sciences, Omdurman Islamic University, khartoum, Sudan, 3Faculty of pathogenic molecular finding and when complemented with aCGH identi- Medicine, University of Elimam Almahadi, kosti, Sudan, 4Faculty of medical Laboratory fied an additional 7-8% contributory disease-causing variation but none Sciences, University of Medical Science and Technology, khartoum, Sudan, 5Department from the mitochondrial genome sequence analysis. Therefore, complete of Bioinformatics, Africa city of technology, Khartoum, Sudan, 6Federal ministry of mitochondrial genome sequencing should be reserved only for individuals health, khartoum, Sudan, 7Department of Bioinformatics, Africa city of technology, with suspected syndromic mitochondrial disorder. The most efficient and khartoum, Sudan, 8Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, cost effective testing is a clinical phenotype driven targeted Nextgen se- University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. quencing panel with reflex to aCGH in those that have negative sequencing results. The next generation sequencing technology (NGS) is one of most promising P S02
.21 and cost effective alternative for whole genome exome sequencing, which Genetic and molecular analysis of the GJB2 gene in Moroccan was used to identify unknown mutations among hearing loss patients. New population with non syndromic hearing loss and possibly pathogenic mutations were screened using NGS (target genes l. bouguenouch1, m. abbassi1, H. Sayel1, k. belhassan1, M. ridal2, M. Alami2, k. ouldim1; sequencing) for hearing impairment panel including more than 80 genes. 76 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOKnToLwAinNg Dth,e U faKc t| oWf WhigWh r.EatSesH oGf .fOalsReG positive pathogen predictions ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM02.26 Prevalence of Non Syndromic Hearing Loss genes in a cohort of found SNPs, different prediction models were combined to enhance predic- French patients tion power. Two female patients within two Sudanese families from Al-Jazi- A. F. Roux1,2, V. Faugère1, M. Moclyn1, D. Baux1,2, Z. Azher1, A. Rodriguez1, G. Garcia- rah state, displayed hearing loss, and Non-synonymous variant were detec- Garcia2, C. Vaché1,2, C. Blanchet3,4, M. Mondain3,4, M. Koenig1,2, M. Claustres1,2; ted and the SNP caused an amino acid substitution in the protein encoded 1Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, by gene OTOR (OMIM #606067). Then, bioinformatics tools were used to 2Laboratoire de génétique de maladies rares, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 3Service ORL, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Centre National de support the significance of this mutation, and also confirmed the genotype- Référence Maladies Rares “Affections Sensorielles génétiques », CHU Montpellier, phenotype co-segregation in family members, in addition searched for the Montpellier, France. SNP that cause mutation within a control exons target SNPs (not founded). The involvement of OTOR in hereditary hearing impairment has not been observed in the Sudanese population so far. Hearing loss is the most common sensory disorders and can affect up to Keywords: Hearing impairment, Next Generation Sequencing, single nu- 1/500 newborns. Before NGS platform could be implemented in diagnostic cleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), Non-synonymous variant, OTOR gene, Su- labs, the molecular diagnosis of non syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) was re- danese families lying solely on the screening for mutations at the DFNB1 locus. Recently, PM02.24 we have developed a panel consisting of 71 genes known to be involved in Gene panel testing in non-syndromic hearing loss: validation on a ARNSHL, ADNSHL and X-linked NSHL. The libraries were generated with Il- British Asian cohort lumina Nextera Rapid Capture Custom Enrichment or Nimblegen SeqCap EZ S. Boardman1, L. A. Mavrogiannis1, L. Crinnion2, C. M. Watson2, R. S. Charlton1; Choice and run on an Illumina MiSeq platform. 1Leeds Genetics Laboratory, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2Translational Genomics, Leeds, All NSHL patients, referred over the last 10 years and negative for DFNB1 United Kingdom. mutations (more than 500) are currently being tested. The strategy applied DFNB1 GJB2, is as follow: when recessive inheritance is suspected only the patient is te- sted by NGS; when dominant inheritance is suspected, a minimum of three , effectively the connexin 26 gene is the leading genetic cau- relatives (the patient, affected and control family members) are tested. In all se of non-syndromicD hFeNaBr1ing loss and testing is integrated in mainstream cases, validation and segregation analyses of the potential pathogenic vari- clinical pathways. However, the list of deafness genes is long - and still ex- ants is performed by Sanger sequencing. panding - while the detection rate in most diagnostic streams is in Although X-linked HL is considered as rare, we’ve already identified mutati- the range of 10%-20%; it can be as low as 5% in British Asians. We explo- ons in the 3 known genes (POU3F4, SMPX and PRP S1
) in 3 different families. red the possibility of gene panel testing using a custom-designed HaloPlex In addition, mutations in the myosins genes are recurrent, whereas some of targeted genomic capture kit (Agilent Technologies) to obtain the coding the other HL genes are scarcely involved. These results herald major NSHL regions of the majority of non-syndromic deafness genes: 67 genes were molecular diagnosis improvements, which will directly benefit patients and included, amounting to 270 kb, with design coverage of ovDerF N97B%1. For va- families. lidation we sequenced 59 anonymised samples of local British Asian child- ren with suspected genetic hearing loss and no causative changes P S02
.27 through an established pipeline of massively parallel sequencing on Illu- Genetically related hearing loss- results of exome sequencing in mina instruments. With structured data filtering aGnIdP Cc3onLsHeFrvPaLt5iveL OvXarHiaDn1t Polish patients. A. Pollak1, U. Lechowicz1, A. Podgorska1, P. Stawinski1, J. Kosinska2, M. Oldak1, H. MevYaOlu1a5tAionM cYrOit3eAriaO wTOe FidPeCnDtifHie1d5 pSaTtRhoCgenic ToMr lIiEkely pathogenic mutations, Skarzynski3, R. Ploski2; verified by Sanger sequencing, in 15 cases within , , , 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, , , , , , and . Actual average aggregate Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Centre of Biostructure, Medical University of coverage exceeded 90% at a depth of 30x. The datasDeFtN eBn1abled definition of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, the analytical and clinical scope of the workflow for servicDeF cNoBn1sideration, Poland. predicting a 6-fold increase in yield compared to testing, while at the same time sampling the mutation background of non- deafness in British Asians. Hearing loss is an extremely heterogenic trait, approximately 50-60% of ca- P S02
.25 ses of hearing loss are due to genetic factors. The genes responsible for the Etiology of hearing loss in a Newborn Screening Program occurrence of hearing loss usually encode proteins located in the inner ear. K. C. Costa1,2, T. Pereira2, M. Pomilio1, S. M. S. Costa1, E. L. Sartorato1; Majority of patients with autosomal, recessive deafness harbour mutations 1Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética da Universidade de Campinas in only one gene- GJB2. Mutations in other genes, which products are direct- -UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2Associaçao Terapeutica de Estimulação Auditiva e de ly involved in the hearing process, may also result in hearing loss. To date, Linguagem, Jundiai, Brazil. approximately 300 genes involved in the processing of auditory information Introduction: has been described, and still the new one are discovered. Efficient search for variants in the gene structure requires the use of the most modern techni- The Newborn Hearing Screening  P1
rogram (NHSP) is a way to ques of molecular biology, such as the next-generation sequencing. Here we promote early diagnosis of hearing impairment. Concomitantly with early present the results of whole exome sequencing (WES) performed on 15 in- diagnosis and intervention, it is important to search for the primary cause. dividuals suffered from familiar, prelingual hearing loss. All exome sequen- In developed countries about 50% of the causes of isolated deafness have a cing was performed on HiSeq 1500 using Illumina exome enrichment kits. gOebnjeetcitci voeri:g in. In Brazil most of cases are due to environmental factors, s2uch Acknowledgements aMse ctohnogde:nital infections, perinatal asphyxia, kernicterus and meningitis. This study was supported by NCN grants: NCN 2012/05/N/NZ5/02629 and To investigate the causes of hearing loss diagnosed at NHSP. NCN 2011/03/D/NZ5/05592 Retrospective study of records of 21 deaf diagnosed from August PM02.28 2R0e0su3 lttos July 2014. Results of laboratory tests, imaging and genetic testing Identification of novel genes and mutations associated with hearing were analyzed. loss in the Middle Eastern Arab population by next generation : Twenty four children had a sensorineural hearing impairment, sequencing 20 were bilateral. Eight cases of newborns remained in Newborn Intensive N. Danial-Farran1,2, Z. Brownstein1, A. Abu-Rayyan3, M. Sokolov1, M. Birkan1, M. Sagi4, N. Unit. One case showed craniofacial anomalies and 2 patients had inner ear Shomron5, S. Shalev2, K. B. Avraham1; malformations. In 3 newborn the hearing loss was due to perinatal asphy- 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of xia. Two newborns had history of infectious disease. Considering the gene- Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 2Genetics Institute, Ha’Emek Medical tic faGcJtBo2rs, 4 individuals had a history family of deafness; 3 nMewTRbNorRn1s were Center, Afula, Israel and Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute from consanguineous family, 4 newborns were homozygous for 35delG in of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 3Hereditary Research Lab, Department of Life Sciences, Bethlehem University, Bethlehem, Palestinian Territory, 4Department of Human Genetics tChoen clusi ognen: e, and 2 presented the A827G mutation in the gene. and Metabolic Diseases, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, Three cases the etiology remains unknown. 5Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv The early etiological research hearing impairment contributes University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. to support and assist disabled hearing and their families and also for assi- stance in public health measures. 1- Morton CC, Nance WE. Newborn Hearing Screening- A Silent Revolution. Introduction: One in one thousand newborns suffer from congenital hea- N Engl J Med 2006, 354:2151-64. ring loss, making it the most prevalent sensory disorder in humans. To date, 2- Simões AM, Guerra ATM. A surdez evitável: predominância de fatores hundreds of mutations in more than 80 genes are associated with a hearing ambientais na etiologia da surdez E n Se Hur Gos s 2e 0ns 1o 5ri a |l Gpr Lof Aun Sd Ga. O J.P Wed , i Sat Cr O19 T9  L2
, A NdDis,a UbilKit y|. WNeWxt GWen.EerSaHtioGn .SOeqRuGencing (NGS) has improved the diagno7s7tic 254-7.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index yield dramatically. The Middle Eastern population, comprised of different Hereditary Hearing Loss (HHL) is an extremely genetically heterogeneous ethnic groups and known to exhibit high rates of consanguinity, has benefi- disorder that prompted us to develop a powerful diagnostic algorithm cha- ted from NGS. Furthermore, as many mutations first identified in this popu- racterized by screening of 113 HHL genes by targeted re-sequencing fol- lation have been subsequently found worldwide, this population is instru- lowed, in negative cases, by whole exome sequencing to detect causative mental in determining genes crucial for hearing. mutation in new genes. Thanks to this strategy we identified PSI P1
/LEDGF Materials and Methods: We applied targeted genomic enrichment along as a novel gene causing sensorineural progressive HHL restricted to the me- with massively parallel sequencing, encompassing 284 genes that included dium-high frequencies and a variable eye phenotype (i.e. uveitis, optic neu- 121 human genes and 163 human orthologues of mouse deafness genes, on ropathy) in an ltalian pedigree. Further clinical examinations of the affected 91 families of Arab descent. One family underwent whole exon sequencing members showed normal amplitude of the ABR indicating no involvement (WES). SL C25
A21 of the auditory nerve while VEP indicated some differences in terms of visu- Results: This research uncovered novel mutations in 23 known deafness ge- al acuity and optic nerve functionality. nes. A novel gene, , associated with hearing loss was detected by A frameshift deletion leading to a premature stop codon (c.1554_1555del, WES. We were able to determine the causative mutation for deafness in 32% p. E518
Dfs*2, p.T519X) with truncation of the last 12 amino acids and segre- of our population. gating with the disease was detected. Our additional studies using different Conclusions: NGS is an optimal technology for genetic diagnosis of hearing methodological approaches (i.e. cDNA analysis, RNA Seq, immunolabeling, loss. Challenges remain in the search for mutations responsible for deafness: etc.) demonstrate that: 1) this deletion does not lead to mRNA degradation to identify the causative variant, particularly when several variants exist and 2) Psip1 is expressed in the nuclei of all hair cells and supporting cells of segregate in the family; to detect structural variations and regulatory ele- both mouse cochlea and vestibular system with the exclusion of the auditory ments and to prove their involvement in hearing impairment; and to prove nerve. mutations in a novel gene causes hearing loss by relevant functional assays. Recently, PSI P1
 was described as a transcriptional co-activator regulated by This work was supported by NIH/NIDCD grant R01-D C011835
. miR-135b in cells of the mouse inner ear and as a possible protector against P S02
.29 photoreceptor degeneration. Present findings strongly suggest an impor- The contribution of GJB2 gene mutations to development of early tant role of PSI P1
 in HHL as well as in eye defect and further highlight the onset hearing loss in affected group of patients in Lithuanian reliability of our strategy to study the genetic basis of HHL population. P S02
.31 V. Mikstiene1, J. Byckova2, E. Gradauskiene2, E. Lesinskas2, A. Utkus1; A Next Generation Sequencing amplicon-based strategy to explore 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,Vilnius University, Inherited Retinal Degeneration complexity Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre of Ear, Nose and Throat Diseases, Vilnius University Hospital V. Artusi1, L. Chiesi2, I. Bernardis1, E. Tenedini1, L. Artuso1, G. M. Cavallini2, A. Percesepe3, Santariškių clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania. V. Marigo4, E. Tagliafico1; 1Center for Genome Research, University of Modena, Modena, Italy, 2Institute of Ophthalmology, University of Modena, Modena, Italy, 3Department of Medical and Congenital hearing loss (CHL) is one of the most common traits diagnosed Surgical Sciences for Children and Adults, Medical Genetics Unit, University Hospital of 1/1000 newborns. Genetic factors contribute to 2/3 of CHL cases in indu- Modena, Modena, Italy, 4Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. strialized countries. Mutations of GJB2 gene are a major cause of CHL world- wide. The aim of the study is to establish the contribution of GJB2 gene mutations Inherited Retinal Degeneration (IRD) are a group of eye disorders, characte- to development of early onset HL in affected group of patients in Lithuanian rized by photoreceptors degeneration which include: Retinitis Pigmentosa, population. Stargardt disease, Usher Syndrome and Leber congenital amaurosis. The Objectives: to determine the incidence and structure of GJB2 mutations in high genetic heterogeneity, the incompleteness of disease specific databases patients affected with early onset nonsyndromic HL, to analyze audiologic and the elevated number of genes involved in IRD, often hamper the correct features, genealogies and perform genotype - phenotype analysis. molecular diagnosis and patients stratification. Methods: Clinical data and GJB2 gene sequencing results were obtained from To clarify IRD molecular profile, we used a next Generation Sequencing a retrospective collection of 133 patients (122 unrelated probands) with (NGS) strategy and designed a custom AmpliSeq panel (Life Technologies), early onset nonsyndromic HL compiled in VUH Santariškiu clinics 2010- containing the coding sequences of 72 disease related genes, for a total of 2014. Statistic summary, homogeneity tests, and logistic regression analysis 1649 amplicons. were employed for the assessment of genotype-phenotype correlation. An in-house bioinformatic pipeline was optimized to filter synonymous Results: Our findings show high proportion of GJB2-positive patients variants and polymorphism and to annotate variants with prediction algo- (60.1%) in the study group. Most prevalent GJB2 mutations were c.35delG rithm (dbNSFP) and disease specific databases (LOVD eye diseases, Retina and c.313_326del14 (67.6% and 25.8% of mutated alleles). The statistical International, RPGR database). analysis revealed significant differences between GJB2-positive and GJB2- A cohort of 40 samples was selected (29 patients, 11 healthy relatives). They negative groups in disease severity (p=0.02), symmetry (p=0.04), and family underwent a complete ophthalmologic examination (visual acuity, anterior history (p=0.0035). The probability of identifying GJB2 mutations in pati- segment and fundus examination, ERG and/or EOG, OCT), as well as a gene- ents affected with profound/severe vs moderate/mild HL and positive vs tic counselling. negative family history estimated to be 2.773(95%CI 1.26-6.192;p=0.0116) Possibly causative mutations were detected in 62% patients (n=18). We and 3.235(95%CI 1.478-7.436;p=0.0418) respectively. found mutations in 8 genes. The most recurrent gene was mutated in 38% Conclusion: The findings of the study quantified the impact of GJB2 mutati- (n=7) of patients. The remaining seven genes harboured lower frequencies ons to the development of HL and are useful for setting up the principles for with just one or two patients mutated. Overall, seven genes were inherited the prediction of disease course in Lithuanian population. with an autosomal recessive pattern and one gene was X-linked. PM02.30 Of note, less than 21% of variants have been already described in specific NGS revealed PSI P1
/LEDGF as a new gene causing sensorineural databases. These preliminary results highlight the need to further explore progressive hearing loss and variable eye phenotypes tFhuen mdionlegc suolaurr cceosm:plexity and heterogeneity of RD in order to translate the- G. Girotto1, D. I. Scheffer2, A. Morgan1, D. Vozzi3, D. Vuckovic4, E. Rubinato1, M. Di Stazio1, se analyses into clinical practice. E. Muzzi5, S. Pensiero6, A. B. Giersch7, J. Shen7, N. Robertson7, C. Morton7, D. P. Corey2, P. Gasparini8; RARER - Area1 ( E35
E09000880002 ) 1Dep.Rep.Sciences,Dev.Pub.Health;IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo-Children Hospital-University PM02.32 of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Harvard Medical School-Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Evidence against ZNF469 being causative for keratoconus Department of Neurobiology, 220 Longwood Avenue J. A. Karolak1,2, T. Gambin3,4, M. Rydzanicz5, J. P. Szaflik6, P. Polakowski6, A. Frajdenberg7, M. Mrugacz8, M. Podfigurna-Musielak9, J. R. Lupski4,10, P. Stankiewicz4, M. Gajecka2,1; 3 Boston, MA 2115, MA, United 1Department of Genetics and Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Poznan University of States, Medical Genetic4 Institute for Maternal and Child Health- IRCCS “Burlo Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy, Univer5sity of Trieste-Department of Medical, Surgical and of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Computer Science, Warsaw University of Health Sciences, Trieste, Italy, Audiology and ENT Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Technology, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor I6nstitute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Pediatr7ics, Institute for Maternal and Child Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 6Department of Ophthalmology, Health - IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, Harvard Medical School and8 Brigham and Medical University of Warsaw, SPKSO University Ophthalmic Hospital, Warsaw, Poland, Women’s Hospital, Department of Pathology, Boston, MA, United States, University 7Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital in Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, of Trieste-Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences/ Medical Genetic Institute for Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy. 78 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 8Department of Ophthalmology and Eye Rehabilitation, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland, 9Department of Ophthalmology, Leszno Hospital, Leszno, Poland, 10Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United tal delay, dysmorphic fea tures and inner ear malformation. States. The second patient displays an isolated duplication of the region 6p25.2p25.3 ZNF469 spanning 1,195 Mb. Shehad a congenital strabismus, unilateral ptosis with amblyopia, bilateral neurosensory deafness, developmental delay, beha- Z NhFa4s 6b9een associated with Brittle cornea syndrome and central cor- vioral disturbances, and dysmorphic features. neal thickness. The latest study also revealed that rare heterozygous mutati- Both patients displayed overlapping phenotypic features with the ones pre- ons in determine keratoconus (KTCN) susceptibility etiology. KTCN viously described. FOX
C1  is a degenerative disorder of the eyZeN cFh4a6ra9c terized by stromal thinning and Further investigations are needed to determine the frequency of such cha- pZNroFt4r6u9sion of the cornea,resulting in severe impairment of visual function. racteristics and their consistency in duplication syndrome. This du- To investigate the contribution of to KTCN, wZeN SFa4n6g9er sequenced plication appears to be linked to developmental abnoFrOmXaCl1itgieesn eas well as a in 42 Polish KTCN patients and 49 Polish individuals with high my- loss of function mutations. This suggests that the normal development of at opia (HM) as a control group. The average number of variants per least the eye requires no more than two copies of the . individual was 40.59520 and 40.26531 for KTCN and HM, respectively (Wil- P
S02 .35 coxon Rank Sum test, p = 0.3601). Moreover, the average number of nonsyn- Identification of a new case of colobomatous microphthalmia with onymous variants was 16.30952 and 16.0 for KTCN and HM, respectively recessive null mutations in TNEM3 by targeted gene analysis (Wilcoxon Rank Sum test, p = 0.3724). All identified variants were previous- O. Patat1, N. Ragge2, D. Geneviève3, J. Kaplan4, P. Calvas1, N. Chassaing1; ly reported. Minor allele frequency (MAF) was determined based on the 1CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 2Le Gros Clark Building - University of Oxford, Oxford, whole exome sequencing results from 268 Polish patients without ocular United Kingdom, 3CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Hôpital Necker-Enfants abnormalities. Among missense variants, only one (rs528085780) has MAF Malades, Paris, France. ≤ 0.01 and has been identified in one patient with sporadic KTCN. However, the resulting Arg1864Lys substitution was not predicted to be deleterious basZeNdF o4n6 9different prediction algorithms and conZsNeFr4va6t9ion scores. Summa- Microphthalmia and anophthalmia are the most severe malformations of rizing, we have not found a significant enrichment of pathogenic variants the eye. Analysis of the genes currently associated to microphthalmia or in in KTCN patients. High prevalence of variantZsN idFe4n6t9i fied anophthalmia leads to the identification of a pathogenic mutation in only in our KTCN group is typical for a common genetic variation observed in 25% of cases. By combination of autozygome and exome analysis, a homozy- Sgeunpeproarl tp: oNpCuNla 2ti0o1n3. G/0en8e/tTic/ NfaZc5to/r0s0 d7i5ff4er, eNnCtN t h2a0n1 v3a/r1ia0t/ioMn/ NinZ 2/00283are gous loss of function mutation in the TNEM3 gene (previously named ODZ3) responsible for KTCN development. was reported in two sibs with isolated bilateral colobomatous microphthal- mia from a consanguineous Saudi family (Aldahmesh MA et al., Genet Med P
S02 .33 2012). ODZ3 is strongly expressed in the optic stalk in vertebrates. Mice Multiplex detection of mitochondrial variants by MALDI-TOF MS in partially knocked down for the gene ODZ3 (lacking only the transmembrane Brazilian patients with hereditary optic neuropathy domain) have morphologically normal eyes but impaired binocular vision. E. L. Sartorato, P. do Amor Divino Miranda, M. Amaral-Fernandes, A. Marcondes, A. T. A new generation sequencing approach targeted on a panel of 180 genes Maciel-Guerra, R. M. Alves, S. M. Silva-Costa; definitely or possibly implicated in microphthalmia or anophthalmia was Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas - SP, Brazil. performed on a cohort of 96 patients, and identified a third patient harbo- ring a TENM3 homozygous null mutation (c.2968-2A>T). This patient had bilateral colobomatous microphthalmia, with anterior chamber malforma- Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a mitochondrial disease cha- tion and chorioretinal coloboma, associated with mild intellectual disability. racterized by bilateral loss of vision. Over 95% of LHON cases are associated The identified mutation (c.2968-2A>T) affects a consensus acceptor splice with one of three main mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations, G11778A, site. This result supports the role of TNEM3 in human microphthalmia. The T14484C, and G3460A. Other mutations appear in 5% of cases. The objec- three patients described to date with homozygous TENM3 loss of function tives of this study were: to determine the frequency of LHON mutations, to mutations present with a similar phenotype of bilateral colobomatous mi- identify mitochondrial haplogroups in Brazilian patients and to evaluate the crophthalmia. usefulness of iPLEX Gold/MALDI-TOF MS technology in detecting LHON mu- PM02.36 tations. We analyzed a total of 101 patients, 67 with LHON clinical diagnosis Whole exome sequence analysis of 106 families with microphthalmia, and 34 with optic neuropathy of unknown etiology. The techniques used anophthalmia and/or coloboma (MAC) were PCR-RFLP, direct sequencing and iPLEX Gold/MALDI-TOF MS. The fre- K. A. Williamson1, M. Ansari1, H. Bengani1, A. Seawright1, U. Project2, V. van Heyningen1, quency of the LHON mutations observed was 83% for G11778A and 17% D. R. FitzPatrick1; for T14484C. Our findings contributed to confirm the LHON clinical diagno- 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine at the sis of 36 patients (36%) and allowed to clarify the diagnosis of 12 patients University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, (35%) with optic neuropathy of unknown etiology. The most frequent ha- Cambridge, United Kingdom. plogroups were of African origin: 
L1 /
L2  and 
L3 . The frequency of the LHON mutations and haplogroups found in the study are relatively different from other published data in other parts of the world. Furthermore, the iPLEX Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on 106 MASCO Xfa2mOiTlieXs2 that Gold/ MALDI-TOF MS technology platform proved to be a very accurate and cPoAmX6p rised two extended pedigrees, 22 trios, 12 affected-relative pairs, and efficient method to screening of the mutations and identification of the ha- 70 singletons. Samples were pre-screened for mutations in , and plogroups related to LHON. The platform combined with other techniques (paired domain): the major genes in severe bilateral MAC. was important to elucidate approximately 35% of the cases studied. Sample preparation was performed in-house or at the Wellcome Trust San- ger Institute as part of the UK10K project, which generated 75 of the exo- PM02.34 mes. Sequence alignment/variant filtering were performed as previously Two cases of duplication 6p25.3, expanding the phenotype of FOX
C1  described (PMID24462371). Targeted resequencing of more than 400 un- duplication syndrome related MAC cases was performed to identify additional/recurrent alleles of P. VANDE PERRE, A. Vigouroux, L. Bouneau, D. Dupin-Deguine, D. Bourgeois, P. Calvas; Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Purpan-CHU de Toulouse, TOULOUSE, France. the exome-indicated genes. de Pnoavthoogenically significant variants are identified and validated in 22 genes FOX
C1  to date, including the confirmed eye genes listed. Analyses to identify mutations indicate genes newly associated with developmental eye Loss of function due to mutations in thFeO X
C1  gene are known causes of dFeOfXeEc3ts. dysgenesis of the anterior segment of the eye. Very few is currently known SGTeRnAe6 Pathogenic genotypes: exome Pathogenic genotypes: resequencing about duplications involving the whole gene. Only two families have ALDH1A3 1 AR singleton - beenN pirsehvimiouursaly, 2d0e0s1cribed in which FOX
C1  duplication is associated with RARB 1 AR singleton - iris hypoplasia (MIM 308500). No further phenotypic features being repor- MAB21
L2  4 AR singletons 3 cases YA
P1  1 AD singleton 4 AD cases ted ( ). This Copy Number Variant (CNV) is very rarely re- ADAMT
S18  1 affected-relative pair 3 cases ported in the major databases as only two cases are notedF OinX CD1ecipher with FZD5 2 cases - BM
P7  1 AR singleton - only one phenotype available. ACTG1 1 extended pedigree - We report two additional unrelated cases with complete duplication GJA8 2 cases - found by array CGH. The first patient displays a 4Mb duplication of the regi- SOX2 2 cases - 1 singleton 3 cases on 6p25.3, and a 7Mb deletion in the region 12p13.33p13.31. She presented 1 singleton (CNV) - with dysgenesis of the anterior seEgSmHenGt o 2f 0th1e 5ey |e GanLdA a SkeGraOtoWco,n SusC, OintTraL-AND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 79 uterine and post natal growth retardation, atrial septal defect, developmen-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The cohort size has facilitated the identification of variants in genes with a known or novel association with MAC. Mutations in confirmed eye genes account for 17% of WES MAC cases. as drivers of the phenotype under a recessive paradigm. Our study iden- tifies 12 novel potentially pathogenic mutations (four of them recurrent) and a novel complex allele p.[(R152*; V2050L)]. In one third (31/92) of our P
S02 .37 cohort we detected the p.[(
L541 P; A1038V)] complex allele, representing Isolated microphthalmia with coloboma of optic nerve mapped to a an unusually high level of genetic homogeneity for ABCA4-related diseases. locus on chromosome 2. A combination of p.[(
L541 P; A1038V)] and/or a truncating change always R. Proskorovski1, Y. Perez1, L. Gradstein2, O. Birk1; resulted in an early disease onset. The comprehensive, population-specific 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics and the Genetics Institute, study expands our knowledge on the genetic landscape of retinal diseases. Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Department of This work was supported by the Polish National Science Center grant no. N Ophthalmology, Soroka Medical Center and Clalit Health Services, Faculty of Health N402 591640 (5915/B/
P01 /2011/40) and the Medical University of War- Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. saw grant no. 1M15/PM11D/14. P
S02 .41 Identification of four novel NHS protein-truncating mutations in Large kindred of the Jewish Iranian inbred Mashhad community presented families with X-linked cataract (CXN) and Nance-Horan syndrome with an apparently autosomal recessive phenotype of severe microphthal- (NHS) reflects the variable expressivity of the disease mia and coloboma of optic nerve. Homozygosity mapping using Affyme- S. Cheong1, P. Liskova2, V. Plagnol3, I. Russell-Eggitt4, A. J. Hardcastle1; trix 250K SNP arrays identified a single ~2.5Mb disease-associated locus 1Institute of Ophthalmology (UCL), London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Inherited on chromosome 2 between rs4672834 and rs517656411. Multipoint LOD Metabolic Diseases and First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and score was calculated and yielded a score of 3.2 at D2
S433 . Interestingly, AB- General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Genetics Institute, CB6 (MIM# 614497), encoding an ATP-binding cassette and known to be University College London, London, United Kingdom, 4Great Ormond Street Hospital for associated with autosomal dominant microphthalmia, lies within the defi- Children, London, United Kingdom. ned locus. However, Sanger sequencing of ABCB6 and its promotor revealed no mutations. Whole exome sequencing was performed and data analysis is being processed. Nance-Horan SNyHndSrome (NHS) and X-linked cataract (CXN) have previous- P
S02 .39 ly been reported to be allelic disorders, caused by NHS protein truncation Interplay between SOX10 and p54NRB:molecular and cellular and aberrant traNnHscSription, respectively. In this study, five families consequences in the context of Waardenburg syndrome and related diagnosed with NHS and one CXN family were recruitNedH.S All coding exons disorders and splice sites of the gene were PCR amplified and Sanger sequenced. A. Kavo, A. Chaoui, V. Baral, Y. Watanabe, L. Lecerf, V. Pingault, N. Bondurand; Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed for -mutation nega- IMRB, INSERM U955, Team 6, Creteil, France. tive patients. The WES dataset was filteNrHedS for rare variants (minor allele frequency ≤0.01) in congenital cataract genes, with reference to Cat-Map and GenomeTrax. Direct sequencing of coding exons revealed muNtaHtSi- SOX10 is a transcription factor (TF) with a crucial role in Neural Crest (NC) ons in 4 families; two novel frameshift mutations, p.(Val1187fs*1187) and development. Mutations within this member of the SOX family were first pSC.(MLeLu125S
C6 Mfs*
L2284 B)E, NanDd2 a segRmAeIn2tal deletion of Xp22.13 encompassing . associated with Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease (W
S4 , deafness, pig- Although the segmental deletion also disrupted four neigNhHboSuring genes mentation defects and intestinal aganglionosis). Variable phenotypes that , , and , this family did not present a clinically di- extend beyond the initial limits of this syndrome and incomplete penetrance stinct phenotype, compared to families with disruption of alone. Inte- of each feature are now reported. In addition to W
S4  or W
S2  (Waardenburg restingly, a NnHonSsense mutation, p.(Q175*), was identified in a CXN family syndrome without Hirschsprung disease), some patients present with cen- lacking any of the extra-ocular phenotypes observed in NHS patients. WES tral and/or peripheral myelination defects. While an escape from the NMD analysis of -negative patients did not reveal any variants in aN cHomSmon pathway was proposed to explain the severe phenotypes in case of trunca- candidate gene. Further investigation of the WES data is required, although ting mutations, no mechanism has been anticipated for missense mutations a mutation in a non-coding region or copy number variation of the gene so far. In vitro studies confirmed deleterious effects of the latter on the main cannot be fully excluded. This study sNuHggSests the possible genetic hetero- SOX10 functions, while about half of the resulting proteins are redistributed geneity of an NHS-like cataract-dental syndrome. Variable disease expressi- in nuclear bodies (foci) of undetermined nature and function. on observed in the CXN family with an stop mutation demonstrates that Here, we report that p54NRB (NONO) interacts with SOX10 and acts in syn- the phenotype-genotype correlation may not be as constricted as originally ergy with it to activate the expression of several target genes during NC de- suggested. velopment. Interestingly, p54NRB co-localizes with all foci forming SOX10 PM02.42 mutants . However, siRNA experiments indicated that p54NRB is not essen- Towards the genetic homogeneity of neonatal severe pseudocoloboma tial for their formation. Two other members of the DBHS protein family also of the central retina with early-onset optic atrophy (LCA9). co-localise with SOX10 mutants, raising the possible paraspeckles nature of I. Perrault1, O. Xerri1, X. Gérard1, O. Roche1,2, J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1; the foci or the re-localisation of the DBHS members in other sub-nuclear 1INSERMU1163, Institut IMAGINE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, compartments. Of note, WT SOX10 protein is also sequestrated in foci, lea- 2Department of Ophthalmology, Necker Hospital., Paris, France. ding to altered synergistic activity between this TF and p54NRB. We specu- late that the dominant negative effect we observe could contribute or be at the origin of the neurological phenotypes observed in patients. Introduction: NMNAT1 encodes a homohexameric NAD- synthesizing enzy- me as well as a chaperone that protects against neuronal activity-induced PM02.40 degeneration. NMNAT1 mutations cause a highly specific Leber congenital Next-generation sequencing of the ABCA4 gene reveals a high amaurosis phenotype characterized by severe neonatal neurodegeneration frequency of complex alleles and novel mutations in Polish patients of the central retina with early-onset optic atrophy. The purpose of this stu- with retinal dystrophies dy was to search for copy number variations (CNV) and mutations affecting A. Ścieżyńska1, D. Oziębło2, A. Ambroziak3, M. Korwin3, K. Szulborski3, M. Krawczyński4, P. Stawiński2, J. P. Szaflik3, R. Płoski5, M. Oldak2,1; 5’ regulatory elements or splicing of the gene in 22 single heterozygote in- 1Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, dex cases with the NMNAT1 phenotype. Poland, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Genetics, World Hearing Center, Institute of Results: Three unique CNVs, i.e. a 1-exon duplication, a 1-exon deletion and Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department a two exon-deletion were identified in 3/22 patients. In addition, 5 distinct of Ophthalmology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland, variants lying in the 5’UTR of the gene were identified in 10/22 individu- 4Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Warsaw, als. 1/5 UTR variant was shared by 6/10 individuals originating from the Poland, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, French Indian Ocean Island, La Réunion. This variant was undetectable in all Poland, Warsaw, Poland. available patient cDNAs (3/6), supporting down regulation or instability of the mutant mRNA. mRNA from 2/10 other individuals harboring other UTR variants were available which analysis was consistent with similar mRNA Variation in the ABCA4 locus has emerged as the most prevalent cause of defects. monogenic retinal diseases. Using next-generation sequencing targeting AB- Conclusion: Here, we report that at least 13/22 LCA individuals with single CA4, the first such approach in Polish patients with Stargardt disease (STGD, heterozygote NMNAT1 mutations carried a second disease allele undetected n=76) and cone-rod dystrophy (CRD, n=16), together with a Polish popula- by Sanger sequencing of the NMNAT1 exome. This result suggests that seve- tion exome data (n=594), we disprove the pathogenic status of p.V552I and re neonatal neurodegeneration of the central retina with early-onset optic p 8ro 0vide more evidence against a causal rEolSe HofG si x2 0fu1rt5he |r GABLCAA
S4 G vaOriWan,t sS CO atT roL pA hyN isD p, aU thK | W omW onW . oE S NH MNG A. TO 1R mG og n ic f utations. In-depth molecular ana-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index lysis of the gene and surrounding regulatory elements should be considered of amplicon-based massively parallel sequencing, Sanger sequencing, and in all patients harboring this highly specific LCA phenotype. MLPA dosage analysis. Full screens have been performed on 290 apparently P
S02 .43 unrelated consecutive cases/families, with requests originating from Clini- Cone structure and function investigation in family with an R
P1 L1
 cal Genetics, Ophthalmology, Neurology, and specialist tertiary centres. Pa- mutation thogenic or likely pathogenic outcomes were seen in 66 cases/families - a M. Bertelli1, L. Ziccardi2, A. Nicoletti1, P. E. Maltese1, M. Lombardo2; working detection rate of 23%, which may indicate more relaxed clinical fil- 1Magi’s Lab Human Medical Genetics Institute, Rovereto (TN), Italy, 2Fondazione G.B. tering and/or increased affordability of testing recently, nevertheless remai- Bietti IRCCS, Rome, Italy. ning relatively high. Local testing for familial mutations was carried out in 40 individuals. All 84 sequence and structural changes encountered, including 42 novel ones, have been recorded and evaluated systematically, comprising Screening by next generation sequencing for retinal dystrophies in a 23 a curated set for data filtering and scoring. Apart from estabOlPisAh1ed polymor- year-old female with intense photophobia and progressive bilateral visual phisms, they have also been deposited in relevant clinical databases, adding loss, identified a R P1
L1  gene mutation: p.Arg45Trp. The same genetic va- to the publically available mutation/variation spectrum of . riant was found in three family members. To examine cone structure and PM02.46 function in all family members, we obtained high-resolution retinal images The hearing phenotype associated with an in-frame deletion in FOX
L1  of the cone mosaic with a flood-illumination adaptive optics (AO) retinal ca- causing autosomal dominant otosclerosis mera, over 2 years. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), contrast sensitivity S. Stanton1, M. Lucas1, A. Griffin2, N. Abdelfatah2, S. Agrawal1, L. Parnes1, A. Batten2, K. function (CSF), combined SLO and SD-OCT imaging, MP 1e nm faiccreo perimcreotsrsy- Hodgkinson2, T. Young2; saencdt imonultifocal electroretinography (mfERG) were also performed. 1Western University, London, ON, Canada, 2Memorial University, St. John’s, NL, Canada. The complementary use of objective tools for analysis of and high-resolution views of the photoreceptor layer confirmed an asymptomatic phenotype in two family members and detected a mild phe- Introduction: Clinical otosclerosis, a bone remodeling disease of the human notype in the proband’s father. Our findings led to diagnosis of occult macu- temporal bone, involves hearing loss, usually with a conductive impairment lar dystrophy (OMD) in this family. associated with fixation of the stapes. Other regions of the otic capsule may R
P1 L1
 gene mutations associated with OMD and the p.Arg45Trp variant also be involved, with variable clinical presentation and progression. have been reported in ethnically diverse families with different occult ma- Materials & Method: Subjects were a multiplex AD family from the island of cular dystrophy segregation patterns. Using new high-resolution adaptive Newfoundland identified with a 15 bp in-frame deletion in the FOX L1
 gene, optical imaging, we detected a heterogeneous phenotype with different cen- and an Ontario proband identified with the same mutation from a cohort tral cone morpho-functional abnormalities across family members harbo- of 32 Ontario cases with surgically confirmed otosclerosis. Phenotype data ring the p.Arg45Trp variant. The different phenotypes in this family may be included retrospective data acquisition from clinical charts (Newfoundland ascribed to incomplete penetrance of the R P1
L1  gene variant. Although we and Ontario) and prospective measures (Ontario) including behavioural au- found only this variant analysing 61 genes, we cannot exclude that mutati- diometry, middle ear analyses (immitance and middle ear muscle acoustic ons in other genes might contribute to the phenotype. reflexes) and otoacoustic emissions. PM02.44 Results: Phenotype analyses revealed a bilateral hearing loss in the New- Functional characterization of two novel splicing mutations in the foundland proband, initially conductive in nature and later progressing to SL
C45 A2 gene associated with Oculocutaneous Albinism Type IV a mixed hearing loss. Newfoundland relatives with surgically confirmed L. Straniero1, V. Rimoldi1, G. Soldà1, L. Mauri2, E. Manfredini2, E. Andreucci3, S. otosclerosis (n=6) also exhibited a bilateral impairment, primarily of the Bargiacchi4, S. Penco2, G. P. Gesu2, A. Del Longo5, E. Piozzi5, R. Asselta1, P. Primignani2; conductive or mixed types; 2 cases did not undergo surgery and were con- 1Humanitas University - Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano (Milan), Italy, sidered non-penetrant. The Ontario proband presented with a profound 2Medical Genetics Unit – Department of Laboratory Medicine, Niguarda Ca’ Granda mixed loss in the right ear, and a mild sensorineural hearing loss in the left Hospital, Milan, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, ear; acoustic middle ear muscle reflexes were absent despite normal middle Florence, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental ear compliance. Biomedical Sciences ‚Mario Serio‘, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 5Pediatric Ophthalmolgy Department, Niguarda Ca’ Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy. Conclusions: Subjects with the FOX
L1  mutation exhibit the hallmark fea- tures of clinical otosclerosis. Physiological measures of middle ear function can be used to supplement the behavioural phenotype, and may enable ear- ly detection of otosclerotic pathology. Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is characterized by hypopigmentation of the skin, hair and eye, and by ophthalmologic abnormalities caused by a de- P
S02 .47 ficiency in melanin biosyTntYhResOisC. AO2CAT YiRs Pa1n autoSsLoCm45aAl 2recessive inherited PRDM12 is an epigentic regulator and a cause of congenital condition and four principal forms (OCA1-4) are recognized based on the insensitivity to pain presence of mutations in , , and genes respective- c. G. woods, A. Chen, m. nahorski, f. stafford; ly. SL
C45 A2 cambridge institute of medical genetics, cambridge, United Kingdom. In this study, we investigate the molecular basis of OCA4 in one Italian albino patient. Sequencing analysis of thSeL 
C45 A2 gene identified two hitherto- unknown putative splicing mutations. The first one lies in the consensus se- We report a new Mendelian disorder causing painlessness and an inabili- Iqnu-esinlicceo of the donor splice site of intron 5 in compound heterozy- ty to sense temperature. Presentation is with temperature instability, self gosity with a synonymous transition involving the last nucleotide of exon 3. mutilations and frequent accidents and corneal trauma. The condition has prediction of the effect of both mutations on splicing shows a score similarities to HSAN4 and HSAN5 with the following important differences: reduction for the mutant splice sites ainnd-v iintrdoicate the possible activation of there is a loss of small myelinated, not small unmyelinated, nerves; itch is newly-created splice sites. The effect on splicing of these two novel mutati- not a feature; and mental retardation is rare. We found bi-allelic mutations ons is going to be investigate using an hybrid-minigene approach to in the histone methyletransferase PRDM12. We will describe the phenotype lead to the demonstration of their causative role and to the identification of and genotype of this new condition, and how to distinguish it from similar aberrant transcript variants. Although the in-vitro characterization of spli- disorders. As we have found that PRDM12 is expressed in post-natal noci- cing mutations may not completely represent the splicing events that really ceptors it si likely to be a new analgesic target. occur in vivo, it certainly provides a strong support to the pathogenic role of PM02.48 the identified variants. Expanding the genotypic spectrum in Perrault syndrome P
S02 .45 L. A. M. Demain1, J. E. Urquhart1, J. O’Sullivan1, S. G. Williams1, S. S. Bhaskar1, E. Jenkinson1, C. M. Lourenco2, A. Heiberg3, S. H. Pearce4,5, K. J. Munro6,7, R. O’ Keefe8, W. G. OPA1 testing in optic atrophy: a 5-year service summary Newman1; L. A. Mavrogiannis, D. J. Cockburn, R. S. Charlton; 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Institute of Human Development, University Leeds Genetics Laboratory, Leeds, United Kingdom. of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Clinics Hospital of Ribeirao Preto, OPA1 University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Section for Clinical Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, National hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Institute , a nuclear gene encoding a mitochondrial dynamin-related GTPase, is of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, the major cause of autosomal dominant optic neuropathy, manifesting in a 5Endocrine Department, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals, Newcastle upon Tyne, United specOtPruAm1 ranging from isolated optic atrophy to complex multi-system neu- Kingdom, 6School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, rological disease. We have been providing comprehensive clinical testing for in the UK and internaEtiSonHalGly 2si0nc1e5 2 
|0  G09L, AusSinGg Oa Wco,m SbCinOatTioLnA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 81ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 8Faculty of PM02.50 Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Genome-wide association study and targeted re-sequencing: a new combined approach to investigate the genetic causes of Age-related Hearing Loss (ARHL) Perrault syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterised by A. Morgan1, D. Vozzi2, D. Vuckovic1, M. La Bianca2, A. D‘Eustacchio2, M. Concas3, M. sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) in both sexes and primaHrSyD o1v7aBr4ianH iAnRsSu2f-, Pirastu3, P. Gasparini1, G. Girotto1; LfiAciReSn2c,y C iLnP 4
P6 , XXC k1a0royroft2ype females. Perrault syndrome is genetically he- 1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3Institute of Population Genetics, National Council of Research, Sassari, Italy. terogeneous with variants in five genes reported to date, , and . Subsequent to the original discovery studies, no further cases of Perrault syndrome due to varHiaSnDts1 7inB 4th, eLsAeR gSe2nes haCv1e0 boeref2n reported. Here we present four families affected by Perrault syndrome with ARHL is a degenerative disease affecting millions of people worldwide. To novel and previously reported mutations in and . date, very few potentially causative genes have been described. Based on our The proband from each family was whole exome seque nHcSeDd1 a7nBd4 the muta- previous GWAS and expression data, a custom targeted re-sequencing panel tions confirmed by Sanger sequencing. A female from family 
P1  was com- of 46 ARHL candidate genes was designed and used for screening 500 ARHL pound heterozygous for a known anLdA RnSo2vel mutation in , c.46G>A, Italian patients coming from both inbred and outbred populations using Ion p.(Gly16Ser) and c.244G>T, p.(Val82Phe), respectively. Two families (
P2  Torrent PGM™ technology. Data were filtered according to allele frequency and 
P3 ) had biallelic mutations in . The affected female and male in and to pathogenicity prediction (i.e. in silico predictor tools). Twenty-one 
P2  were homozygous for c.1565C>A, p.(Thr522Asn), previously associated mutations located in 14 different genes (8 frameshift, 2 stop gain and 11 with Perrault syndrome. Family 
P3  consisted of an affected female and male, missense) affecting 49 patients were detected. All mutations were absent in who were compound heterozygous for c.1565C>A, p.(Thr522Asn) and controls coming from the same populations as well as in any public database c.351G>C, p.(Met117Ile). AffecteLdA mRSe2mbers of both families showed a low (or present at a very low frequency MAF≤0,003). Missense mutations were frequency SNHL an unusual audiometric configuration previously described predicted to be highly damaging. Both scenarios were present: different mu- in Perrault syndrome cauCse1d0 obryf2 mutations. A further affected female tations in the same gene as well as the same mutation in different patients. (family 
P4 ) with significant neurological disability wHasS Dco1m7Bp4ouLnAdR hSe2tero- In some cases, human phenotype resembles that of already existing mice zCy1g0oourfs2 for mutations in , c.968G>A p.(Arg323Gln) and c.1196A>G models. For example, a) 3 novel heterozygous frameshift deletions were p.(Asn399Ser). These cases independently confirm , and detected in XIR
P2  in patients showing a very similar phenotype to that re- as causative of Perrault syndrome. cently described in mice (Francis et al. 2015); b) a heterozygous missen- se mutation was detected in four patients showing a high-frequency HL in WB
P2  gene, similar to that described in the corresponding mouse model P
S02 .49 (Buniello et al. 2014). Complete results will be presented. These findings Association of novel mutation p.W325X (c.977G>A) in the POU3F4 demonstrate the usefulness of our approach (GWAS+ Expression studies + gene with perilymphatic Gusher-deafness syndrome (DFNX2) in Yakut Mutation screening) further supporting the potential role of these genes in family (Eastern Siberia) causing ARHL. N. A. Barashkov1,2, L. A. Klarov3, F. M. Teryutin1,2, A. V. Solovyev2, V. G. Pshennikova1,2, K. Y. Nikolaeva2, E. E. Konnikova3,2, G. P. Romanov2, N. N. Gotovtsev2, K. E. Savvinova2, M. P
S02 .51 V. Pak4,2, S. N. Lekhanova2, N. V. Savvina2, N. V. Luginov3,2, I. V. Morozov5,6, A. A. Bondar5, New candidate genes associated with primary congenital glaucoma N. A. Solovyeva1,2, A. M. Rafailov2, N. N. Sazonov2, A. N. Alexeev7, O. L. Posukh8,6, L. U. S. Carmona1,2, M. Simões2, H. Froufe2, F. Santos2, E. SIlva1, C. Egas2,3; Dzhemileva9, E. K. Khusnutdinova9,10, S. A. Fedorova1,2; 1Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Biocant - Transfer 1Yakut Scientific Center of Сomplex Мedical Рroblems, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2M.K. Technology Association, Cantanhede, Portugal, 3CNC.IBILI, University of Coimbra, Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Republican Coimbra, Portugal. Hospital # 2– Center of Emergency Medicine, Ministry of Public Health of the Sakha Republic, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 4Republic hospital №1 – National Center of Medicine, Sergelyakhskoe shosse 4, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 5Institute of Chemical Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is an ocular inherited autosomal reces- Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 6Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian sive disease, associated with CY
P1 B1 mutations. However, some of the pati- Federation, 7Institute of Humanitarian Research and Indigenous Peoples of the North, ents do not have CY
P1 B1 mutations. This study aims to identify novel genes Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, causative of PCG in these patients. 8Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 9Institute of Whole exome sequencing was performed in three unrelated patients and Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, one trio. After annotation and variant filtration according to the autosomal Russian Federation, 10Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. recessive disease model, rare variants with a pathogenic functional impact were selected. The comparison of variants shared by the four patients did not identify a The most rare causes of deafness in the world are X-linked and mitochon- common mutated gene. The four samples had 4, 9, 5 and 8 altered genes, drial forms of hearing impairment (1-2%). For the first time, we revealed respectively. None of these genes were previously associated with glaucoma, identical abnormalities of inner ear in two brothers from Yakut family (Ea- except an RNASEH2C gene variant, mutated in one patient and confirmed in stern Siberia) with presumably X-linked recessive deafness that are typical the trio analysis. This gene has been associated with Aicardi-Goutières syn- for the perilymphatic Gusher-deafness syndrome (DFNX2, MIM304400) drome, characterized by severe neurological abnormalities together with caused by mutations in the POU3F4 gene (MIM 300039). Computed tomo- congenital glaucoma. However, the patient does not have a typical pheno- graphy studies demonstrated an abnormal dilatation of the internal acoustic type. According to in silico previsions, this mutation leads to the loss of a canal (IAC) as well as an abnormally wide communication between the IAC donor splice site, creating a longer protein. Studies are underway to charac- and the inner ear compartment in both brothers. Parents had no any tem- terize the RNASEH2C mutation in this family. poral bone anomalies. To determine whether mutations in the POU3F4 gene Since no common mutated gene was found in our study and other reported (Xq21.1) are responsible for the hearing loss in these patients, we sequen- studies, we suggest that PCG may be caused by mutations in different genes, ced the single exon of the POU3F4 gene. We identified novel nucleotide sub- consistent with an autosomal recessive model, or by an alternative model stitution c.977G>A in POU3F4 in hemizygous state in both probands, in the such as the polygenic, with heterozygous variants in different genes. heterozygous state in their mother, and c.977G>A was absent in their father. S. Carmona is is a recipient of a doctoral grant from FCT-Portugal, ref. SFRH/ Transition c.977G>A leads to stop codon (p.W325X) in the POU-homeodo- BD/90445/2012. main of human transcription factor protein. Segregation of inner ear mal- PM02.52 formations and novel mutation c.977G>A (p.W325X) in the POU3F4 gene Heterozygous RARB missense mutations causing microphthalmia: with deafness in studied Yakut family confirmed association of the POU3F4 Four further cases to add to this emerging phenotype gene with clinical phenotype of perilymphatic Gusher-deafness syndrome D. R. FitzPatrick1, R. J. Martin2, J. A. Goodship2; (DFNX2, OMIM 304400). Study was supported by RFBR (#14-04-01741_A, 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Northern Genetics Service, 14-04-9010_Bel_A, 15-44-05106-r_vostok_а), Governmental contract # Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. 6.656.2014/К, SBRAS Integration project #92 and Grant of the Head of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) for young scientists, experts and students for 2015 years (RG#76 from 02.06.2015). Background RARB (Retinoic Acid Receptor B) plays an important role in eye develop- ment. Compound heterozygous loss of function mutations in RARB have been associated with PDAC syndrome (pulmonary hypoplasia/agenesis, diaphragmatic hernia/eventration, anophthalmia/microphthalmia, and 82 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO caT rdL iA acN dD ef, e cU t)K . T| h W reeW uW nr. eE laS teH dG s. uO bjR ecG ts with microphthalmia and dia-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index phragmatic hernia have been described with de novo, gain of function mis- children of related parents. This change is a splice site variation that leads to sense mutations affecting the same codon of RARB (Arg387). Two of these vitelliform macular dystrophy. Further, we found in other family in the CRB1 patients (both with p.Arg387Cys substitutions) died in utero and after a few gene mutation at c.T2106G (p.Y702X) causing macular dystrophy. Third hours of life respectively. The third patient (p.Arg387Ser) was 16 years old case showed pathogenic mutation in the CNGA3 gene at c.A827G (p.N276S) when his case was described in the literature. causing achromatopsia type 2. A affected male was mutated in the gene New cases TUL
P1  at position c.1450A>C (T484P) causing Leber Congenital Amaurosis We describe four new cases of missense RARB mutations at Arg387 in pa- (LCA) or RP type 14 and further affected female was positive for a change in tients with microphthalmia/anophthalmia. One patient is an adult male the RDH12 gene at c.81delT (p.A27fs). Mutations in this gene cause Leber of normal intelligence and a p.Arg387Ser substitution. He does not have a Congenital Amaurosis. All mentioned mutations are unreported. To validate known diaphragmatic hernia. The other three patients all have p.Arg387Cys pathogenic nature of these changes, we analyzed the mutations by Sanger substitutions. sequencing and some predicting software. In addition, missense mutations These four cases add to an emerging phenotype associated with RARB mis- were compared for protein structure changes with mutated and wild type sense mutations. amino acid. In all cases we observed significant difference in protein folding, P
S02 .53 which might influences the biological function. Furthermore, over 100 nor- Recessive RHO mutation 
E150 K and SAMD7 regulatory variants in a mal population samples were tested with negative results for each case. consanguineous family with retinitis pigmentosa PM02.56 K. Van Schil1, M. Karlstetter2, A. Aslanidis2, B. P. Leroy1,3, F. Coppieters1, F. Depasse4, T. Two missense mutations in SAL
L4  in a patient with microphthalmia, Langmann2, E. De Baere1; coloboma and optic nerve hypoplasia 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, E. Ullah1,2, R. Lao3, P. Tang3, E. Wan3, T. Bardakjian4, P. Kwok3, A. Schneider4, M. Ansar1,5, Belgium, 2Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, A. Slavotinek2; 3Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 1Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Belgium, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Queen Fabiola Children’s University Hospital, Islamabad, Pakistan, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, Brussels, Belgium. San Francisco, CA, United States, 3Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Division of Medical Genetics, Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Center for Statistical Genetics, Purpose Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, To identify the genetic cause of a retintis pigmentosa phenotype observed in United States. a Turkish consanguineous family. Methods Homozygosity mapping was performed for five sibs, two of which are affec- There are four human homologues of the D. Melanogaster Sal gene that are ted. Functional analysis of non-coding SAMD7 variants was performed by highly conserved, 
C2 H2 double zinc finger transcription factors. Mutations luciferase assays and electroporation assays in mouse retinal explants with in SAL
L1  causes Townes-Brocks syndrome, SAL
L2  and SAL
L3  have not been SAMD7 CBR-reporter constructs (Hlawatsch et al. 2013). associated with human disease and mutations in SAL
L4  cause a phenotypic Results spectrum that includes Okihiro/Duane-radial ray syndrome, acro-renal- Homozygosity mapping revealed two candidate genes, namely RHO and ocular syndrome and Holt-Oram syndrome. As part of our studies into the SAMD7. A homozygous RHO mutation (c.448G>A, p.
E150 K) was found in etiology of anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma (AMC), we used the two affected sibs, while all other sibs were heterozygous carriers. exome sequencing with a trio approach in a Caucasian female with unilate- No coding SAMD7 mutations were found. Interestingly, sequencing of the ral microphthalmia and coloboma, bilateral optic nerve hypoplasia, a ventri- SAMD7 promoter and an enhancer in the two affected sibs revealed four cular septal defect, atrial septal defect and growth delays. Prior investigati- homozygous variants located in the binding regions of the CRX transcription ons included normal array CGH and both parents reportedly had no clinical factor. The variants are known SNPs, with a low MAF of 1,6 %. The first three features. We found two sequence variants in SAL
L4  - c.575C>A, predicting SNPs are located in a CRX-binding region called CBR1, while the fourth SNP p.Ala192Glu and c.G2053G>C, predicting p.Asp685His (NM_020436). Both is located in CBR2. The combined SAMD7 CBR1/CBR2 mutated construct variants were verified using Sanger sequencing and predicted to be dama- showed a significantly decreased SAMD7 reporter activity compared with ging with three software programs; the first was paternally inherited and the WT construct. the second was maternally inherited. Only p.Ala192Glu was present in Conclusions normal controls (6/121,266). Structural eye defects have been infrequent A rare recessive RHO mutation (
E150 K) was found in consanguineous RP in individuals with SAL
L4  mutations. In two families diagnosed with acro- patients, consistent with previous reports (Kumaramanickavel et al., 1994; renal-ocular syndrome, segmental disc dysplasia and hypoplasia and retinal Azam et al., 2009 and Zhang et al., 2013). Moreover, functional analysis of coloboma were found with a SAL
L4  deletion and cataract, iris and choroidal four variants located in non-coding, CRX-binding regions of SAMD7, sugge- colobomas, microphthalmia and microcornea were reported with hetero- sted a regulatory and synergistic effect on SAMD7 expression. As Samd7 has zygosity for a frameshift mutation. As Sall4 regulates Bmp4, we speculate recently been identified as a novel Crx-regulated transcriptional repressor that altered BM
P4  expression could be responsible for the eye defects and in retina (Hlawatsch et al., 2013), we hypothesize that these SAMD7 vari- conclude that haploinsufficiency for SAL
L4  should be considered as a rare ants might have a modifying effect on the retinal phenotype observed in this cause of AMC. family. P
S02 .57 P
S02 .55 An augmented ABCA4 screen targeting non-coding regions reveals a Molecular diagnosis of complex Eye disorders by Next Generation deep intronic founder causal variant in Belgian Stargardt patients Sequencing M. Bauwens1, F. Coppieters1, J. De Zaeytijd2, N. Weisschuh3, S. Kohl3, K. Dahan4, F. Depasse5, M. De Rademaeker6, B. Loeys7, F. Meire5, T. de Ravel8, W. Steyaert1, S. De G. Shariati1,2, M. Mohebi3,1, M. Sedaghat4,1, A. Saberi1,5, N. Mazaheri1,6, M. Hamid7,8, M. Jaegere1, B. P. Leroy2,9, E. De Baere1; Sarvari1, M. Mohammadi Anaei7, J. Zeighami1, H. Galehdari1,6; 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Dept of Ophthalmology, 1Narges Medical Genetic diagnosis Lab, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute of Genetics, Jondishapour Medical University, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 4Institut 3Internal Medicine, Jondishapour Medical University, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, de Pathologie et de Génétique, Centre de génétique humaine, Gosselies, Gosselies, 4Department of Endocrinology, Jondishapour Medical University, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Belgium, 5Department of Ophthalmology, Queen Fabiola Children’s University Hospital, Republic of, 5Jondishapour University, Medical School , Genetics Department, Ahvaz, Brussels, Belgium, 6Center for Medical Genetics, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 6Department of Genetics, Shahid Chamran University, Ahvaz, Belgium, 7Center for Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Iran, Islamic Republic of, 7Narges Medical Genetic diagnosis Lab, Ahwaz, Iran, Islamic Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 8Center for Human Genetics, Leuven University Hospitals, Republic of, 8Department of Biotechnology, Pasteur Institute, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Leuven, Belgium, 9Division of Ophthalmology, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Republic of. Philadelphia, PA, United States. Molecular detection of diseases such as eye disorders is very challenging. Autosomal recessive Stargardt disease (STGD1) is hallmarked by a large Hunting the right gene in these complex disorders is like finding the needle proportion of patients with a single heterozygous causative variant in the in the haystack. Nevertheless, modern sequencing platforms known under disease gene ABCA4. Braun et al. (2013) reported deep intronic variants collective name Next generation sequencing or NGS is a huge help to solve of ABCA4, prompting us to perform an augmented screen in 131 Belgian this problem. We also could be able identifying disease causing mutations STGD1 patients with one or no ABCA4 variant to uncover deep intronic cau- by NGS in different and unrelated retinopathy cases. In One case, the PRPH2 gene was homozygous mutated EaSt HnuGcl e2o0tid1e5 c |.5 G82L-A1(SGG>AO) Win ,2 S aCffOecTteLdA NsDal, A UBKCA 
|4  W vaWriaWnts..ESHG.ORG 83 All 131 prescreened patients underwent targeted resequencing of four deepABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index intronic ABCA4 regions using next-generation sequencing (Miseq, Illumina), to ~2200 unrelated HI patients recruited among patients from Institute of revealing a second variant in 28.6% of cases. Twenty-six percent of these Physiology and Pathology of Hearing. Approx. 600 control subjects were carry the same causal variant c.4539+2001G>A (known as V4). Haplotyping also studied. in V4 carriers showed a common region of 63 kb, suggestive of a founder Results: We found 43 (1.88%) probands with 14 different rare TMPRS
S3  mutation. Genotype-phenotype correlations indicate a moderate-to-severe variants. We also found a genotype-phenotype correlation with truncating impact of V4 on the STGD1 phenotype. mutations causing more severe HI with earlier onset than missense muta- The remaining patients in whom no second ABCA4 mutation was identified tions. The p.A90T variant previously linked with HI had high prevalence in underwent targeted resequencing of the entire genomic regions of ABCA4, controls (~6%) indicating that is non-pathogenic. BEST1 and PRPH2 (~ 500 kb in total) (HaloPlex Target Enrichment System, Conclusions: TMPRS
S3  mutations are rare but distinct cause of HI in Polish Agilent Technologies). Variant filtering was based on minor allele frequency, population. The more severe phenotype associated with truncating mutati- conservation score, splicing predictions and regulatory potential. Prelimi- ons confirms previous findings. nary data in a pilot group show that the standard filtering yields approxi- Acknowledgements mately 130 variants per patient that require further investigation. This study was supported by NCN grants: NCN 2012/05/N/NZ5/02629 and In conclusion, causal variant V4 occurs in a high fraction of Belgian STGD1 NCN 2011/03/D/NZ5/05592 patients and represents the first deep intronic founder mutation in ABCA4. PM02.60 This emphasizes the importance of augmented molecular genetic testing of Editing of the USH2A gene based on CRISPR/Cas9 system ABCA4 in STGD1. Finally, resequencing of the complete ABCA4 gene in the C. Fuster-García1, M. D. Sequedo1,2, M. J. Aparisi1,2, T. Jaijo1,2,3, R. P. Vázquez-Manrique1,2, J. remainder of the STGD1 patients will allow us to identify novel deep intro- M. Millán1,2,3, E. Aller1,2; nic and non-coding mutations. 1Grupo de Investigación en Biología Molecular, Celular y Genómica, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2U-755, CIBER de Enfermedades Raras PM02.58 (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 3Unidad de Genética y Diagnóstico Prenatal, Hospital Association between telomere length and telomerase polymorphisms Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, Valencia, Spain. in young adults with cataract. M. Fernández-Prieto1,2, V. Rivero-Gutiérrez3, J. Fernández-Mateos1,2, C. Egido-Turrión1, A. Sánchez-Jara3, L. de Juan-Marcos3,2, R. González-Sarmiento1,2; 1Molecular Medicine Unit. Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca., Introduction: Usher Syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disease causing Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL)., Salamanca, sensorineural hearing loUsSsH, r2eAti nitis pigmentosa and, sometimes, vestibular Spain, 3Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, dysfunction. It is a genetically heterogeneous disorder, with more than 10 Spain. associated genes, being the most common mutated gene. The recent CRISPR technology is based on a nuclease (Cas9) that cuts the double DNA strand at a specific locus via a guide RNA. Upon cleavage, the INTRODUCTION: Telomeres cells shortening during aging suggests that target locus undergoes a damage repair either by the error-prone nonhomo- telomere length could be a biomarker of aging and age-relate morbility. logous end-joining (NHEJ) or the high fidelity homologous recombination Telomerase compensates this shortening maintaining telomere ends by ad- (HDR) pathway. dition of desoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Acquired cataract is one of the most Materials and MUSeHth2oAds: We have generated different constructs of CRISPR/ common age-related eye diseases but it is also present in a reduced number Cas9 RNA-guided nucleases targeted to two prevalent mutations located at of young people. exon 13 of the gene: c.2999delG and p.
C759 F. These constructs were OBJETIVES: The aim of this report was to analyze the prognostic value of transfected into HEK293 cells, and each nuclease efficiency was tested by telomere length in young patients with cataracts and evaluate the effect of sequencing and also with the T7 endonuclease assay. polymorphisms in telomerase genes on the susceptibility to develop ca- Later on, we repeated the transfection with the most efficient nuclease tog- taract in these subjects. ether with a template to induce HDR repair. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Telomere length was measured by quantitative Results: The present study shows the first steps of an approach of gene the- polymerase chain reaction in peripheral blood leukocytes of 112 cases and rapy based on this CRISPR technology, applied to two characteristic mutati- 112 controls classified in two groups (60 years). ons responsible for Usher Syndrome. To detect telomerase polymorphisms TERT1327C>T and TER
C63 G>A, Taq- Conclusions: The pathological features of this syndrome represent a great Man quantitave PCR method was used. disadvantage for the patients, since communication nowadays relies largely RESULTS: Our results indicate that young population with cataracts has on audiovisual media, and there is still no medical treatment, except for the shorter telomeres than the same cohort of healthy subjects (p<0.01) and si- hearing aids or cochlear implants for the hearing impairment. milar to the older patients with cataracts. The onset of cataracts in younger Therefore, repairing of specific mutations by gene editing is an interesting adults may serve as an in vivo marker of primary aging and at the same time strategy that can be performed using the CRISPR technology. could alert us to other pathologies associated with telomeric shortening as Research grants Fundación ONCE and Telemaratón: todos somos raros. cardiovascular diseases or cancer. P
S02 .61 We found a statistically significant association between GG homozygous of A targeted next-generation sequencing diagnostic panel for Usher TER
C63 G>A rs2293607 polymorphism and an increased telomere shorte- Syndrome ning in healthy subjects (p=0.015). M. E. Shanks, E. Packham, J. P. Williams, P. Clouston, A. H. Nemeth, S. Downes, A. Seller; Thus, our results suggest that the development of cataracts in young people Oxford Medical Genetics laboratory, Oxford, United Kingdom. could be associated to a premature molecular aging. Introduction: Supported in part by PI13/01741 P
S02 .59 Usher syndrome is a phenotypically and genotypically hete- Profile of TMPRS
S3  mutation among Polish patients with non- rogeneous autosomal recessive condition comprising both hearing loss and syndromic hearing impairment Retinitis PigAmBHenDt1o2s,a C(DRH
P2 ).3 W, CeI Bh2a, vCeL dReNs1ig, nDeFdN Ba 3t1a,r gGePtRed98 n, eHxAt-RgSe,n MerYaOti7oAn, U. Lechowicz1, A. Pollak1, A. Podgorska1, P. Stawinski1, A. Franke2, B. Petersen2, M. sPeCqDuHe1n5c,i nPgD ZpDa7n,e Ul SfHor1 Cth, Ue StHh1irGteen gUeSnHe2sA cuUrSrHe2nAtl y associated with Usher Firczuk3, M. Oldak1, H. Skarzynski4, R. Ploski5; syndrome; 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, and . isthe most common cau- Poland, 2Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, sMee otfh toydp:e II Usher syndrome and is also a common cause of non-syndromic Kiel, Germany, 3Department of Immunology, Center of Biostructure Research, Medical RP. University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 4Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Centre of Biostructure, The genes associated with Usher syndrome are captured using Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Agilent’s Haloplex enrichment technology and sequenced on an Illumina MReiSseuqlt. sA: custom bioinformatics pipeline has been designed for alignment, variant calling, annotation and filtering of variants. Introduction: Recessive mutations of the TMPRS
S3  gene cause non-syndro- To date 16 patients have been referred with a clinical diagnosis mic hearing impairment (HI) but knowledge on their spectrum in Caucasi- of Usher sUySnHd2rAom e. The majority, 11 patients, have two pathogenic MUSYHO27AA ans is limited. The purpose was to search for pathogenic TMPRS
S3  variants variaGnPtRs 9–8 including 3 dosage variants. A further 2 patients have only 1 pa- in Polish Caucasian HI patients. tUhSoHg2eAnic variant. Pathogenic variants were also detected in Materials and Methods: A strategy of iterative cycles of TMPRS
S3  gene se- and . USH2A quencing (initiated by whole exome sequencing in one subject performed Conclu sisio anlsso: tested as part of our Retinitis Pigmentosa diagnostic screen o 8n 4HiSeq 1500- Illumina ) combined with fEoScuHseGd m2u0t1at5io n| GscLreAenSinGgO wWhic,h S COan Td L 1 A0/ N8 D9 R , P U p Ka t |i e Wnts W w Were .E fo Su Hnd G t .o O h Rav Ge two pathogenic variants. we termed Iterative Sequencing and Variant Screening (ISVS) was applied A molecular diagnosis of Usher syndrome was made in 81%ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index USH2A PM03.02 USH2A Phenotypic expansion of visceral myopathy associated with ACTG2 of Usher referrals; 69% in the gene and of these 13% have a copy tandem base substitution number variants; confirmed by MLPA. variants are also present in J. Klar1, D. Raykova1, E. Gustafson2, I. Tóthová1,3, A. Ameur1, A. Wanders1, N. Dahl1; 11% of our RP cohort. 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Womens and Childrens Health, PM02.62 Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of Biology, Faculty of Humanities and Natural Sciences, Molecular genetic examination of hereditary deafblindness in Czech University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia. patients J. Sabova1,2, O. Mazal1, M. Simandlova2, D. Raskova3, D. Grecmalova4, A. Krepelova2, R. Pourova2; 1Synlab genetics s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology and Medical Introduction: Familial visceral myopathy (FVM) is a rare heritable and hete- genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and Motol University Hospital, rogeneous condition due to impaired smooth muscle function. We identified Prague, Czech Republic, 3Centre for Medical Genetics and Reproductive medicine a family segregating eleven individuals with a spectrum of visceral sym- GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, ptoms involving the small intestine, colon, biliary tract, urinary tract and Ostrava, Czech Republic. uterus. Material and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was conducted on DNA samples from four affected individuals. Target enrichment was performed Deafblindness is a rare disorder characterized by combination of hearing and using the Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon 50Mb kit. Samples were loa- visual impairment. Usher and Stickler syndromes are the most frequent gene- ded on an Ion PI chip and sequenced on the Ion Proton System using Ion PI tic syndromes associated with deafblindness. Usher syndrome is an autosomal Sequencing 200 Kit (200 bp read length recessive disorder responsible for up to 50% cases of hereditary deafblindness. Results: Whole exome sequencing revealed a novel heterozygous tandem It is divided into three clinical subtypes and is caused by mutations in 11 genes, base substitution c.806_807delinsAA (p.Gly269Glu) in ACTG2, encoding most frequently in USH2A gene. Stickler syndrome is an autosomal dominant smooth muscle actin gamma-2, in affected family members. disorder of connective tissues characterized by hearing impairment, eye ab- Conclusions: Variants in ACTG2 were recently identified in familial visceral normalities, with possibility of other congenital defects. Mutations in collagen myopathy with intestinal pseudo-obstruction as well as with the congeni- genes, most frequently in CO
L2 A1, are responsible for Stickler syndrome. tal megacystics-microcolon-intestinal hypoperistalsis (MMIH) syndrome. In our study we investigated 30 patients from 16 families with Usher syndro- In our family, eight affected members presented with severe complications me and 17 patients from 9 families with Stickler syndrome from the Czech Re- from the biliary and/or the urinary tracts in addition to gastrointestinal public. We analysed USH2A and CO
L2 A1 genes using Sanger sequencing as a pseudo-obstructions. Furthermore, all affected mothers had a history of prescreening and we detected mutations in 2 families with Usher syndrome assisted deliveries due to poor progress during labor and weak uterine con- and 2 families with Stickler syndrome. NGS screening of negative patients will tractions. The variable involvement of multiple smooth muscle dependent follow. organs in our family, including the biliary tract and the uterus, add to the Here we present two cases: The first case is a 50-years-old male with bilateral phenotypic spectrum associated with ACTG2 missense variants. hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa. Double heterozygosity of known patho- P
S03 .03 genic mutation c.11864G>A (Trp3955Ter) and novel mutation c.14621C>G Novel heterozygous mutation in CO
L4 A3 gene in a family with Alport (Ser4874Ter) in USH2A gene confirmed the diagnosis of Usher syndrome in syndrome this patient. The second case is a 20-years-old female showing bilateral retinal E. Domínguez-Garrido1, C. Cervera-Acedo1, P. Santibañez1, M. López1, J. Aguirre- detachment, experienced by her father and paternal grandfather as well. Iden- Lamban1, H. Hernández2, M. Artamendi2, E. Huarte2, M. Sierra2; tification of a known pathogenic mutation c.1597C>T (Arg533Ter) confirmed 1Center for Biomedical Research (CIBIR), Logroño, Spain, 2Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, the diagnosis of Stickler syndrome. Spain. Supported by a project for conceptual development of research organization P
S03 .01 00064203 and 64204. 17q12 microdeletion - a highly variable syndrome with intrafamilial Introduction variation Alport syndrome (AS) is an inherited renal disorder characterized by hema- A. Bar-Shira1, A. Reches1, S. Simchoni1, T. Naiman1, I. Kaplan-Ber1, M. Goldstein1, I. Wolman2,3, L. Ben-Sira4,3, A. Orr-Urtreger1,3, Y. Yaron1,3, R. Kleper5,3; turia, progressive renal failure, hearing loss, and ocular abnormalities. The 1Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Ultrasound Unit disease is genetically heterogeneous and associated with mutations in type in Obstetrics and Gynecology, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, IV collagen that forms a distinct network in the glomerular basement mem- Tel Aviv, Israel, 3The Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, brane (GBM). Fifteen percent of patients with AS have autosomal recessive 4Department of Radiology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 5Pediatric inheritance caused by pathogenic mutations in either CO
L4 A3 or CO
L4 A4 Nephrology Service, Dana Children’s Hospital, Tel Aviv, Israel. genes, located in 2q36-37. Subjects and methods Genetic analysis was performed on a 28-year-old male patient who had, Introduction: Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) since the age of 3 years-old, presented nephrotic syndrome and persistent are some of the most common malformations observed during pregnancy. microhematuria. He fulfilled four of the AS clinical diagnostic criteria: a po- We describe a case of prenatally detected fetal hyper-echogenic kidneys that sitive family history of hematuria, proteinuria, hearing loss, and typical elec- led to diagnosis of a familial condition. tron microscopy abnormalities of the GBM. The entire coding sequence and Materials and Methods: A 34 year old primipara was referred to our insti- flanking intronic regions of the CO
L4 A3/A4 genes were analyzed by PCR tution due to fetal hyperechogenic kidneys at 24 weeks gestation. Her hus- and direct sequencing reaction. Afterwards, sixteen members of his family band has mature-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). (8 males and 8 females) were included in the analysis. Results: Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) showed low risk for aneuplo- Results idy. No other malformations were seen. Fetal ultrasound and MRI were high- A novel heterozygous mutation (c. [998G>A]+[=]; p.[G333E]+[=]) in exon 18 ly suggestive of bilateral renal dysplasia. Amniocentesis with chromosomal of the CO
L4 A3 gene was found in the proband and it was confirmed in ele- microarray analysis (CMA) revealed a 1.5Mb microdeletion on chromosome ven members of the family. 17q12 including the TCF2/HNF1B gene. Chromosome 17q12 microdeletion Conclusion is a well described contiguous-gene deletion syndrome, with variable phe- Among relatives of members who carried the novel mutation, the clinical notype. The deletion varies in length but most cases harbor the common phenotype of AS was variable. All of them presented hematuria, and 6 of 12 1.5Mb deletion. The TCF2/HNF1B gene is the major causative gene. Features also had proteinuria and hearing loss. The identification of new mutations include a wide range of manifestations including neurological, skeletal, hair and their correlation with clinical phenotype are important to offer an early & nails and endocrine (including MODY). Renal involvement is the hallmark treatment and genetic counselling. feature, described in over 90% of cases ranging from fetal hyperechogenic PM03.04 or multicystic dysplastic kidneys to pelvic dilatation, recurrent infections Further evidence for digenic inheritance in Alport syndrome: and abnormal renal function. Normal kidneys have been described. Parental combined mutations in collagen IV and slit diaphragm genes CMA analysis demonstrated that the deletion was inherited from the father, A. Pinto1, M. Baldassarri1,2, M. Grohmann3, K. Dahan4, H. Storey5, E. Landucci1, C. thus providing a molecular basis for MODY. Fallerini1, L. Bianciardi1, E. Lazzeri6, P. Romagnani6,7,8, A. Provenzano9, S. Giglio9, M. Conclusions: Genetic consultation in such prenatal settings is difficult, due D‘Amico10, C. Pecoraro11, I. Meloni1, C. Bergmann3,12, M. Nagel13, F. Ariani1,2, F. Mari1,2, A. to the variable phenotype and penetrance, especially the risk for neuro-de- Renieri1,2; velopmental disorders, and the fact that it is often inherited from a mildly 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Azienda affected parent. Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Bioscientia, Center for Human Genetics, ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 85ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Ingelheim, Germany, 4Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain, Belgium, 5Molecular PM03.06 Genetics laboratory, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Excellence Centre for Dysregulation of FOXF1 gene and Pulmonary capillary Research, Transfer and High Education for the Development of DE NOVO Therapies hemangiomatosis (PCH) manifestations. (DENOTHE), University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 7Department of Clinical and P. Dello Russo, C. Pittini, E. Demori, N. Passon, D. Romagno, G. De Maglio, S. Pizzolitto, G. Experimental Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 8Pediatric Damante; Nephrology Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 9Medical Genetics Az. Ospedaliero Universitaria S.Maria della Misericordia, Udine, Italy. Section, Dpt of Biomedical Experimental and Clinical Sciences “Mario Serio”, Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 10U.O. di Nefrologia e Dialisi, Ospedale S. Anna, Como, Italy, 11Pediatric Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Santobono Children′s Hospital, Naples, Italy, 12Renal Division, Department of Medicine, University Hospital Pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis (PCH) is a rare disorder that was Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 13Internal Medicine/Nephrology, Weißwasser, Germany. first reported in 1978, with only seven nonrelated cases having been repor- ted by 1998 and a little more than 100 by 2011. PCH is characterized by numerous blood vessels that proliferate throughout Through a collaborative effort of several centers in Europe, we have recently pulmonary interstitial tissue, blood vessels and airways. PCH is pulmonary demonstrated digenic inheritance in Alport syndrome identifying combined hypertension associated. mutations in collagen IV genes (Mencarelli et al J Med Genet 2015). This Congenital PCH has been very rarely described. result was achieved using an NGS panel covering CO
L4 A3, CO
L4 A4, and CO- We report a newborn died after three days of life with severe neonatal pul- 
L4 A5 genes. Here, we further expand the evidence for digenic inheritance monary hypertension, due to diffuse capillary hemangiomatosis diagnosed using an exome sequencing approach. Alport syndrome is characterized by post mortem. extreme intrafamilial phenotypic variability including the degree of prote- He had no additional anomalies or malformations, and no familial oc- inuria. The phenotype of heterozygotes for a single mutation in collagen IV currence. ranges from asymptomatic to overt disease. We selected patients with cli- High resFoOlXuFti1on conventional karyotypLeI gNaCv1e0 n8o1rmal results (46,XY). nical evidence of Alport syndrome and typical ultrastructural lesions such aCGH discovered a chromosome 16q23.3q24.1 deletion that disrupted the as thinning, thickening and splitting of the glomerular basement membra- distant trasdcer inpotvioonal enhancer , mapping 0.3 Mb upstream ne. We demonstrated that symptomatic cases with a single mutation in a on 16q24.1. FOXF1 collagen IV gene are compound heterozygous at either NPH
S1  or NPH
S2  The deletion was and sized about 2.6 Mb. locus, with at least one allele being hypomorphic. This combination is not Recently similar deletions of distant enhacer associated with Alveo- present in male Alport patients hemizygous for one pathogenic mutation lFaOrX CFa1pillary Dysplasia with Misalignment of Pulmonary Veins (ACDMPV) in CO
L4 A5. According to the strength of NPH
S1 /NPH
S2  mutations, patients have been described. manifest variable grade of proteinuria. In order to prove the pathogenic role gene is known to have a crucial roFleO XinF 1human lung and intrinsic pul- of identified mutations we are currently using a method recently described mLIoNnCa0r1y0 v8a1s cular development. (Lazzeri et al. JASN 2015) which allows isolation and long-term culture of Here we suggest that dysregulation of expression due to decrease renal progenitors from fresh urine samples. Overall, on the basis of these expression can contribute to histologically proven pulmonary results, we can further extend the concept of digenic disease for Alport syn- capillary hemangiomatosis, strengthening the hypothesis of a genetic back- drome which can thus be due to either mutations in two collagen IV genes ground of PCH. or mutations in one collagen IV gene and one slit diaphragm gene in the P
S03 .07 framework of triallelic inheritance. Characterization of PKD1/PKD2 mutation negative autosomal P
S03 .05 dominant polycystic kidney disease family A novel knockin mouse model for Alport Syndrome K. Claes1, W. Steyaert1, M. Van Heetvelde1, E. Meireson1, K. De Leeneer1, E. Fransen2, K. I. Savva1, C. Stefanou1, M. Pieri1,2, C. Stylianou3, G. Lapathitis4, C. Karaiskos4, G. Vanderstraeten3, B. Callewaert1; Papagregoriou1, C. Deltas1; 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2StatUa Center for 1Molecular Medicine Research Center, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department Statistics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Medical Genetics, of Life and Health Sciences, University of Nicosia, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Department of University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. Nephrology, Heraclion University Hospital, Heraclion, Crete, Greece, 4The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) is a common (fre- quency 1: 1000), adult onset nephropathy accounting for 4-10% of patients Alport Syndrome represents an inherited nephropathy leading to end-stage requiring dialysis or renal transplant worldwide. Most frequently germli- renal disease by the 2nd-3rd decade of life. It is characterized by alterations ne mutations in either PKD1 or PKD2 cause ADPKD. However, not only the of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and is caused by mutations in identification of large ADPKD families unlinked to either gene, but also the collagen IV genes. Although most of the responsible mutations are missense lack of PKD1 or PKD2 mutations detected in ~8% of ADPKD families, sug- substitutions, a full phenotypic analysis of a knockin mouse model is absent gests further genetic heterogeneity. Until now no additional gene has been from the literature to date. identified. We herein present preliminary results from the phenotypic analysis of a We identified a large three generation family with a classical presentation of mouse model carrying the Col4α3-p.G1332E mutation, which is homolo- ADPKD. DNA was available from eight affected and three unaffected relati- gous to the human CO
L4 A3-p.G1334E mutation representing a frequent ves. Mutation analysis of PKD1 and PKD2 ruled out a deleterious mutation founder mutation among Cypriots with thin basement membrane nephro- in these genes; furthermore, linkage analysis ruled out an association with pathy (TBMN). these loci. Genome-wide SNP analysis suggested linkage with a locus of 5 Mb Mutant mice on the 129SvJ background do not develop hematuria but ap- on chromosome 19 (LOD score= 2.3994). Exome sequencing did not reveal pear to develop proteinuria around 17-wk-old. Homozygous mutant mice on a clear deleterious mutation in this family in this region. Since the coverage mixed genetic background exhibit the characteristic Alport GBM ultrastruc- of several top candidate genes was not sufficient, we are currently screening tural features, namely irregular thickening, lamellation and podocyte foot the coding regions of these genes by next generation sequencing. Further process effacement. Furthermore, heterozygous mice demonstrate diffusely molecular exploration of this family may lead to the identification of a novel thin GBM, which is the main ultrastructural finding in patients with TBMN. gene associated with ADPKD. Interestingly, kidney immunofluorescence studies using antibodies specific PM03.08 for the Col4α3 and Col4α5 chains, demonstrate increased expression of both PKD2-related Autosomal-dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease collagen chains in mutant GBM as compared to age/sex matched controls. (ADPKD): mutation spectrum, phenotype and prognosis This may explain why these knockin mice live much longer compared to E. Cornec-Le Gall1, M. Audrézet2, E. Renaudineau3, E. Michez4, M. Hourmant5, C. Vigneau6, the existing knockout model. The mean survival of the mutant, heterozy- C. Charasse7, Genkyst Study Group, S. Maestri2, J. Chen8, P. Saliou9, Y. Le Meur10, C. Férec11; gous and wild type mice is 17, 22 and 31 months respectively. The complete 1Service de Néphrologie Laboratoire de Génétique INSERM 1078CHRU BREST, BREST, phenotypic analysis will enable further clarification of the pathophysiologic France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire CHRU BREST, BREST, France, 3Service mechanisms of Alport syndrome and TBMN and allow the testing of novel de Néphrologie CH Saint Malo, SAINT MALO, France, 4Service de Néphrologie CH Vannes, Vannes, France, 5Service de Néphrologie CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 6Service therapeutic interventions. de Néphrologie CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 7Service de Néphrologie CH Saint Brieuc, Project was co-funded by the ERDF and the Republic of Cyprus through the Saint Brieuc, France, 8Etablissements français du sang, BREST, France, 9Service de santé RPF (NEWINFRASTRUCTURE/STRATEGIC/0308/24). publique et hygiène hospitalière- Unité INSERM 1078 CHU BREST, BREST, France, 10Service de Néphrologie CHRU BREST, BREST, France, 11Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire CHRU BREST, unité INSERM 1078, Etablissements français du sang, BREST, France. 86 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO PKT DL 1A aN ndD P, K U D2K m | uW tatW ionW s . aE reS iH deG nt. iO fieR d G in ~85% and ~15% of the Autoso-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index mal-dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) pedigrees. As targeted the- ditional efforts are needed to identify causal genes. rapies are emerging, accurate description of ADPKD phenotype is crucial to Materials and Methods: We designed a gene panel of 208 genes, which con- delineate which patients should, or should not, receive these new treatments. sists of known genes identified from studies on familial forms of isolated or PKD2 phenotype has been described as milder but population-based studies, syndromic CAKUT and candidate genes suggested by in vitro and in vivo mo- enabling to depict the exact burden of the disease, are currently lacking. We dels for CAKUT. Targeted next-generation sequencing was performed in 458 aimed to describe PKD2 mutation spectrum and related phenotype. Between patients with sporadic CAKUT with a depth of coverage of 135x per sample. 2010 and 2015, a mutation of PKD2 was identified in 241 patients from the Results: Rare (frequency < 0.01), truncating, splice-site variants and non- cross-sectional Genkyst study (166 pedigrees). synonymous variants predicted to be deleterious and conserved were defi- The 68 different mutations identified included 23 newly described mutati- ned as candidates. Based on previous reports on disease-causing mutations, ons. They spanned on the entire coding region of PKD2 gene and were main- we considered 5 variants in 6 patients to be causal mutations and 15 vari- ly truncating mutations (84%). A 28-kb deletion involving exons 10-15 was ants in 20 patients to be likely pathogenic. However, 32 variants found in 69 identified in 23 pedigrees confined in an area of ~3500 km², which repre- patients that were previously reported as pathogenic were reclassified here sents the first case of founder mutation in ADPKD. At inclusion, 50 patients as variants of uncertain significance. Finally, we identified 128 candidate va- had reached end-stage renal disease (ESRD), and median age at ESRD (ob- riants in 132 patients that were predicted to be loss-of-function. tained by Kaplan-Meier model) was 77.8 yrs [ranges=41.5-84.6]. Although Conclusions: This study comprises the largest gene set to be analyzed in a there was no gender influence on renal survival, multiple linear regression cohort of CAKUT patients to date, it demonstrates the advantages of a disea- demonstrated that men had significantly lower kidney function than women. se-targeted gene panel, and prioritizes candidate variants identified in 34% Considerable disease variability was observed amongst patients harbouring of our patient cohort, some of which are currently being followed up using the same mutation, suggesting that additional genetic or environmental fac- in vitro functional tests. tors may modulate the disease severity in PKD2 patients. Consistent with this P
S03 .11 point, in 3 PKD2 pedigrees with cases of early-onset ESRD, disease severity Whole exome sequencing and targeted sequence analysis in 73 was linked to the co-inheritance of hypomorphic alleles of PKD1. (funded by patients with congenital anomalies of the kidneys and urinary tract PHRC inter-regional 2010) (CAKUT) P
S03 .09 A. Kosfeld1, M. Kreuzer2, C. Daniel3, F. Brand1, A. Schäfer4, A. Chadt5, A. Weiss4, V. Genomic analysis of biliary atresia by GWAS and whole exome Riehmer1, M. Kirschstein6, T. Seeman7, K. Amann3, A. Bjerre8, L. Pape2, H. Al-Hasani5, A. Kispert4, D. Haffner2, R. G. Weber1; sequencing 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, Y. Chen1,2, R. Rajagopalan2, C. Grochowski2, A. Falsey2, K. Loomes1,2, N. Spinner1,2, M. 2Department of Paediatric Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover Medical Devoto1,2; School, Hannover, Germany, 3Division of Nephropathology, Department of Pathology, 1University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2The Children‘s Hospital of University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 4Department of Molecular Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Biology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 5German Diabetes Centre, Leibniz Centre for Diabetes Research, University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6General Hospital Celle, Celle, Germany, 7Childrens’ Hospital and Transplantation Biliary atresia (BA) is a rare liver disease presenting within the first months Centre, 2. Medical Faculty – University Hospital Motol, Charles University, Prague, Czech of life characterized by obliteration of the extrahepatic biliary tree in a Republic, 8Department of Paediatrics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. progressive, necroinflammatory manner, leading to cholestasis, fibrosis, cirrhosis and chronic liver damage, and accounting for 50% of pediatric li- ver transplantations in the US. The etiology of BA is not well understood, CAKUT is a genetically highly heterogeneous disorder. To elucidate the gene- and environmental, inflammatory, and genetic causes have been proposed. tic aetiology in unclear cases and identify novel CAKUT genes, we performed A GWAS in Chinese patients previously identified a signal on chromosome whole exome sequencing on peripheral blood from 24 patients (22 spora- 10q upstream of the ADD3 and XPNPE
P1  genes. We performed a GWAS in dic, 2 familial) followed by detailed data analysis. In 12/24 (50%) patients, 450 Caucasian non-syndromic BA patients collected through the Childhood we found 14 different heterozygous loss-of-function (LOF) variants in two Liver Disease Research Network and 1981 controls, with the Illumina Om- known dominant CAKUT genes (PAX2 und SAL
L1 ) and 11 CAKUT candidate ni2.5 array. The most significant SNP was rs10865291 (p-value = 2.7x10-7; genes, whereby two patients carried two distinct LOF mutations. Four of the odds ratio 1.6; 95% CI (1.3 -1.9)), in the sixth intron of EFEM
P1 . Efemp1 14 LOF variants were de novo, one was inherited from an affected parent, is an extracellular glycoprotein implicated in tissue regeneration and or- seven were inherited from a healthy parent, and in two cases inheritance ganogenesis. Additionally, we sequenced the exome of 100 patients, and was undetermined. In four patients, known CAKUT causing missense muta- looked for rare variants in 21 genes chosen because of reports of mutations tions inherited from a healthy parent were detected in the SIX2 (2/24) and in syndromic BA or animal models with hepatobiliary defects, and BA asso- the RET (2/24) gene. In 8 patients without LOF variants, heterozygous mis- ciation from GWAS. Filtering for protein-altering variants present at <1% in sense variants were determined in CAKUT candidate genes that were novel public datasets, we found 20 missense variants and 2 in-frame insertions in and predicted to be pathogenic, three of which belonged to the GDNF-RET- 13 different genes in 26 patients. We found more than one variant in LGR4, network. In 49 additional CAKUT patients, targeted sequencing of selected ZEB2, DNMT1, INVS, JAG1, and PRICKL
E4 , some shared among more than candidate genes was performed. One of these genes, in which we detected one proband. These findings suggest that BA etiology is likely highly hete- four rare or novel heterozygous variants including one de novo LOF and rogeneous and a single gene does not explain the phenotypic complexity of three pathogenic missense variants in CAKUT patients, was further ana- the disease. lysed in vitro and in vivo. We characterised its expression pattern in mouse PM03.10 embryos during the development of the kidney and urinary tract by RNA in Prioritization of candidate variants using targeted next generation situ hybridisation. In addition, we examined the kidneys and urinary tract of sequencing of 208 candidate genes in congenital anomalies of the mice with a knock-out of this gene macroscopically and microscopically. kidney and urinary tract PM03.12 N. Nicolaou1, S. Pulit1, I. J. Nijman1, G. Monroe2, W. F. J. Feitz3, M. F. Schreuder4, A. M. van The first genetic study on congenital choledochal dilatation (CCD) Eerde1, J. C. Giltay1, R. H. Giles5, E. Cuppen1, E. M. H. F. Bongers6, N. V. A. M. Knoers1, K. Y. implicates extracellular matrix proteins Renkema1, G. van Haaften7; M. Garcia-Barcelo1, J. K. L. Wong1, N. Ngo2, T. Son2, L. Nguyen2, P. Sham1, S. Cherny1, P. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Tam1; Netherlands, 2Medical Genetics, UMC UtrechtDepartment of Medical Genetics, University 1The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2National Hospital of Pediatrics, Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Urology, Radboudumc Hanoi, Viet Nam. Amalia Children‘s Hospital, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of pediatrics, Radboudumc Amalia Children‘s Hospital, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Department of Human Congenital choledochal dilatation (CCD) or paediatric choledochal cyst re- Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7UMC Utrecht, fers to the congenital dilatation of the choledochs (bile ducts) which leads to Utrecht, Netherlands. the obstruction of the ducts and bile retention. Symptoms include cholestatic jaundice, abdominal pain and liver enlargement complicated with cholangi- tis and pancreatitis. New-borns undergo surgery otherwise the liver could Introduction: The leading cause of end-stage renal disease in children is be permanently damaged. CCD is rare, mostly sporadic with variable popu- attributed to congenital anomalies of the kidney and the urinary tract (CA- lation incidence, the highest being in Asia (1/1,000 in Asians; 1/150,000 in KUT). Familial clustering implicate genetic factors and monogenic mouse Caucasians). Its aetiology implicates congenital structural anomalies reflec- models support the involvement of numerous genes in CAKUT aetiology. ting a failure in the hepatobiliary-pancreatic development. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 87 However, genetic testing for human CAKUT is currently insufficient and ad- Thirty-one CCD trios were exome sequenced. Gene/pathway-set enrichmentABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index analyses grouped genes with at least one damagdien ng oavlloele into focal adhesion encoding 21-hydroxylase, are identified in >80% of individuals with CAH. and extracellular matrix-receptor interaction pathways. CY
P21 A2 and its highly homologous pseudogene, CY
P21 A1P, reside within Pathogenic mechanisms considered included germ-line mutations close proximity on 6p21; as a result >90% of CY
P21 A2 mutation-containing and/or recessive inherited mutations in homozygosis, compound hete- alleles are caused by gene conversion events from CY
P21 A1P or CY
P21 A2 rozygosis (CH) or as “di-genic/oligogenic” model of inheritance whereby deletions arising from non-allelic homologous recombination. Further, variants in genes of related pathways coexist in a patient through parental CY
P21 A2 full gene duplications exist and provide a source of false negative inheritance. and false positive results as carriers of a CY
P21 A2 deletion may be masked Fifteen gene members of those pathways were recurrently mutated and had by a CY
P21 A2 duplication on the opposite allele (2+0 configuration) or car- variants at different sites (more than one damaging allele per gene). These riers of a point mutation may also carry a second non-mutated CY
P21 A2 alleles were in compound heterozygosis or co-existing with a mutated func- in cis. In our lab current CY
P21 A2 testing consists of dosage analysis by tional gene-partner in the same individual. MLPA and coding region sequencing from full-length gene PCR amplificati- Patients’ genetic profiling revealed CCD as not only genetically heteroge- on, which currently will not detect 2+0 CY
P21 A2 deletion carriers. Here we neous but with di/oligogenic inheritance. Yet, the relevant mutated genes present the distribution of mutations detected during genetic testing from are functionally convergent. Data are consistent with the sporadic presen- the only CY
P21 A2 testing laboratory in Canada and present additional data tation of CCD. Incidentally, the cholangiocarcinoma rate in Asians is also the further supporting the need for dosage analysis in all CY
P21 A2 analyses. highest world-wide. We We also present an experimental approach to identify individuals with 2+0 are also aiming at finding possible links between these choledochal disor- silent deletions and provide preliminary data of the prevalence of the 2+0 ders and at explaining their high incidence in Asia. configuration in a control population of >900 individuals. Acknowledgement: General Research Fund (GRF) HKU 7669/13M to P
S03 .15 MMGB Molecular genetic diagnostics of congenital adrenal hyperplasia in the P
S03 .13 Czech Republic Report of two CTRC intronic mutations associated with acute or P. Silerova, Z. Hruba, Z. Vrzalova, E. Hrabincova, S. Pouchla, L. Kozak, L. Fajkusova; chronic pancreatitis and delineation of their pathogenic molecular University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. mechanisms Background: J. M. Chen1, E. Masson2, C. Férec3; 1INSERM U1078; Université de Bretagne Occidentale (UBO); EFS-Bretagne, Brest, Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of inherited France, 2INSERM U1078; Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire (CHRU) Brest, autosomal recessive disorders caused by enzymCYatPi2c 1dAe2ficiency which im- Hôpital Morvan, Brest, France, 3INSERM U1078; Université de Bretagne Occidentale pairs steroidC YhPo2r1mAo2ne biosynthesis. About 90 % of all CAH cases are due to (UBO); EFS-Bretagne; Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire (CHRU) Brest, Hôpital Morvan, Brest, France. 21-hydroxylase CdYePfi2c1ieAn1cPy (21-OHD) causedC YbPy1 1B1, HSD 3geBn2e abeCrYraPt1io7nAs1. Most of the gene mutations result from recombination events with its pseudogene . Mutations in the and genes are genetic causes of 11-β-hydroxylase deficiency (11-βOHD), 3-β- Chymotrypsin C (CTRC) is highly specific in degrading all human trypsin/ hMyedtrhooxdysst:eroid dehydrogenase deficiency (3-βHSD) and 17-α-hydroxylase trypsinogen isoforms, constituting an important line of defense against pre- deficiency (17-αOHD), respectively. maturely activated trypsin within the pancreas. Since 2008, variants in the For differential amplification of the genes and their homologs, CTRC gene have been increasingly reported to be associated with chronic lCoYnPg1-1raBn1g e PCR is used (21-OHD, 11-βOHD). Diagnostics of 21-OHD is follo- pancreatitis. However, to date, all reported CTRC intronic variants have been wed by restriction analysis, secondary PCR, sequencing and MLPA. Further classified as “unknown significance” due to the lack of functional analytic data. During our routine mutational analysis of four pancreatitis genes, Results: analysis comprises secondary PCR and sequencing. Molecular dia- gnostics of 3-βHSD and 17-αOHD include PCR and sequencing. PRS
S1 , SPINK1, CTRC and CFTR, in patients with acute or chronic pancrea- Molecular genetic testing confirmed the diagnosis of 21-OHD in 373 titis, we identified two intronic mutations in the CTRC gene, c.357-2A>G in probands (45,8 %). Only one mutant allele was found in 80 (9,8 %) of the intron 4 and c.640-12G>A in intron 6 (Table), both of which were absent pCYroPb1a1nBd1s. The diagnosis of 11-βOHD was confirmed in one patient and 17- in 350 healthy controls. We performed RT-PCR analyses of mRNAs prepa- αOHD was confirmed in two patients. Analysis of -1888G/T and -1858A/G red from cultured lymphocytes of patients I and II (Table), respectively: promoter SNPs revealed 23 probands (29,1 %) homozygous for c.357-2A>G activated a cryptic splice acceptor signal that is located 147 bp -
C1 o8n8c8lu Ts aionnd: -1858 G alleles. Homozygosity of these alleles is associated with upstream of the wild-type exon 4 whilst c.640-12G>A created a novel splice reduced 11-β-hydroxylase effiCcYiePn2c1yA.2,CY
P11 B1, HSD3B2 CY
P17 A1 acceptor signal 8 bp upstream of the normal one. This is the first report of Molecular genetic testing in our laboratory allows for the iden- experimentally confirmed pathogenic CTRC intronic mutations associated tification of mutations in the and ge- with acute or chronic pancreatitis. The identification of a pathogenic CTRC nes in patients suspected of steroid hormone synthesis deficiency. variant in the three children or adolescent patients with acute pancreatitis has important implications for genetic counseling; these patients should be PM03.16 advised to avoid alcohol and smoking because they are at high risk in de- Whole Exome Sequencing in Congenital Hypogonadotropic veloping chronic pancreatitis. Hypogonadism Clinical data of pancreatitis patients with CTRC intronic mutations L. Izatt1, P. Carroll2, S. Lillis3, Y. Patel3, L. Brodd3, K. Stone3, K. Ryan4, J. Wook Ahn4, M. Age of Mutation(s) Simpson5, M. Yau3; Patient Current first Family Mutation in other 1Clinical Genetics, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Ethnicity Diagnosis (sex) age (y) onset history in CTRC pancreatitis Kingdom, 2Diabetes and Endocrinology, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, (y) genes London, United Kingdom, 3Genetics, Viapath, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Chronic CFTR Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4Bioinformatics, Viapath, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Mother I (fema- French Cauca- calcific c.357-2- p.F508del Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5Genomic Medicine Group, King‘s College 58 20 with the le) sian with A>G and SPINK1 London, London, United Kingdom. disease diabetes c.27delC II c.640- Moroccan Acute 7 4 No No (male) 12G>A III (fe- Acute c.640- Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH [MIM161110]) due to Cameroonian 20 18 No No male) recurrent 12G>A gonadotropin-releasing hormone deficiency is a rare genetic disorder (af- IV (fe- Acute c.640- Algerian 12 6 No No fects ~1/30,000) characterised by abnormal pubertal development and male) recurrent 12G>A infertility. Over 60% cases have anosmia (Kallman syndrome) and some exhibit additional phenotypes. CHH is a genetically heterogeneous deve- PM03.14 lopmental disease. Most cases present sporadically, although familial forms Genetic testing for congenital adrenal hyperplasia: the Canadian (AD, AR and X-linked) with incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity experience occur. Research suggests it is emerging as a digenic or oligogenic disease, R. E. Lamont, H. Zarsky Johnson, L. Graham, J. S. Parboosingh; rather than a monogenic trait. Genetic testing for this condition has hitherto Alberta Children‘s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada. been costly, time-consuming and incomplete, with mutations identified in less than 30%. In this study, we investigated three simplex cases (2M with partial anosmia, Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) most commonly results from a de- 1F) who presented with delayed puberty and hypogonadism due to isolated ficiency of 21-hydroxylase, an enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway that GnRH deficiency. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on each co8n8verts cholesterol to cortisol and aldoEsSteHroGne 2. M01ut5at i|o GnsL iAn SCGYPO21WA,2 ,S COpaTtiLeAntN usDin, gU thKe |I lWlumWinWa .HEiSSeHq2G5.0O0 RplGatform and the Agilent SureSelectABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Human All Exon v5 Kit. Following alignment to the human genome, an in- have been generated and are currently under investigation of their capture house pipeline applied a virtual panel to restrict the genes to be analysed efficiency. Exome sequencing has been performed with genomic DNA from based on the clinical presentation (22 CHH genes). Variants were filtered to two of the patients. Potential disease-causing variants have been identified. identity potential pathogenic mutations, which were subsequently confir- A total of 2 genetic variants were identified and thought as the main cause med by Sanger sequencing. for DSD. One is a missense mutation F846 on the ATRX gene, while the other Results: Five variants in three CHH genes (FGFR1, GNRHR and H
S6 ST1) one is indel with V176_K177insV on the TSPY
L1  gene. were identified. Variants in these genes are recognised to result in deficient Conclusion GnRH activity, confirming that a Kallman phenotype can result from mutati- Finding the causative gene of a heterogenetic disease is challenging even ons in CHH genes other than KA
L1 . with recent development of NGS and bioinformatics. In our study, we have a Conclusion: We demonstrate that WES, with analysis limited to relevant list of candidate disease-causing variants that need to be carefully studied in genes, can successfully and efficiently confirm a molecular diagnosis in a the cell model system with biochemical assays. Our results indicate that NGS genetically and phenotypically complex disease, such as CHH. aids on genetic diagnosis of 46,XY DSD. P
S03 .17 P
S03 .19 Comprehensive genetic analysis of 35 unrelated Spanish patients RNA-Seq in skeletal muscle of metabolic syndrome patients with with congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency. DYRK1B_R102C mutation Report of a novel frameshift mutation in the CY
P21 A2 gene. J. Tavakkoly Bazzaz1, M. Fathzadeh1, A. R. Keramati2, T. Yarovinsky2, K. Sarajzadeh- P. Fernández-Álvarez1, H. Valbuena1, O. Díez1, A. Plaja1, E. García-Arumi1,2, D. Yeste3, E. Fard3, M. Amini4, A. Noorafshan5, D. Mehrabani6, M. Dianatpour7, G. Ranjbar Omran8, M. Tizzano1,2; Babaee Bigi9, M. Kasaei9, H. Poustchi10, R. Lifton11, R. Malekzadeh10, A. Mani2; 1Area of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, University Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine,Tehran University of Medical Spain, 2Biomedical Network Research Centre on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Instituto Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Internal Medicine Department, Yale de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 3Pediatric Endocrinology, University Hospital Vall University, New Haven, CT, United States, 3School of Medicine, Shiraz University of d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Plastic Surgery Department, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences,, Shiraz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 5Histomorphometry & CY
P21 A2 Stereology Research Centre, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences,, Shiraz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 6Stem Cell & Transgenic Technology Research Center, Shiraz University We describe the mutation spectrum in a cohort of 35 unrelated of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 7Medical Genetics Department, North-East Spanish congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) patients; 29 wo- Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 8Endocrinology men and 6 men, 25 of them diagnosed in pediatric ageC.Y TPh2e1 Ad2is tribution of Department, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, the phenotypes was: salt-wasting SW (7 patients), simple virilizing SV (5 9Cardiology Department, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran, Islamic CpYatPi2en1Ats2) and n on-classical form NC (23 patients). All exons were Republic of, 10Digestive Disease Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical sequenced to determine mutations and MLPA was performed to detect Sciences,, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 11Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States. largedeletions. A genotype-phenotype correlation was investiga- ted. Two mutated alleles were detected in all SW and SV patients as well as in 19 of the 23 NC patients. In the remaining four only one mutated allele Methods: Oral Glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was carried out in non-diabe- was found. A novel p.Leu3
C4 Y3ACPy2sf1sA*220 mutation was identified in a NC pa- tic young DYRK1BR102C mutation carriers and non-carrier relatives. The tient. SW SV NC Total skeletal muscle (SM) biopsies of these probands were examined by RNA-Seq Tph.Vea lf2o8ll2oLweiung table shows allele mutations by phenotype: and Western blot analysis. In addition, wild type and mutant DYRK1B and Total deletion p.Ile173Asn 30(71,4%) 30(45,5%) empty lentivirus constructs were administrated to 
C56 Bl6 mice and their IV
S2 -13 A/C>G 7(50%) 2(20%) 9(13,6%) effects on body weight and plasma glucose and key regulators of insulin si- p.Pro453Ser 6(60%) 2(4,8%) 8(12,1%) gnaling were examined. p.Pro483Ser 4(29%) 3(7,1%) 7(10,6%) Results: Pathway-based analysis of the SkM RNA-Seq data revealed prefe- p.Arg484fs 1(10%) 2(4,8%) 3(4,5%) Gene conversions 2(4,8%) 2(3%) rential expression of genes involved in cytoskeletal remodeling, including p.Arg357Trp 2(14%) 2(3%) ACTN3, SL
C16 A3, MYH11, Grem2, MY
L6 B, MS
S51 , and MYLPF. Consistent p.Gln319X 1(7%) 1(10%) 2(3%) with RNA-Seq data, staining of SkM of carriers and non-carriers for slow- p.Leu343Cysfs*20 1(2,4%) 1(1,5%) and fast-twitch fibers demonstrated higher ratio fast glycolytic fibers in Total 1(2,4%) 1(1,5%) 1(2,4%) 1(1,%5) mutation carriers than non-carriers (65% vs. 40%). DYRK1B mutation car- The most prevalent mut1at4ion in NC 1p0atients was 4p2.Val282Leu, 6w6hereas riers exhibited higher baseline insulin levels (16.7uIU/mL) and compared to p.Ile173Asn and a complete gene deletion were the most observed mutations in non-carriers (8.4uIU/mL) and had higher plasma glucose levels in response SV and SW patients, respectively. These findings are consistent with previously to oral glucose ingestion that is indicative of insulin resistance in carriers published data of a northern-Spain cohort. Genotype accurately predicted phe- of R102C mutation. Mice overexpressing DYRK1BR102C allele were simi- notype in more than an 85% of our patients. The finding of CAH cases with only larly insulin resistant.Western blot analysis and Mass Spectrometry of liver one mutated allele underlies the importance to implement deep-sequencing tests proteins illustrated increased expression of G6Pase, PEPCK, Glucokinase, to identify cryptic mutations in CY
P21 A2 or mutations in other candidate genes. and Pyruvate carboxylase, in mice overexpressing mutant and wild type DYRK1Bcompared to empty vector. Conclusions: Our findings suggest that DYRK1B initiates cytoskeletal remo- PM03.18 deling and causes insulin resistance, while it triggers hepatic gluconeogene- Application of next-generation sequencing in the search of causative sis by enhancing the expression of key gluconeogenic enzymes. genes for Taiwanese patients with disorders of sex development PM03.20 M. Tsai1, H. Yu2, P. Chen2; Genetic and functional interactions between β1 integrins and 1Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of endothelin-3 during enteric nervous system development Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, 2Institute of Clinical E. Gazquez1,2, Y. Watanabe2, F. Bondon-Broders1, P. Paul-Gilloteaux3, V. Baral2, J. Heysch1, Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. N. Bondurand2, S. Dufour1,2; 1Institut Curie/CNRS UMR 144, Paris, France, 2IMRB INSERM U955, Creteil, France, 3PICT-IBiSA, Paris, France. Objectives This study aims primarily to establish a rapid and high-throughput genetic test for 46,XY DSD. Meanwhile, the applicability and effectiveness of next- The enteric nervous system (ENS) results from the colonization of the de- generation sequencing are to be evaluated in searching for the remaining veloping gut by enteric neural crest cells (ENCCs). During their migration, unknown causative genes of this inherited disease. ENCCs proliferate and differentiate into glial and neuronal cells, which ag- Methods gregate into ganglia and give rise to the intrinsic innervation of the bowel. A A membrane hybridization method was used as the main strategy for tar- proper ENS formation requires many different factors among which are the get sequence enrichment. In a stepwise manner, the capture filter for tar- G-coupled receptor EDNRB, its ligand endothelin-3 (EDN3), and Itgb1 enco- get genes were designed and developed under specific conditions so that ding the β1-integrin subunit. Interestingly, the enteric phenotype of condi- whole-genome fragment DNA libraries could be set up appropriately. The tional Itgb1 mutants resembles the phenotype described for Edn3 or Ednrb amplified exomes of target genes were hybridized against the DNA libraries mutants, i.e. lack of innervation in the distal part of the colon, reminiscent and sequenced subsequently. of Hirschsprung disease in Human. Otherwise, EDN3 was shown to regulate Results ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANaDdh, eUsiKon | pWroWperWtie.sE oSfH caGnc.Oer RceGlls and astrocytes. 89 We have enrolled 6 46, XY DSD patients in this study. Targeted smpliconsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P
S03 .23 Abernathy malformation: a rare association with Goldenhar Considering these observations, we investigated a putative role of EDN3 on syndrome ENCC adhesion properties and its functional interaction with β1-integrins A. de Burca1, J. Collier2, H. Bungay2, E. Blair1; during ENS development. We discovered that EDN3 promotes ENCC adhe- 1Oxford Department of Clinical Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2John Radcliffe sion in vitro. It stimulates β1-integrin activation and increases the number Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. of ENCCs focal adhesions. Upon EDN3 treatment, ENCCs rapidly exhibited changes in cell shape and membrane dynamics displaying a sustained grow- th and persistence of lamellipodia. Morever, in vivo double-mutant studies Abernathy malformation is a rare congenital malformation characterised by showed that itgb1-/-; Edn3ls/ls mutants displayed an aggravated enteric absence or hypoplasia of the hepatic portal vein, resulting in a congenital phenotype and an altered ENS network organization. Ex-vivo live imaging of portosystemic shunt. Consequences of the malformation include focal nodu- embryonic guts allowed us to evidence severe migratory defects of double lar hyperplasia of the liver, hepatoblastoma and hepatic encephalopathy. mutant ENCCs that contribute to the enteric defects observed. Our patient is a 27 year old woman who was referred to the genetics clinic Altogether our results reveal that interplays between EDN3 and β1-integrins for preconception counselling due to a diagnosis of Goldenhar syndrome. are crucial for proper ENS ontogenesis. She was diagnosed with focal nodular hyperplasia of the liver aged 15. Re- P
S03 .21 view of historic imaging and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogram The analysis of APOB-100, LRPA
P1 , ABCG5 and ABCG8 genes revealed a type 1a Abernathy malformation, likely to be the cause of the fo- polymorphisms in gallstone disease patients and healthy donors from cal nodular hyperplasia. Volga-Ural region of Russia Congenital absence of the portal vein has been previously described in one A. Sagdatova1, A. Nurgalieva2, S. Zagidullin1, E. Khusnutdinova2,3; individual with Goldenhar syndrome. In this case focal nodular hyperplasia 1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State University, developed into hepatoblastoma requiring liver transplantation. Abernathy Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, malformation is a rarely reported association of Goldenhar syndrome that Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. can cause serious hepatic complications. PM03.24 Metallothioneins are downregulated in ileal mucosa of Familial Gallstone disease (GSD) is a metabolic diseases of the hepatobiliary sy- GUCY2C diarrhea syndrome patients susceptible to Crohn´s disease stem, characterized by the formation of gallstones in the gallbladder, com- R. R. Tronstad1,2, H. Brattbakk2, C. Stansberg2, K. Hanevik2, K. D. -. Pham1, E. Ellinghaus3, mon bile duct stones in the liver bile ducts. 10% of the population suffers K. M. Ersland2, H. L. von Volkmann2,1, S. F. Jørgensen4,5, O. H. Gilja2,1, N. Hovdenak1, T. from gall stones, and the number of patients in the world with each passing Hausken2,1, M. H. Vatn5,6, A. Franke3, P. M. Knappskog2,1, T. H. Karlsen5,4, S. Le Hellard2,1, T. decade becomes larger. The aim of this study was to exam the association Fiskerstrand2,1; of polymorphisms of APOB-100 (rs693), LRPA
P1  (rs11267919), ABCG5 1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 3Christian Albrechts University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 4University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, (rs4131229) and ABCG8 (rs11887534) genes with the risk of gallstone di- 5Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 6Akershus University Hospital, sease. The patient group consisted of 205 patients with with cholelithiasis, Oslo, Norway. the control group included 190 unrelated healthy individuals. Genomic DNA GUCY2C was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes by standard phenol/chlo- roform method. Genotyping was performed by PCR followed by restriction Background: Familial diarrhea syndrome (FGDS), first described in digestion. The analysis has revealed that heterozygous genotype X+X- of a Norwegian family (n=38), is caused by an activating mutation in the gene rs693 of APOB-100 gene is a marker of increased risk of gallstone disease in encoding guanylate cyclase C. Patients with FGDS have early onset mild di- Russian (p = 0.03; OR = 2,1). For those of Tatar ethnicity shows that rs693*X- arrhea but are also susceptible to ileal Crohn‘s disease (CD) (7 patients). allele and C allele of rs4131229 of ABCG5 gene are markers of increased The aim of the present study was to compare global gene expression in ileal risk of developing the disease (p = 0,002; OR = 2,0 and p = 0,02; OR = 1,7, biopsies (non-inflamed mucosa) from FGDS patients (n=11), unrelated CD respectively), while rs693*X +, rs4131229*T alleles and of rs4131229*T/T patients (n=6) and healthy controls (n=16). We also assessed whether CD genotype are a markers of reduced risk of gallstone disease (p = 0,002; OR genetic risk variants segregate with CD in the FGDS patients. = 0,5; p = 0,02; OR = 0.6 and p = 0,03; OR = 0,5, respectively). Results of the MethodsN: OGDlo2bal gene expression was examined using Illumina Human HT- study shows that the polymorphisms of the APOB-100 and ABCG5 genes are 12 v4 BeadChip. 140 CD risk variants were genotyped (Immunochip array) associated with the risk of gallstone disease. and the gene was sequenced in 23 adult FGDS-patients (7 with CD). PM03.22 Results: Nine metallothioneins were significantly downregulated (1.5-3 The mutational analysis of the INF2 gene in Czech patients with FSGS fold) in FGDS patients, but not in unrelated CD patients, compared to con- and MCD trols. ThNeO pDo2ly genic risk score did not differ significantly between FGDS M. Šafaříková1, J. Reiterová2, J. Štekrová1, M. Kohoutová1, V. Tesař2; patients with and without CD. However 6 of the 7 FGDS patients with CD 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University carried risk variants, and tNheO Dtw2o most severely affected patients and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2General University Hospital, were homozygous for the rs5743289 risk allele . Three of 16 FGDS patients Prague, Czech Republic. without CD were heterozygous for risk variants Conclusion: Metallothioneins were significantly downregulated in non-in- flamed terminal ileum of FGDS patients, but not in unrelated CD patients We started to screen for mutations in the INF2 gene in 136 Czech patients compared to controls. Lower levels of these zinc-binding proteins may cause (49.82 ± 17.91) with FSGS/MCD. The INF2 protein plays a key role in the inflammation due to interference with NOD2-stimulated bacterial clearance function of the slit diaphragm in podocytes. and autophagy. Further studies are warranted to investigate guanylate cy- We have so far identified one already known missense mutation with the clase C-related susceptibility to Crohn´s disease. proven damaging effect on the function of podocytes. The substitution Arg218Gln, which was in the heterozygous state, was found in two brothers P
S03 .25 (thirty-two and thirty-one years old) with a positive family history who suf- Molecular analysis of KAL-1 and GnRHR genes in patients with fered from FSGS. The heterozygous state did not correlate with the rapid idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism progression and early development of the ESRD (twenty-seven and thirty- I. Pereira-Caetano1, J. Silva1, T. Kay2, A. Mirante3, J. M. Aragüés4, M. R. Mascarenhas5, J. Gonçalves1; one years, respectively), while their father developed ESRD at fifty-seven 1Unidade Genética Molecular, Departamento Genética Humana, Instituto Nacional de years. For that reason, we suppose the collaboration of more factors, such as Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Serviço Genética Médica, Hospital D. other substitutions in the INF2 gene or in other genes connected with FSGS Estefânia - CHLC-EPE, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Serviço Endocrinologia, Hospital Pediátrico or the influence of environment, in the case of these two brothers. Coimbra - CHC-EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Serviço de Endocrinologia, Diabetes e The other interesting findings were the undescribed heterozygous chan- Metabolismo, Hospital Santa Maria – CHLN-EPE, Lisboa, Portugal, 5Clinica de ges p.Pro208Ser (c.622 C>T) in the anonymous patient and p.Pro1057Leu Endocrinologia, Diabetes e Metabolismo, Lisboa, Portugal. (c.2640 C>T) in forty-three years old man (FSGS, negative family history). However, according to predictive programs (PolyPhen-2 and PON-
P2 ), this substitution is not probably causal. It was also found the already known sub- Introduction: Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) comprises stitution p.Arg214His (c.641 G>A) with proven damaging effect in fifty-one delayed/absent puberty, infertility and low serum gonadotropins in the con- years old woman (FSGS, positive family history). text of normal anterior pituitary anatomy and function. Is due to partial/ The previous mentioned results are first data from the mutational analysis complete absence of gonadotropin-releasing hormone release/action or of the INF2 gene in Czech patients with FSGS/MCD. The similar study fo- gonadotropin secretion and its incidence is low (1/10.000-1/86.000) with cused on the INF2 gene has never been performed in the Czech Republic. a nearly 4:1 male-to-female ratio. Approximately two-thirds of individuals Su9 p0 ported by the grant project PRVOUK- PE 2S 5H /LG F1 2 /20 .15 | GLASGOW, SCO wT ithL IA HN H D ha, v U e aK n o| s W miW a orW hy.E pS osH mG ia. (O KaR llG mann syndrome-KS) and one-thirdABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index KA
L1  GnRHR have normosmic IHH (nIHH). Mutations in gene cause X-linked KS, and quent blood transfusion, anal atresia, sparse hair, scalp defect, lumbosacral in gene autosomal recessive IHH (almost 2% of nIHH patiKeAnLts1). meningUoB-mRyIelocele and hydrocephalus.This is a second report of neural MaGtenrRiaHl Rand Methods: 45 patients with IHH (42 males, 3 females), with and tube defect in association with JBS implying that this association is as a re- without hyposmia/anosmia were studied. Mutation analysis of and/ sult of mutation rather than coincidental. The phenotypic defects in or was performKeAdL 1by SSCP/DHPLC-PCR or by PCR-direct DNA se- JBS involve several organ systems in addition to pancreas suggesting that quencing. UBR1-mediated protein degradation plays a critical role at certain stages of Results: We found two mutations: c.769C>T (p.Arg257*) in a 15-years- human development, and in specific cell types. old anosmic male; and a novel one, an extensive deletion encompassing PM03.28 exons 4 to 14 confirmed by MLPA, in a 3-yearsG-noRldH Rboy (detected also in Targeted panel sequencing of 399 renal genes reclassifies primary his mother) with micropenis and maternal family history of HH. Two nIHH disease diagnoses in young end stage renal disease patients male patients were compound heterozygous for : c.[2T>C];[785G>A], A. M. van Eerde1, A. van der Zwaag1, M. H. de Borst2, E. Peters1, K. Renkema1, M. p.[(M1T)];[(R262Q)] (39-years-old, prepubertal testicules, gynecomastia, Elferink1, P. van Zon1, M. Lilien3, G. van Haaften1, G. Navis4, N. Knoers1; 
P1 -A0 pilosity) and c.[317A>G];[416G>A], p.[(Q106R);(R139H)] (35-years- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, the Netherlands, old with a brother non-tested with similar phenotype). All four mutations Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Nephrology, UMC Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Paediatriuc Nephrology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, the are known to be disease-causative. Netherlands, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Department of Nephrology, University Medical Discussion: We were able to find the genetic defects in 4 patients. The low Center, Groningen, the Netherlands, Groningen, Netherlands. detection rate of mutations (8.8%) is related with the existence of several genes implicated in the IHH’ pathogenesis. The NGS analysis in patients with IHH may improve the molecular diagnosis as it allows the screening of diffe- Background: About a quarter of patients with end stage renal disease (ESRD) rent genes simultaneously. before age 30 do not have a primary renal disease diagnosis. Previous gene- PM03.26 tic studies have focused on specific clinical diagnoses. We took an innovative Systematic analysis of chromatin interactions at disease associated approach by sequencing a panel of 399 renal disease genes in 200 cases loci links novel candidate genes to Inflammatory Bowel Disease with ESRD onset before age 30, regardless of their clinical diagnosis. Data C. A. Meddens1, M. Harakalova2, N. van den Dungen2, E. Cuppen2,3, F. Asselbergs2, E. for the first 132 cases are presented. Nieuwenhuis1, M. Mokry1; Methods: We designed the “RENome” using SureSelect/Agilent with 399 1Wilhelmina Children‘s Hospital, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands. genes involved in hereditary renal disease. We used SOLiD™ 5500XL for se- quencing and an in-house developed bioinformatics pipeline for mapping, Introduction: variant calling and QC. Variants were annotated using CARTAGENIA softwa- re. Genome wide association studies (GWASs) have revealed Results: On average >95% of in target bases were genotyped, with >99% numerous genomic loci that are associated with complex genetic diseases. sensitivity and specificity. Stringent filtering criteria allowed only for coding Subsequently, many candidate genes have been defined, mainly based on the variants with percentage variant reads of >15%, novel or with allele fre- functional relationships between genes found in the vicinity of the identified quency of <0.005, that were listed as disease-causing in HGMD Pro, had a loci. However, many of these loci can be linked to regulatory DNA sequences SIFT score <0.05 and were not predicted to be benign in PolyPhen2. We also and it is now widely appreciated that part of the GWAS associations is due to selected samples with likely CNVs. Extended analyses, with less stringent sequence variation in regulatory elements. Therefore, the genes controlled filtering criteria and in depth copy number analyses, are presented at the by these regulatory elements should be considered as possible candidate meeting. genes. Since regulatory elements can regulate genes via chromatin-chroma- Conclusion: This filtering strategy yielded a molecular diagnosis in 15 pati- tin interactions that comprise up to 1 Mb, these genes cannot be identified ents (11.4%), confirming the registered primary disease in 6, and unexpec- based on base-pair distance from the regulatory regions. To address this, tedly reclassifying it in 9. Considering the stringency of filtering, these num- we used chromatin conformation capture-sequencing (4C-seq) to systema- bers underestimate the diagnostic potential of our innovative approach. Ad- tically determine the genes that are physically interacting with regulatory ding early RENome sequencing to the diagnostic work-up in all young ESRD uRneistus ltthsa: t overlap the disease associated SNPs in Inflammatory Bowel Di- patients, improves etiologic classification and genetic counseling. sease (IBD). AMvE is supported by the Dutch Kidney Foundation and Fonds NutsOhra We assayed chromatin interactions in monocytes, lymphocytes and in DLD-1 cells – major cell types implicated in IBD pathogenesis. WeI pLe1r0fRoAr-, P
S03 .29 mSMeAdD 45C, -SsMeqA Dfo6r 92 IPBIDA-Sa1ssociated loci that localize to regulatory elements Significant association of KIR2D
L3 /HLA-
C1  combination with iCno anlcl ltuhsreioen c:e ll types. Our approach links 815 novel genes, including susceptibility to Crohn´s disease and , to IBD. R. Diaz Pena1,2, J. Vidal- Castiñeiras1, M. Moro1, R. Alonso-Arias1, P. Castro- Santos2; 1Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 2Universidad Autónoma de We have performed a novel candidate gene approach in which Chile, Talca, Chile. chromatin interaction data on GWAS-susceptibility loci are intersected with the information about DNASM rAegDu6l,a ItLo1r0yR eAl,e PmIAeSn1ts and S MgeAnDe5 ,expression in relevant cell types. This revealed 815 novel candidate genes, consisting of Introduction: The killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) form a multiple notable genes like and thereby com- group of regulatory molecules that specifically recognize HLA class I mole- plementing previously reported candidate gene approaches. cules. The aim of this study was to analyze the possible association of spe- P
S03 .27 cific KIR genes and KIR/HLA-C genotypes with the susceptibility to Crohn’s Johanson-Blizzard syndrome in an Omani infant with neural tube disease (CD) in a Spanish population. defect: a coincidental findings or a consequence of UBR1 mutation ? Materials and Methods: A total of 125 patients with RA and 339 healthy A. Al-Kindy; control subjects were selected for this study based on clinical criteria. The Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman. commercial KIR-SSO typing kit from Luminex (Tepnel Lifecodes) was used to investigate KIR and HLA-C typing. Result-s3: The centromeric A/A genotype was more frequent in CD patients Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS), #243800 is a rare, autosomal recessi- (P<10 ). When we included HLA-C analysis, we found that the centromeric ve multisystem disorder characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency A/A genotype a-3nd HLA-
C1  combination was significantly increased in CD and aplasia/hypoplasia of alae nasi. Additional common features include patients (P<10 ). Moreover, KIR2D
L2 /2D
L3  genotype demonstrated a de- ectodermal dysplasia, hypothyroidism, groUwBRth1 hormone deficiency, senso- creased frequency in CD patients (P<0.0005), whereas the KIR2D
L3 /2D
L3  rineural hearing loss, urogenital and anorectal anomalies and cognitive dys- genotype was significantly increased in CD patients (P<0.0005). Remarkab- function of variable degrees. Mutations of (MIM #605981) are known ly, we also observed a highly significant increase of the KIR2D
L3 /KIR2D
L3  to cause JBS. The UBR1 represents one of at least four 
E3  ubiquitin ligases HLA
C1 /HLA
C1  homozygosis in CD patients (P<0.0005). of the N-end rule pathway, an evolutionary conserved and ubiquitously ex- Conclusion: Our results confirm the relevance of the KIR2D
L2 /KIR2D
L3  pressed intracellular proteolytic pathway involved in ubiquitin-mediated genes and their interaction with HLA-C in CD. The presence of a particular degradation of many proteins. JBS has wide and highly variable clinical ma- KIR-HLA pair may confer functional competence on NK cells and influences nifestation with rare maUlfBoRrm1ations observed in some patients with mole- differences in NK cell functional responses among individuals. We show that cularly confirmed JBS. We report a newborn Omani with JBS and a novel the contribution of the KIR genes to CD susceptibility extends beyond the truncating mutation in . The clinical features include a beaked nose, association with individual KIRs, with an imbalance between activating and hypoplasia of nasal wings, exocrinEeS pHanGcr 2ea0ti1c 5in s|u GffiLciAenScGy pOreWse,n StiCngO wTitLhA NiDnh,i bUitKor |y WKIRW gWene.Es SseHemGi.nOg RtoG influence the susceptibility to CD. 91 severe failure to thrive and septicemic shock, severe anemia requiring fre-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM03.32 KOUNCIL: kidney-oriented understanding of correcting ciliopathies Grant references: Proyecto interno Universidad Autónoma de Chile M. F. Stokman1, M. M. Oud2, J. van Reeuwijk2, M. R. Lilien1, N. C. van de Kar2, I. J. Nijman1, 36/2014. C. Gilissen2, H. Y. Kroes1, E. H. M. F. Bongers2, N. Geijsen3, E. Kamsteeg2, E. Cuppen1, R. Roepman2, R. H. Giles1, K. Y. Renkema1, H. H. Arts2,4, N. V. A. M. Knoers1; PM03.30 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Hubrecht Endocrine neoplasia: translational outcome of the genetic study Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. S. Birla, E. Malik, V. P.Jyotsna, R. Singla, S. Aggarwal, A. Sharma; All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. Introduction Nephronophthisis is an autosomal recessive renal ciliopathy that constitutes the leading monogenic cause of end-stage renal disease in Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes are characterized by tu- children. The KOUNCIL consortium is a collaboration between the UMC Ut- mors of endocrine and non endocrine organs. They are autosomal dominRaEnTt, recht, the Radboudumc Nijmegen and UC London aimed at elucidating the dMiEsoNr1d,e PrRs KaAnRd1 cAategorized into MEN1, MEN2, Carney complex (CNC), von genetic etiology and pathophysiological mechanisms underlying nephro- Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) etc. caused by genetic lesions in genes like nophthisis and identifying drugs thaMt eptrhevoednst renal failure. Our goal is to with an involvement in regulation of cell growth, differen- improve early genome diagnostics, genetic counseling and therapeutic op- tiation and death. tions for nephronophthisis patients. We employ next-generation Definitive treatment is timely screening and surgical resection of tumors. In- sequencing to identify novel diseasien gveintreos in 10in0 vnievop hronophthisis pati- formation on mutation status facilitates effective propMhEylNa1ctiRc EinTt ervenPtRioKnAs- ents included within the AGORA biobank project. The functional effect of oRb1lAig atory for management and survival of the patients and their relatives. novel mutations is assessed using and models. Genotypic The present study reports on mutation screening of , and and phenotypic patient characteristics are registered in a nephronophthi- in 113 patients and 100 controls. Majority of the patients had charac- sis database, facilitating correlation analyses and the identification of early teristic clinical presentations.Some exhibited rare symptoms of acromegaly phenotypic markers. Newly identified genes are incorporated into a diagno- aRnEdT infertility as in Carney complex, and another patient showed cutaneous stic targeted next-generation sequencing panel of ciliary genes. We use a lichen amyloidosis associated with MEN2A. Molecular analyses revealeIdn systems-biology approach to identify and functionally characterize nephro- silico hotspot mutation ‘
C634 R’ in 36% cases (Table-1). Novel and reported nophthisis-associated prRoetseuinl tsmodules. Finally, we use high-throughput mutations and polymorphisms were identified in the genes screened. repurposing screens in zebrafish embryos to discover drugs that halt pro- analysis using computational algorithms predicted the changes to be gression of renal failure. We expectI FtTo1 u7n2coWveDrR t3h4e causWalD mRu6t0ation pathogenic providing evidence for their role in disease causation. Predictive in 60-90% of nephronophthisis patients. KOUNCIL members were involved genetic testing was provided to ‘at risk’ family members to identify changes in the identification of three novel genes ( , and ) for followed by extensive clinical evaluation of neoplastic changes if any. Trans- nephronophthisis-related disorders. Clinical guidelines and new diagnostic lation of genetic findings was achieved by comprehensive evaluation follo- tools for nephronophthisis are dCeovneclolupseido nand implemented in genome dia- wed by cost effective surveillance and prophylactic surgeries of asymptoma- identified in the present study gnostics. We expect to identify FDA-approved drugs that can lead to novel tic family members wherever required. Nature of mutati- S.No Gene Phenotype Genotype Position therapies for nephronophthisis. The KOUNCIL study is designed Table-1 Mutations on/SNP to advance understanding of renal ciliopathies and improve clinical care for Novel nephronophthisis patients. KOUNCIL is funded by the Dutch Kidney Foun- MEN1 Hyperparathyroi- dation (C
P11 .18). 1 dism and gastri- 14 bp deletion Exon8 Novel noma Novel P
S03 .33 2 Insulinoma c.445-44G→A Intron2 Novel Diagnostics of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease by NGS 3 Insulinoma M561K Exon10 J. Štika1, G. Nagyová2, S. Peková1; 4 Insulinoma c.913-42G→C Intron6 RET Medullary thyroid 1synlab genetics s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic, 22nd Department of Pediatrics, Comenius carcinoma and University Medical School and University Children´s Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. 5 
C634 R Exon11 Reported cutaneous lichen PKHD1 PRKAR1A amyloidosis Novel PKHD1 Cardiac myxoma, Introduction: Mutations in the gene cause autosomal recessive poly- 6 acromegaly and 22bp insertion Exon6 cystic kidney disease (ARPKD). The gene is located on chromosome infertility P
S03 .31 6 and consists of 68 exons. The incidence of ARPKD is approximately 1:30 Clinical exome sequencing for improved diagnostics and treatment of 000. Some newborns with ARPKD die due to insufficiently deKvidelnoepye fdu nlucntigosn. patients visiting a multidisciplinary nephrogenetic outpatient clinic In those who survive, the disease is manifested by backbone and limb de- D. Lugtenberg, E. A. M. Cornelissen, I. Rood, J. Schoots, J. K. J. Deegens, J. M. Hofstra, J. formations, unusual facial features and distended abdomen. van Reeuwijk, J. F. M. Wetzels, H. H. Arts, R. Roepman, C. Gilissen, E. Kamsteeg, E. M. H. F. deteriorates progressively towards renal faPiKluHreD.1 Fortunately, dialysis and Bongers; transplantation can extend patients’ lifespan. RadboudUMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Materials and Methods: The analysis of the gene was carried out by next generation sequencing (GS-Junior, Roche). In-house designed primers were used for amplicon preparation. Amplicons cover all coding exons and Single gene disorders are estimated to account for ~30% of children and exon-intron boundaries. Universal design for library preparation was used. ~10% of adult patients attending renal outpatient services. In the Rad- Results: DNA samples of eleven unrelated patients with symptoms of ARPKD boudumc a multidisciplinary nephrogenetic outpatient clinic for children were analysed. Thr36Met - a heterozygous mutation causal for ARPKD was and adult patients with (genetic) kidney diseases has been established by identified in five samples. This mutation was accompanied by the second a team of (pediatric) nephrologists and a clinical geneticist. Clinical exome heterozygous mutation in all five cases. Those five mutations have been pre- sequencing for a broad spectrum of isolated- and syndromic renal (ciliary) viously described in literature in patients with ARPKD, namely Arg92Trp, disorders has been developed. The approach consists of a two-tier analysis Gly112Arg, Leu2128Ter, Ile2331Lys and Ile2957Thr. In addition, heterozy- in which the first step is to screen for pathogenic variants in genes that are gous mutations - one considered as deleterious Gly1712Arg and one novel known to be mutated in renal diseases (170 genes) or (renal) ciliopathies Gln1122Ser - were found in one sample. In five samples wPeK HdiDd1 not find any (125 genes). If causative mutations are not identified in the first step, the deleterious or suspicious mutations. complete exome data set can be analysed with informed consent. The first Conclusion: Our method allowPKs HrDel1iable analysis of the gene to be results with the renal disease gene panel in 63 unrelated patients with un- achieved in a few days. To assess the clinical significance of novel mutations, diagnosed renal disease led to pathogenic mutations in nine cases (14%), it is necessary to analyze the gene in the individual members of pa- and in 11 other cases (17%) likely pathogenic variants needed follow-up tients’ families. studies. Further analysis of the complete exome data set in 17 patients, PM03.34 revealed novel candidateN gPeHnPe1s in two cases that are under investigation. Evidence for a dosage-sensitive mutational network in a cohort of 308 In addition, copy number variation analysis of exome data revealed a pa- patients with early and severe forms of polycystic kidney disease thogenic deletion of the gene in two cases, confirming the clinical S. Neuber1, E. Decker1, J. Devane2, C. Kramer2, T. Eisenberger1, M. Hiersche1, C. Decker1, H. diagnosis. We conclude that the combination of the multidisciplinary out- J. Bolz1, D. Epting2, E. Ott2, C. Bergmann1,2; patient clinic with diagnostic exome sequencing provides a powerful tool 1Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Renal Division, for detecting causative mutations in up to 23 out of 63 patients (35%) with Department of Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. a renal disease. 92 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO PoT lyL cA ysN ticD k, iU dnK ey | dW iseW asW e (.E PKS DH ) G is. O thR e G most common potentially life-th-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index reatening human genetic disorder. In addition to recessive ARPKD, 2-5% dities of those immune disorders in 3 carriers; iii) importantly, genes af- of patients with dominant ADPKD show early and severe disease. Genetic fected by BA-CNVs (N=102; gene set-1) were enriched with immune genes, testing is cumbersome because of the size and structure of major disease correlated with the high prevalence of immunity disorders in BA. Further, genes and increasing genetic heterogeneity. We established a novel custo- we proved significant connectivity between gene set-1 and genes tagged mized sequence capture based NGS panel for PKD thaPt KcuDr1r,e PnKtlDy 2ta, rgetsP 9K5- by common variants (N=103; gene set-2) (Empirical p=0.039). As multiple HgeDn1es. In total, we analysed a cohort of 308 patients with early and severe function modules were elucidated in topological analysis of the BA candi- PKD. The majority of patients carried mutations in and date gene network, a ‘core’ position of cellular signalling pathways, which , however a subgroup harboured mPKuDta1t ions in genes typically related affect inflammatory and immunity regulation pathways, was highlighted. to other ciliopathies such as nephronophthisis, Joubert, Meckel, and Bardet- Conclusions: BA-CNVs underpin BA phenotypic complexity, and converge Biedl syndrome. We demonstrate that is a driver for early and seve- with those BA-associated common variants in a molecular network impli- re manifestations in families with dominant ADPKD. Notably, mutations in cated in BA pathogenesis. Integrating clinical/epidemiological data and BA both ADPKD genes can also be identified in patients with recessive PKD. A genetic findings is plausible using the BA ‚diseasome‘ approach. proportion of patients carry aggravating mutations in more than just one P
S03 .37 single gene/allele in the context of a functionally proven dosage-sensitive Steroid resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS): NGS panel testing to network. Zebrafish and Xenopus are used as models for validation of some direct therapy and intervention of our findings. This is the most comprehensive study performed so far by P. Dean1, M. Gable1, L. Yarram-Smith1, A. Bierzynska2, M. Saleem3,2, M. Williams1; which we propose a dosage-sePnKsDit1iv e model for early and severe forms of 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Academic Renal Unit, University PKD. Our NGS panel allows the parallel analysis of all disease genes inclu- of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Children’s Renal Unit, Bristol Royal Hospital for ding the pseudogene-variable gene which plays a decisive role in cyst Children, Bristol, United Kingdom. initiation. An accurate genetic diagnosis is crucial for genetic counselling, prenatal diagnostics and the clinical management of patients. Steroid Resistant Nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) is a disorder of the glomeru- P
S03 .35 lar filtration barrier. It is characterised by massive proteinuria, hypoalbu- AN ATYPICAL AND RARE FAMILIAL PULMONARY FIBROSIS CASE WITH minaemia and oedema, and is managed by non-specific heavy immunosup- A PATHOGENIC SFTPC GENE MUTATION: DIAGNOSIS IN THE DETAIL V. P. McConnell1, A. J. Fisher2, T. McManus3; pression. An invasive biopsy is often required and the majority of patients 1Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast, United Kingdom, 2Institute of progress to end stage renal failure. Rapid genetic diagnosis is important for Transplantation, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS FT Trust, Newcastle Upon Tyne, therapy and intervention as genetic SRNS is non-responsive to immunosup- United Kingdom, 3South West Acute Hospital, Western Health & Social Care Trust, pression, and has a lower rate of post transplant recurrence. SRNS is asso- Enniskillen, United Kingdom. ciated with over thirty genes expressed at the glomerular filtration barrier. BGL has received >200 worldwide diagnostic referrals (80% paediatric and 20% adult) for NGS clinical panel testing of 37 SRNS genes (Haloplex; Mi- Familial pulmonary fibrosis (FPF) is defined as idiopathic interstitial pneu- Seq; open-source pipeline, including CNV analysis using CONTRA). Likely monia (IIP) in ≥ 2 first-degree relatives with diagnosis based on established pathogenic variants have been identified in 27% of referrals, most common- clinical criteria. The clinical findings of IIP are bibasal reticular abnorma- ly occurring in NPH
S1 , NPH
S2 , WT1, CO
L4 A3 and CO
L4 A4 with a different lities, ground glass opacities, or diffuse nodular lesions on high-resolution mutation spectrum in adult and paediatric patients. A further 27% have computed tomography and abnormal pulmonary function tests that de- candidate variants. Heterozygous CNV variants were detected in two pati- monstrate intrapulmonary restriction. Mutations in TERT, TERC, and SFTPC ents with NPH
S1  and NPH
S2  related disease supporting CNV analysis in all genes have been identified in about 8%-15% of individuals with FPF and patients 1%-3% of simplex cases with SFTPC mutations associated with Pulmonary Variant stratification is challenging due to the presence of rare variants in un- surfactant metabolism dysfunction-2 (SMD
P2 ), inherited in a autosomal do- der-sequenced populations. A pathogenic LMX1B mutation, c.737G>A, was minant manner detected in ≤1% for FPF and simplex cases. associated with nail-patella-like renal disease, and a patient with a c.287C>T The 26 year old female proband presented after an immigration chest xray MYH9 variant presented with thrombocytopaenia and SRNS associated with demonstrated increased bronchial wall markings in lower zones having had MYH9-related disease. Several patients have variants in more than one col- a 2 year history of shortness of breath. Subsequent investigations including lagen gene. Prenatal diagnosis was performed for a Pierson syndrome fami- HRCT chest and VATS lung biopsy showed appearances in keeping with ex- ly with pathogenic LAMB2 variants, c.[4198_4199delCT];[928T>C]. tensive interstitial fibrosis with a usual interstitial pneumonia type picture. We present our results illustrated by cases highlighting the clinical benefit The only deceased sister had reported history of failure to thrive and re- of panel testing. current pneumothoraces from 17. Subsequent genetic testing detected the PM03.38 proband to be a heterozygous carrier of a pathogenic SFTPC mutation which Role of CD2AP mutations in Steroid Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome was maternally inherited. revisited - new insights from next generation sequencing Further presentation of the familial clinical phenotype and genetic investi- K. Soderquest1, A. Shaw2, M. Saleem3, A. Bierzynska3, M. A. Simpson1, A. Koziell1; gation will be presented which illustrates the variable intrafamilial clinical 1King‘s College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Washington University, St Louis, WA, phenotype, adds to the knowledge on SMD
P2  gene phenotypic spectrum, United States, 3University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom. the complexity of the diagnostic pathway with rare disease and need for clo- se multidisciplinary liaison, whilst highlighting the importance of clarificati- on of family history and phenotyping. To date, mutations in over 50 genes have been published as underlying PM03.36 different cases of Steroid Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome (SRNS). SRNS is a Integrating genetic analysis with phenotypes of biliary atresia molecularly heterogeneous condition but, in all cases, the underlying insult G. CHENG1, P. H. CHUNG1, W. TANG1, E. H. WONG1, E. K. CHAN2, M. SO1, P. SHAM1, S. S. results in malfunction of the kidney’s Glomerular Filtration Barrier (GFB) CHERNY1, P. K. TAM1, M. GARCIA-BARCELÓ1; resulting in protein loss into the urine. CD2AP was first proposed as a site of 1The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2The Chinese University of Hong dominant mutations underlying SRNS in 2003. This was supported by histo- Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. logical features of renal disease in heterozygous loss of function mouse mu- tants and a heterozygous splice site variant observed in two renal disease patients. Since then, further disease relevant alleles have been reported and We aim to explore the role of rare copy number variants (CNVs) in non-syn- the screening of CD2AP has been added to clinical protocols. dromic BA. We revisited clinical records of 89 non-syndromic type III BA The advent of next generation sequencing technologies and the discovery patients with median follow up of 17.20 years, which revealed that 41.57% of other causal genes questions whether mutations in CD2AP alone are suf- BAs were affected with chronic extra-hepatic diseases, with high prevalence ficient to cause SRNS. Here, we present data on CD2AP variants found from of autoimmune-allergic diseases (22.47%) and Glucose-6-phosphate dehy- whole exome sequencing of over 200 SRNS patients and 1500 controls. We drogenase deficiency (14.29% of the males). After genotyping on the geno- show that several alleles previously described as disease causing are ob- me-wide Affymetrix5.0 array, we shortlisted 29 ‘BA-CNVs’ found in BA pati- served in our control population. In addition, whilst we observe rare alle- ents but not in the general population, and collated 103 BA-associated genes les in CD2AP in two of our cases, in each of these individuals, we observe from a gene-based genome-wide association analysis on common variants, other rare alleles in other SRNS genes that are predicted to be functionally for downstream analysis. In BA-CNVs we discovered three categories of ge- relevant. These observations demonstrate the challenges in determining the notype-phenotype correlations: i) two de novo BA-CNVs, perturbing genes/ pathogenicity of individual variants in the absence of complete data. Our chromosome-segments known to BA, correlated with BA; ii) three BA-CNVs observations also highlight the potential oligogenic nature of certain forms encompassing genes known to imE mS uH nG ity 2 d0 ef1 ec5 ts | , cG orL rA elS atG edO wW ith, S coC mO orT bL i-AN oD f S, RU NK S. | WWW.ESHG.ORG 93ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Department of Medical Genetics, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto de Magalhães/ Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in This work was funded by a Translational Research Collaboration Grant from Biomedicine, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar/Universidade do Porto, the UK National Institute for Health Research. Porto, Portugal, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Unit Clinical Genomics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Department of Nephrology, P
S03 .39 Hospital de São João, Porto, Portugal, 5Research school GROW, Maastricht University, A study to follow up patients after transient neonatal diabetes Maastricht, Netherlands. mellitus - an International Patient Register R. James1, N. N. Zalkapli,1, L. E. Docherty1, K. Lokulo-Sodipe1,2, A. Torokwa2, D. J. G. Mackay1, I. K. Temple1,2; The authors report a case of two affected sisters, born to non-consan- 1University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust,, Southampton, United guineous healthy parents, who were diagnosed with Alport syndrome, based Kingdom. on a family history of microscopic hematuria, steroid-resistant proteinuria, end-stage renal disease and sensorineural hearing loss. Ultrastructural examination of the renal biopsy showed glomerular base- Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus (TNDM 1), caused by overexpression ment membrane (GBM) thinning and thickening with atypical electrCoOnL-d4eAn5- of imprinted genes at 6q24 is characterised by growth restriction and dia- CseO Lb4oAd4ies. DeCtOaLch4mA3ent of GBM from podocytes was compatible with focal betes that presents soon after birth and undergoes spontaneous remission segmental glomCeOruLl4oAsc5lerosis (FSGS). Pathogenic mutations in the , in the first year of life. Individuals have a higher-than-normal risk of develo- and genes were excluded by direct sequencing of all exons ping type-2 diabetes in later life, however the degree of risk is not known. and by MLPA of . Subsequently, whole exome sequencing was perfor- The register includes over 180 cases of 6q24 TNDM and 72 of these families med in the proband, using the Illumina HiSeq2000 platform and filterNinPgH th
S2 e have given consent for follow-up and we have information on 17 individuals variants on genes encoding podocyte products. Two substitutions, c.686G>A over the age of 5 years. (p.(Arg229Gln)) and c.928G>A (p.(Glu310Lys)), were detected in the Results: 6/17 (35%) had experienced a recurrence of diabetes between 5 gene, in compound heterozygosity in the affected sisters, confirming the dia- and 14 years (mean age 12y 8m). Permanent recurrence was reported in gnosis of autosomal recessive nephrotic syndrome type 2 and supporting 4 cases which were treated with insulin. One recurrence was transient and genetic counselling in this family. FSGS is a glomerular lesion that results concomitant with an episode of gastric flu at 5y. The remaining case was from podocyte detachment or death, clinically presenting with proteinuria managed with metformin and diet at the follow up. and progressing to renal failure. It can have multiple primary or secondary 11/17 (65%) experienced no recurrence of diabetes at the time of follow up. causes, including monogenic disorders. Although typical ultrastructural Ages at follow up ranged between 5 years and 13 years 6 months (mean age GBM changes are seen in Alport syndrome (as alternating thinning and thik- at follow-up = 8y 2m) kening, lamellation and the presence of electron-dense bodies), FSGS may In total, 7/17 (41%) were reported as having learning difficulties. Of the- be observed in later stages of the disease. This work ChOigLh4liAg3htCs OthLe4 rAe4levanCOce- se, 1 attended special school and had a diagnosis of autism and 1 suffered Lo4f Ane5xt-generation sequence in determining the molecular genetics diagno- brain damage at birth and requires help with mobility and fine motor skills. sis in suspected cases of Alport syndrome without , or The remaining 5/17 (29%) reported some developmental delay, notably in pathogenic mutations. speech and language. P
S04 .01 A survey is underway to expand these findings and gather further follow-up Mutations in PD
E4 D and molecular pathology of acrodysostosis data. Additional results will be presented at ESHG. without hormone resistance Diabetes UK application 12/0004501; Wessex Clinical Research network UK T. KANAM
E1 , C. Ki2, K. Yanagi1, K. Naritomi1, N. Niikawa3, G. S. Baillie4, J. P. Day5, G. CRN7363 Nishimura6, N. Mastuura7, M. D. Houslay8, S. Cho2, D. Jin2; 1University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan, 2Sungkyunkwan University School of PM03.40 Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, Hokkaido, Urinary system and renal malformations in girls with Turner Japan, 4University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 5University of Cambridge, syndrome Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Tokyo Metropolitan Children‘s Medical Center, Tokyo, S. Turyk, M. Sakurai, M. Ciaccio, S. Predier, H. Trimarchi, A. Nolasco, M. Notaris, S. Japan, 7Seitoku University, Chiba, Japan, 8King‘s College London, London, United Bonsergent; Kingdom. Hospital Britanico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Acrodysostosis without hormone resistance is a rare skeletal disorder cha- Turner Syndrome (TS), in which there is a loss of all or part of one X chromo- racterized by some, occurs in 1 in 2500 to 1 in 3000 born females and is associated with brachydactyly, nasal hypoplasia, mental retardation and occasionally deve- characteristic findings. Renal and urinary system malformations with their lopmental delay. Mutations in the gene encoding cAMP-hydrolyzing phos- posterior complications such as urinary tract infections or proteinuria have phodiesterase-4D (PD
E4 D) have been reported to cause this rare condition been recognized to increase in patients with TS. In this retrospective study but the pathomechanism has not been fully elucidated. we report a detailed clinical history and analyzed renal and urinary system To understand the pathogenetic mechanism of PD
E4 D mutations, we con- pathology in 34 girls with TS. All TS patents were evaluated by renal and ducted 3D modeling studies to predict changes in the binding efficacy of collecting system ultrasonography and if structural renal or urinary system cAMP to the catalytic pocket in PD
E4 D mutants. Our results indicated di- malformations were found, cystourethrography and centellography (DMSA minished enzyme activity in the two mutants. Ectopic expression of PD
E4 D or DTPA) was used. mutants in HEK293 cells demonstrated this reduction in activity, which was Patients mean age at renal and urological studies was 9,7 years (2-18 years). identified by increased cAMP levels. However, cells from an acrodysostosis The cytogenetic findings in 34 patients with TS were classic in 20 patients patient showed low cAMP accumulation, which resulted in a decrease in the (58,82%), mosaic and structural aberration of X chromosome: in 14 pati- phosphorylated cAMP Response Element-Binding Protein (pCREB)/CREB ents (41,18%). The prevalence of renal and urinary system pathology was ratio. The reason for this discrepancy was due to a compensatory increase 44,11% (15 patients). The most frequent findings were urinary system in expression levels of PD
E4 A and PD
E4 B isoforms, which accounted for the malformations 20,58% (7 patients), associated with renal malformations paradoxical decrease in cAMP levels in the patient cells expressing mutant 8,82% (3 patients), while 5 patients (14,7%) had renal malformations alo- isoforms with lowered PD
E4 D activity. We propose that specific inhibito- ne. Horseshoe kidney, malrotation or other position abnormalities, dupli- ry PD
E4 D mutations can lead to the molecular pathology of acrodysostosis cation of the collecting system and different ureterovesicular obstruction without hormone resistance but that the pathological phenotype may be were found. dependent on an over-compensatory induction of other PD
E4  isoforms that Conclusion: The early diagnosis of renal and urinary system malformation can be expected to be targeted to different signaling complexes and exert in TS and their follow- up is crucial to reduce the morbility in these patients. distinct effects on compartmentalised cAMP signaling. There appears to be no correlation between karyotype and the presence or PM04.02 type of renal or urinary system malformation Investigation of angiogenesis-associated genes with risk of acute P
S03 .41 musculoskeletal injuries in two South African populations Whole exome sequencing identifies two pathogenic variants in NPH
S2  M. Rahim1, A. Gibbon1, H. Hobbs2, W. van der Merwe2, M. Posthumus1, M. Collins1, A. V. and confirms the diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome type 2 in two September1; siblings with atypical Alport syndrome 1University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2Sports Science Orthopaedic Clinic, M. J. N. Sá1,2, R. Kamps3, S. Sampaio4, J. Vanoevelen3, D. Merckx3, G. Soares1, A. M. Cape Town, South Africa. Fortuna1, H. Smeets3,5; 94 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG Introduction: Genetic factors have been implicated with risk of anteriorABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index cruciate ligament ruptures and Achilles tendon ruptures. The angiogenesis 1,06-3,39, p: 0,05 (corrected). In addition, this allele showed a lower associa- signalling pathway plays a key role in extracellular matrix remodelling fol- tion with HLA-B27 (15,78%) compared with C allele (28,57%) (OR: 0,469; lowing mechanical loading. Increased levels of angiogenic cytokines have pC=o0n,c0l2u;s CioI9n5s% 0,238-0,923, corrected P: 0,03). N one of the polymorphisms been reported in injured tendons and ligaments. were associated to radiological damage. Aim: To inAvnetsetrigioart ec riuf cainagteio lgigeanmeseinst g reunpetsu raer eg raosuspociated with risk of acute : I
L1 B rs16944 and I
L6  rs1800795could modulate the expres- musculoskeletal injuries in two South African populations. sion of IL-1[[Unsupported Character - Symbol Font &#61538;]] and IL-6, Methods: Achilles tendon rupt:u 2re2 7g croounptrols (CON) and having clinical implications in PsA. 227 participants with ACL ruptures (ACL), of which 126 had non-contact Supported in part by PI13/01741 mechanism of injury (NON). VEGFA : 125 coVnEtGroFlAs P
S04 .05 (CON) and 4V5E pGaFrAticipants withK rDuRptures of the AchiKlleDsR tendon (RUP). All Molecular characterization and transcriptome-wide expression participants were genotyped for the functionVaEl GFA rKsD69R9947, profiling of two patients affected with spondyloepimetaphyseal rs1570360, rs2010963V, EGFA rs2071559 and rs1870377 poly- dysplasia with joint laxity type 1 morphisms. Haplotypes were also inferred for and . M. Ritelli1, N. Chiarelli1, N. Zoppi1, C. Dordoni1, S. Quinzani1, M. Traversa1, M. Venturini2, Results: In the ACL study, the rs699 V9
E4 G7 FCAC genotype (p=0.010, OR: P. Calzavara-Pinton2, M. Colombi1; 1.92, 95% CI: 1.17-3.17) was significantly over-represented within partici- 1University of Brescia, Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Brescia, pants with non-contact ACL ruptures. The rs1570360 GA genotype Italy, 2University of Brescia, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Brescia, Italy. was significantly over-represented (p=0.007, OR: 1.70, V95E%GF ACI: 1.1K6D-2R.50) in the CON group (48%) compared to the ACL group (35%). Inferred haplo- B3GALT6 type analyses also implicated genomic regions spanning and . No independent significant differences were observed in the genotype frequen- Mutations in , encoding the galactosyltransferase II (GalT-II) in- cy distributions between the Achilles tendon CON and RUP groups. volved in the synthesis of the glycosaminoglycan (GAG) linkage region of Conclusion: These novel findings provide preliminary evidence highlighting proteoglycans (PGs), have recently been associated with a spectrum of con- the potential biological significance of the angiogenesis signalling pathway nective tissue disorders, including spondyloepimetaphysealB d3yGsApLlaTs6ia with in the aetiology of acute musculoskeletal injuries. joint laxity type 1 (SEMDJ
L1 ) and Ehlers-Danlos-like syndrome. Here, we Grants: Supported by NRF, URC & MRC. MR funded by NRF & UCT, MP funded report on two sisters compound heterozygous for two novel muta- by Thembakazi Trust. tions that presented with severe short stature and progressive kyphoscolio- sis, joint hypermobility, hyperextensible skin, platyspondyly, short ilia, and P
S04 .03 elbow malalignment. Microarray-bCaOsMedP trSaPnPs1crCipOtLo5mAe1 analyCsiOsL r1e5vAea1led the Genetic Investigation of Anencephaly in Old Order Amish differential expression of several genes encoding extracellular CmSaGtAriLxN (AECCTM1) H. F. Jones, B. A. Chioza, M. Ahmed, A. H. Crosby; CstHruPcFtuLrOaXl cLo3m, pon eSnTtEsA, iPn4cluding , , , and , enzy- University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom. mes involved in GAGGD sFy6ntGhDesFi1s 5and inB EMCMPE rRe,modeling, such as , HOX , LIM and , signaling transduction molecules of the TGFβ/ BMP pathway, i.e., , , and and transcription factors of the Neural tube defects (NTDs) are the second most common type of birth de- and families implicated in skeletal and limb development. Immu- fect after congenital heart defects, affecting over 300,000 births globally nofluorescence analyses cCoOnMfiPrmed tShPeP d1,o wn-regulate,d expression of some each year. They encompass a group of complex congenital malformations of of these genes, in particular of the cartilage oligomeric matrix protein and the central nervous system characterised by failure of the neural tube close osteopontin, encoded by and respectively and showed the pre- correctly resulting in an opening in the spinal cord or brain during early dominant reduction and disassembly of the heparan sulfate specific GAGs, embryonic development. Anencephaly is a severe form of NTD, resulting in as well as of the PG perlecan and type III and V collagens. The key role of the absence of a major portion of the brain, skull, and scalp and is a lethal de- GalT-II in GAG synthesis and the crucial biological functions of PGs are consi- fect. We investigated an extensive eight-generation pedigree from the Amish stent with the perturbation of many physiological functions that are critical community with 4 interlinking families with anencephalic births indicative for the correct architecture and homeostasis of various connective tissues, of an autosomal recessively-acting mutation. Assuming that a founder mu- including skin, bone, cartilage, tendons, and ligaments, and generates the tation was responsible, we used genome-wide SNP mapping to identify re- wide phenotypic spectrum of GalT-II-deficient patients. gions of autozygosity in a single affected case likely to harbour the disease gene. This identified three candidate regions located on chromosomes 14q, PM04.06 3p and 1p. This data was then cross-referenced with exome sequencing data Variants in the RANK gene are associated with bone mineral density of the affected case to identify the putative causative mutation. and fracture risk in Maltese postmenopausal women Supported by MRC grant G1002279. M. M. Formosa, A. Xuereb Anastasi; Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of PM04.04 Malta, Msida, Malta. Association of I
L1 B and I
L6  gene polymorphisms with higher disease Introduction: activity and clinical pattern of psoriasic arthritis. E. Bueno Martínez1,2, N. Cubillo3,2, R. Usategui1,2, C. Quintas Faria1,4, C. Cieza-Borrella1,2, Osteoporosis is a progressive multifactorial skeletal disease I. Calero3,2, J. Pino-Montes3,2, C. Montilla3,2, R. González-Sarmiento1,2; 1Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of Biomedical Research of characterised by low bone mass thereby increasing fracture susceptibility. Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 3Department of Rheumatology, University The Receptor activator of nuclear factor Kappa B (RANK) is involved in the Hospital of Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain, 4Institute of Biomedical Research of regulation of osteoclastogenesis via the RANK-RANK ligand-Osteoprotege- Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, Salamanca, Spain. rin pathway. The influence of two polymorphisms rs3018362 (A>G) and Objective: rs884205 (G>T) in the 3‘ untranslated region of this gene were analysed in rMealatteiorina ltso abnonde M meitnheoradls d:ensity (BMD) and different low trauma fractures Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA) is a chronic inflammatory disease asso- in Maltese postmenopausal women. ciated to psoriasis that affects peripheral joints, the spine and enthesis. As 1045 women were recruited and subdivided in result of the therapeutic success of antagonists of TNF and the IL-23/IL-17 three BMD control groups if without a fracture history: normal, osteopenic cytokines axis, we know these cytokines play an important role in its patho- or osteoporotic. Cases were women who suffered any type of low trauma genesis. IL-23 is nece ssary for the differentiation and survival of IL-17 pro- fracture. Genotyping of the rs3018362 polymorphism was performed by po- ducing helper lympho)c ytes (Th17) IL-1B and IL-6 also is needed for the dif- lymerase chain reaction and restriction enzyme digest, whereas real-time ferentiation of Th17cells. Here, we have analyzed whether I
L1 B (rs16944) PRCeRsu wltass: used for the rs884205 variant. Odds ratios were computed using aPnadti eInLt6s (arnsd18 M00e7th9o5dsp:olymorphisms are associates with inflammatory logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and clinical risk factors. activity, radiographic damage or clinical pattern of Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA). p Homozygosity for the rs3018362 G allele was associated with a 125 patients suffering from PsA were included in lpow femoral neck BMD (Adjusted OR=2.2 [95% confidence interval 1.1-5.1], the study. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood using phenol/ =0.02), and to a lower extent reduced lumbar spine BMD (OR=1.9 [1.1-3.4], chloroform procedure and genotyped using TaqMan 5’-exonuclease allelic =0.04) relative to research subpjects with a normal BMD. Cases carrying dRiesscurilmtsi:nation assays (Applied Biosystems). Statistical analysis was perfor- two copieps of the minor allele T for the rs884205p variant had an increased med using SPSS software. fracture risk (OR=2.6 [1.1-7.1], =0.04), especially that of the hip (OR=3.2 The G allele of I
L1 B rs16944 was associated with higher peripheral [
C1 o.2n-c8lu.0s]i, on=:0R.0A2N) Kan d humerus (OR=2.9 [1.1-7.9], =0.04). Haplotype-based joint disease activity (OR: 3,13; P<0,0004; CI95%: 1,43-6,82 p<0,008 (cor- analysis revealed that the alleles were not in linkage disequilibrium. rected), while the G allele of the I
L6  rs1800795 presented a strong trend gene polymorphisms predispose to reduced BMD or in- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 95 to be associated with peripheral forms (70,86%) (OR: 1,89; p<0,03; CI95% creased fracture susceptibility in Maltese postmenopausal women.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P
S04 .07 An unusual type of brachydactyly with delayed ossification and symphalangism Methods: In total, 232 control (CON) and 234 ACL rupture participants C. L. M. Marcelis1, M. Ottink2, W. Klein1; (ACL), of which 135 had a non-contact mechanism of injury (NON) were ge- 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Medisch Spectrum Twente, notyped for functional polymorphisms: I
L1 B rs16944, I
L6  rs1800795, I
L6 R Enschede, Netherlands. rs2228145, CAS
P8  rs3834129, CAS
P8  rs1045485, PTGER4 rs4495224, TGFB2 rs7550232, TNF rs1800629, TNF rs1799964 and TNFRSF1B rs1061622. Haplotypes were inferred for CAS
P8  and TNF. Statistical analy- We present the case of a now two year old boy. The second child of healthy ses were conducted (p<0.05) between the groups (CON vs. ACL and CON vs. nonconsanguineous Dutch parents. This boy has normal growth and deve- NON). Sex-specific interactions were investigated. lopment and is otherwise healthy. He presented at birth with abnormal po- Results: No significant differences were observed in the genotype and alle- sitioning of both hands and feet, with abnormal implantation of fingers and le frequency distributions when all participants were analysed. The CAS
P8  toes. The fingers show absent flexion and extension creases over the proximal rs3834129 del allele was significantly under-represented in the male CON interphalangeal joints. There is no limitation of movement. Radiological ex- group (41%) compared to the male NON subgroup (51%) (p=0.047, OR: amination at birth showed absent ossification of the preaxial metacarpals and 1.46, 95%CI: 1.01-2.12). The I
L1 B rs16944 TT genotype was significantly metatarsals. In addition abnormal or absent ossification of the proximal and under-represented in the female CON group (10%) compared to the fema- middle phalanges of the 3rd-5th fingers and absent ossification of the proxi- le NON subgroup (26%) (p=0.029, OR: 3.06, 95%CI: 1.09-8.64). The ins-G mal and middle phalanges of the 2nd-5th toe was seen. Ultrasound investiga- CAS
P8  haplotype was significantly over-represented in the CON group (55%) tion showed the presence of cartilage at the site of the metacarpals/tarsals compared to the ACL (48%, p=0.017) and NON subgroup (48%, p=0.031). and phalanges with the impression of symphalangism between the proximal Similar results were observed in the male participants [ins-G: CON (56%) vs and middle phalanges of the hands. At age 16m there is irregular ossificati- NON (43%), p=0.040]. on of the previously unossified metacarpals, metatarsals and phalanges with Conclusions: This study implicated variants within CAS
P8  and I
L1 B with symphalangism of the proximal interphalangeal joints in the hands. ACL ruptures, highlighting the biological significance of the cell signalling X-ray investigation of the spine, pelvis and long bones did not show additional pathway in the etiology of ACL ruptures. abnormalities. DNA analysis of the NOG gene was normal and Cytoscan HD Research funded by National Research Foundation (NRF), UCT. MS was sup- array analysis showed a normal male profile. We‘ll discuss overlap with pre- ported by the NRF, UCT and MP by Thembakazi Trust Pvi Mou 0s 4ly .0 d 8escribed syndromes and suggest this is a new type of brachydactyly. PM04.10 Report of two novel mutations in PTHLH as a cause of brachydactyly Aquagenic palmoplantar keratoderma as a CFTR-related disorder: type E confirmation of a separate entity A. Pereda1, C. Thomas-Teinturier2, C. Silve3,4, I. Garin1, P. Bougnères2, I. Diez5, A. C. Cabrol1, T. Bienvenu2, L. Ruaud1, E. Girodon2, G. Noacco3, L. Van Maldergem1, F. Linglart4,6,7, G. Pérez de Nanclares1; Aubin4; 1Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Institute, Hospital 1Centre de génétique Humaine, CHU, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, Universitario Araba, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, 2Pediatric Endocrinology, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le 2Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Cochin University Hospital, AP-HP, Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 3Service de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaires, Hôpital Cochin, Université Paris-Descartes, Paris, France, 3Dermatology, private practice, Joncherey, Paris, France, 4INSERM U1169, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 5Department France, 4Department of Dermatology, EA3181, CHU, Université de Franche-Comté, of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario de Araba-Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, Besançon, France. 6Centre de Référence des Maladies Rares du Métabolisme du calcium et du phosphore Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 7Service d’Endocrinologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Bicêtre-Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. A 27 year-old caucasian female was referred to the dermatology clinics for swelling and discoloration of palms and soles a few mitniunteeas mafatneru ubmathing or swimming since one year, alongside with hypohidrosis. A single episo- Introduction: Autosomal-dominant brachydactyly type E (BDE) is a conge- de of pneumonia at 3 y was reported. On examination, and, nital limb malformation characterized by small hands and feet as a result a few minutes after water exposure, a rapid onset of a papillomatous me- of shortened metacarpals and metatarsals. BDE can be isolated or asso- dio-palmar swelling was observed. Her growth parameters were normal ciated with a syndrome, and in most cases, the genetic cause of BDE remains without any chest deformity. Her sinus X-rays indicates absence of nasal unknown. One of the genes associated to syndromic BDE is PTHLH, the gene polyps. A diagnosis of aquagenic palmoplantar keratoderma (APK) was coding for parathyroid hormone related protein (PTHrP), implicated in the made. A sweat test indicated cChFloTrRide concentrations of 64 mmol/l and 51 regulation of the balance between chondrocyte proliferation and the onset mmCFoTl/Rl (N<60). Since APK has been already reported in association with of hypertrophic differentiation during endochondral bone development. clinical cystic fibrosisC aFnTdR/-oRrD mutations, next generation sequencing Haploinsufficiency of PTHLH has been reported as the cause of BDE, mostly of was undertaken and identified a comvbaisn adteifoenre onfs a,pparent homozy- associated to short stature in 6 families. gosity for a missense muCtFaTtiRon c.2855T>C (p.Met952Thr), already Subjects and Methods: We report a family case with BDE, short stature and described in congenital bilateral absence of and a large hete- apparently breast hypoplasia in the daughter; and an isolated case, presen- rozygous deletion encompassing exons 16 to 20, described as c.2
C6 F2T0R- ting with isolated BDE. PTHLH gene coding exons and coding exon intron- 674_3367+198del9855 known as CF pathogenic mutation. Based on these joints of all transcripts were analysed by direct sequencing. results, we confirm the existence of a link between isolated APK and Results: The sequencing of PTHLH gene revealed two intragenic deletions mutations and suggest to include this phenotype (APK only) at the mildC FeTnRd affecting the splicing (47_101+73del128 and c.101+3AAGT) as the cause of of CFTR clinical spectrum. Owing to the small number of CFTR-related APK the syndrome. Both mutations are predicted to cause a mistake in the spli- casesC rFeTpRorted sofar, we are unable to conclude on the importance of cing, resulting in an aberrant mRNA, which will be degraded by nonsense- mutation-negative APK. This observation also suggests that screening for mediated decay and produce haploinsufficiency of the PTHrP in both pati- rare mutations should be systematically proposed in case of isolated ents. APK in order to provide appropriate genetic counseling. Conclusion: This is the third report on PTHLH mutations leading to BDE re- P
S04 .11 vealing that the spectrum of symptoms is wider than previously described. FAM110B on 8q12.1 as a new candidate gene for CL±P in a high- Funding: INSERM U1169 [AL and CS]; Instituto de Salud Carlos III prevalence area in South America [PI13/00467 to GPdN]; GPdN supported by I3SNS Program of the Spanish F. M. de Carvalho1, F. A. Poletta2, R. F. Fonseca3, P. Lapunzina4, A. R. Vieira5, E. E. Castilla1,2, I. Ministry of Health [C
P03 /0064; SIVI 1395/09]; AP funded by the Spanish M. Orioli3; Ministry of Health [FI11/00309]. 1ECLAMC (Latin American Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) and INAGEMP P
S04 .09 (National Institute of Populational Medical Genetics) at LEMC (Laboratory of Congenital The cell signalling pathway and risk of anterior cruciate ligament Malformations Epidemiology), Oswaldo Cruz Institute/Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2ECLAMC (Latin American Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) (ACL) ruptures. at CEMIC (Center for Medical Education and Clinical Research) and CONICET (National M. Rahim1, S. Mannion1, B. Klug1, H. Hobbs2, W. van der Merwe2, M. Posthumus1, M. Council for Scientific and Technical Investigation), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3ECLAMC (Latin Collins1, A. V. September1; American Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) and INAGEMP (National Institute 1Department of Human Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, of Populational Medical Genetics) at Department of Genetics, Institute of Biology, Federal 2Sports Science Orthopaedic Clinic, Newlands, Cape Town, South Africa. University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 4Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM), IdiPAZ, La Paz Hospital and CIBER of Rare diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 5Departments of Oral Biology and Pediatric Dentistry and Center for Craniofacial and Dental Polymorphisms within genes encoding signalling molecules have previously Genetics, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, been implicated in risk of chronic Achilles tendinopathy. This study aimed to United States. d 9et 6ermine if these genetic variants are assEoSciHatGed 2w0ith1 5AC |L G inLjuAryS rGisOk.W, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Background: In South America a cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL±P) high neous involvement was worsening leading to generalized dermatosparaxis. prevalence region were detected in Patagonia (Argentina). Amerindian ancestry At examination, generalized photoageing and capillary fragility, deep facial was identified as a risk factor. We aimed the identification of autosomal genomic wrinkles and palmar creaserds, blue sclerae, palpebral ptosis, short stature regions that may contribute to CL±P in this probably more homogeneous popu- (150 cm, lower than the 3 centile), brachydactyly with low-set thumbs, lation. barrel chest, deforming osteoarthritis, bilateral hallux valgus, joint hyperm- Method: The study sample included 30 families with isolated CL±P (31 affected obility according to Beighton score (7/9), varicose veins, and frontal alope- and 113 total individuals). They were genotyped on the Affymetrix Genome-Wide cia with thin hair, were observed. Chronic pain, recurrent bursitis, several 6.0 array. We calculated linkage disequilibrium (LD) between each pair of SNPs excisions for lipomas, multiple muscle ruptures, and spontaneously solved into a window of 50 SNPs, shifting the window 5 SNPs forward and repeating the subarachnoid hemorrhage, were referred. Immunohistological examination procedure to scan all autosomes. Then we pruned the data removing one SNP of of a skin biopsy revealed epidermal thinning with reduced keratinocytes’ each pair that was in strong LD (r >0.8). We performed a segmentation analysis layer and increased and morphologically altered elastic fibers resembling to obtain genomic regions significantly associated with CL±P. We identified ge- solar elastosis, without calcium deposits, and reduced collagen fibers. Cutis nomic segments of a maximum length of 250Kb with more than one SNP with laxa and the dermatosparaxis and classic EDS typeAs DwAeMreT Se2xclCuOdeLd5 Afo1r the p-value less than 0.001. CpOecLu5lAia2r clinical presentation of the patient, not yet described to our know- Results: A total of 14 genomic segments with two or more independent SNPs si- ledge. Furthermore, mutational screening of the , and gnificantly associated with CL±P were identified. A segment of 61.3Kb on 8q12.1 genes did not reveal causal mutations. The plausible hypothesis of containing FAM110B gene showed the most significant association with CL±P a recessive inheritance prompted us to perform SNP array analysis that sho- (p= 0.00007). Other segment of 25.5Kb on 3q29 significantly associated with wed the presence of several large chromosomal regions with loss of hetero- CL±P (p=0.0002) was close to the FGF12 gene that was previously associated zygosity. We expect that in these candidate regions whole exome sequencing with oral cleft phenotype in other populations. will reveal the causal mutation involved in this disorder. Conclusion: Our results suggest FAM110B on 8q12.1 as a new candidate gene to PM04.14 CL±P. The region on 3q29 near FGF12 gene should be more investigated because Craniofrontonasal syndrome with central polydactyly: Case report previous associations with CL±P. F. Hazan1, A. K. Yılmaz2; Funding: This work was supported by Grants from FAPERJ: 
E26 /102.158/2011,E- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey., izmir, 26/102.797/2012,
E26 /110.140/2013;CNPq: 573993/20084,306396/20130,4 Turkey, 2Department of Neurosurgery , Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey., 02045/2010-6,481069/2012-7,402149/2012-2;Capes:1957/2009,2799/2010. izmir, Turkey. PM04.12 Report of a Saudi Family with Kniest dysplasia (KD) showing an Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS), also known as craniofrontonasal dys- Autosomal Recessive Inheritance plasia, is an X-linked developmental disorder, caused by mutations in the N. A. Al-Sanna‘a1, K. P. Hoornaert2, H. Y. Al-Abdulwahed1, G. Mortier3; EFNB1 gene. EFNB1 located at Xq13.1, and encoding a ligand of the Ephrin 1Jonhs Hopkins Aramco Healthcare, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 2University Hospital Ghent, family of receptor protein tyrosine kinases. This syndrome is characterized Ghent, Belgium, 3University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, by craniofrontonasal bridge and bifid nasal tip, frontal bossing, coronal su- Belgium. ture synostosis (unilateral or bilateral), hypertelorism, frizzy and curly hair, corpus callosum agenesis, and cleft lip or palate. Skeletal features include Sprengel shoulder, dysplastic clavicles, partial cutaneous syndactyly of the Kniest Dysplasia (KD) is a rare autosomal dominant spondylo-epiphyseal hands and feet, duplication of the thumbs or halluces and characteristic lon- dysplasia (OMIM # 156550) characterized by a disproportionate short sta- gitudinal ridging and splitting of nails. Herein we present a girl CFNS patient ture, midfacial hypoplasia, progressive myopia, bell-shaped chest, kyphosco- with a heterozygote c.196 C>T (p.R66*) mutation in EFNB1. The patient also liosis, stiffness and enlargement of the joints, premature osteoarhritis, and had central polydactyly of the right hand which has not previously been de- contractures of fingers. scribed in this syndrome. Often, it is associated with cleft palate, Pierre-Robin sequence and deafness. P
S04 .15 KD is caused by a mutation in the CO
L2 A1 gene encoding type II collagen. In vitro functional characterization of the Bardet Biedl syndrome-9 Here we describe two affected siblings born to a phenotypically normal gene in nonsyndromic craniosynostosis. Saudi Arab first cousins couple. They were born with prominent eyes, cleft M. Barba1, L. Massimi2, M. C. Geloso1, M. Caldarelli2, F. Michetti1,3, C. Di Rocco2, G. soft palate, micrognathia, midfacial hypoplasia, knee joint contracture, and Tamburrini2, C. Bernardini1, W. Lattanzi1,3; short lower limbs (birth length was 43 cm). Both developed severe myopia 1Inst. Anatomy and Cell Biology, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, 2Inst. which progressed to left-sided retinal detachment in the younger affected Neurosurgery, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 3Latium Musculoskeletal sister at 4 years of age, hearing impairment, disproportionate short stature, Tissue Bank, Rome, Italy. barrel-shaped chest, thoracolumbar kyphoscoliosis, knee and hip joint fle- Introduction: xion contractures, and bowed legs. Radiographic study showed dumbbell shaped femurs and humeri, hypoplastic pelvic bones, platyspondyly, flared The molecular mechanisms underlying nonsyndromic cra- metaphyses, and large epiphyses. niosynostosis (NSC) are still largely unknown. Recent evidence obtained Molecular analysis revealed the presence of a “de novo” homozygous spli- thorugh GWAS on a large cohort of patients indicated the significant associa- ce site mutation in the CO
L2 A1 gene (c.2904+2T>C) in both of the affected tion of sagittal NSC to the Bardet Biedl Syndrome-associated gene 9 (BB
S9 ). siblings. BB
S9  is involved in the formation of the primary cilium. Preliminary data The parents were found to be heterozygous for the same mutation. Both had demonstrated that cells isolated from prematurely fused sutures of midline an appropriate height, and their radiographic study, hearing test and oph- NSC patients display aberrant BB
S9  expression and reduced number of pri- thalmological evaluation were normal). To our knowledge, this is the first mMaertyh ocdilsia: , affecting the cell osteogenic potential. This study was aimed at reported family in whom two siblings with KD are found to have an identical characterizing the BB
S9  gene as associated to midline NSC. biallelic splice site mutation in the CO
L2 A1 gene. Calvarial-derived mesenchymal cells (CMSC) were isolated from fused and patent sutures of NSC patients. The expression of BB
S9  was ana- P
S04 .13 lyzed through qPCR, both in fused and patent samples. The BB
S9  gene was Report on a patient with extremely fragile skin, dermatosparaxis, sRielesnucletsd: by siRNA in fused-CMSC, the effect of gene modulation on cilioge- joint hypermobility, short stature, skeletal deformities, and lipomas: nesis was analyzed by immunofluorescence. a new syndrome? M. Colombi1, C. Dordoni1, N. Chiarelli1, M. Traversa1, N. Zoppi1, E. Giacopuzzi1, M. BB
S9  level was higher in fused-CMSC compared to controls. Confo- Venturini2, F. Facchetti1, P. Calzavara-Pinton2, M. Ritelli1; cal microscopy showed that fused-CMSC display a predisposition to produce 1University of Brescia, Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Brescia, differently shaped and developed primary cilia. 48 hours of siRNA treatment Italy, 2University of Brescia, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Brescia, eCfofinccielunstliyo nresd:uced the BB
S9  level and affected the ciliogenesis, restoring a Italy. phenotype like patent-CMSC. These data confirmed the association between BB
S9  expres- sion and aberrant ciliogenesis, suggesting that the dysregulation of primary We report on a patient who came to our attention with a suspicion of Ehlers- cilium and its related signaling could underlie the alterated osteogenic pro- Danlos syndrome (EDS). The proposita,a 56-year-old Italian woman, was cess occurring at the site of premature synostosis in NSC. born in a geographically isolated valley from healthy and referred non-con- sanguineous parents, and had two healthy sons. Redundant, sagging, fragile skin with atrophic scars was preEseSnHt Gsin 2ce0 i1nf5an |c Gy. LInA aSdGultOhoWod, SthCe OcuTtaL-AND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 97ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM04.16 Non-coding variant in the BM
P2  locus associated with sagittal non- syndromic craniosynostosis causes differential GFP expression in acral and periorificial dermatitis occurring either in the perinatal period, or zebrafish. at weaning in breast-fed children. Its clinical diagnosis has to be necessarily C. Justice1, J. Kim2, S. Kim2, G. Yagnik2, B. Carrington3, R. Sood4, A. Wilson5, A. Wilson1, S. A. confirmed by a genetic testing, as it may be misdiagnosed as various skin Boyadjiev2; diseases ranging from relatively common ones to rare ones. Our present 1Genometrics Section, Computational and Statistical Genomics Branch, National Human study is based on an Iranian inbred family with four living members having Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,, Baltimore, MD, United clinical symptoms suggestive of AE, albeit exhibiting no mutations either in States, 2University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, 3Zebrafish Core, SL
C39 A4 or in nearly 50 genes directly involved in zinc homeostasis. Translational and Functional Genomics Branch, National Human Genome Research Purpose: Our goal was to determine the genetic cause of the AE-like geno- Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Zebrafish Core, Translational and Functional Genomics Branch, National Human Genome Research dermatosis observed in this multiplex family. Institute, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD, United States, 51Genometrics Method: Whole-exome sequencing was performed in nine of the family Section, Computational and Statistical Genomics Branch, National Human Genome members, including three affected and six unaffected ones. Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,, Baltimore, MD, United States. Results: An exceedingly rare variant was found in the promoter of DSP (desmoplakin gene), which creates an alternative initiation codon. The de- leterious effect of this variant was assessed by immunohistochemical and Craniosynostosis is a common congenital malformation in which one or functional studies using luciferase-based assays. This result allowed us to more of the cranial sutures of an infant skull fuse prematurely. Sagittal non- diagnose Carvajal syndrome (MIM #605676), that is a rare autosomal re- syndromic craniosynostosis (sNCS) has an esBtMimPa2ted prevalence of ~2 per cessive form of palmoplantar keratoderma associated with wooly hair, and 10,000 BliMveP b2irths. Our recent GWAS study identified robust associations to with dilated cardiomyopathy, which last symptom was not observed in our locus on chromosome 20 that is 345kb 3’ of . We did not identify any patients. coding variant, suggesting that variaBnMtsP i2n the associated region near Conclusions: This case not only illustrates the difficulty to recognize AE ba- BM
P2  may harbor regulatory elements responsible for thBeM pPh2enotype. To sing on clinical symptoms and pathology only, but it also emphasizes the test this we monitored the expression of in primary calvarial osteo- usefulness of whole-exome sequencing in its differential diagnosis from blasts from sNCS patients. We observed overexpression of and heigh- other syndromes with overlapping features. tened BM
P2 -signaling in 2 out of 8 osteoblast cell lines. In order to deter- PM04.20 mine if rs1884302 variation causes functional changes, a 716 bp fragment Pure hair and nail ectodermal dysplasia in a consanguineous Turkish was cloned into a zebrafish enhancer detector (ZED) vector with the wild- family with a novel mutation in HOX
C13  gene type allele (T) or the risk allele (C). Zebrafish transgenesis carried out with E. Kirat1, E. Karaca2, M. Seven1, H. Ulucan1, E. Fenercioğlu1, M. Ozen1,3, Y. Bayram2, D. both fragments resuinlt evdit rino a strong expression of green fluorescenBt MprPo2tein Pehlivan2, A. Koparir1, S. Jhangiani4, A. Yuksel3, R. Gibbs4, J. Lupski2,4,5; (GFP) in the head of the transgenic fish with a C, but not with the T alllele 1Department of Medical Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical School of Istanbul University, of rs18in8 4v3iv0o2. Our results suggest that overexpression of by Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of altered regulatory activity near this gene contributes to the etiology of sNSC, Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Biruni University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, while results indicate that the differences in regulatory activity are 5Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. dependent on the C or the T allele. P
S04 .17 Modeling Craniosynostosis in zebrafish: How to investigate genetic- INTRODUCTION: Pure hair and nail ectodermal dysplasia (PHNED) is a rare linked human skull deformations in fish disorder which characterized by hypotrichosis/ complete alopecia and nail D. Liedtke, R. Blümel, E. König, I. Köblitz, E. Klopocki; dystrophy. Recent studies reported recessive families with PHNED having Institute for Human Genetics, Universität Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. mutations in KRT85 and HOX
C13  genes. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) in a patient of PHNED phenotype from a consanguineous family. WES analy- Craniosynostosis is a human disease condition, in which premature fusion sis revealed a novel homozygous frameshift mutation (c.353delC; p.T118fs) of cranial sutures results in prominent skFuGllF dRe3formaTtiWonISsT. G1enetic triggers in HOX
C13  gene. for these disorders are numerous and are mostly linked to mutations in CONCLUSION: To best of our knowledge this is the first Turkish family re- well-described developmental genes, like in viv oand . To investigate ported PHNED with novel HOX
C13  mutation. In this report we will discuss the function of novel or so far ill-described genes causing craniosynostosis, this novel mutation with the review of the literature. aD raenliiaob rlee rainoimal model is needed, allowing investigations of skull de- P
S04 .21 velopment over time and genetic engineering. Besides mouse, the zebrafish Refining palmoplantar keratodermal-congenital alopecia syndrome, ( ) has become a good choice to study such complex developmen- Wallis type in two unrelated Italian patients tal processes in a vertebrate model system. M. Castori1, S. Morlino1, M. Malacarne2, M. Lamp3, E. Pisaneschi4, A. Angioni4, M. Iascone5, We performed initial investigations of normal cranial suture development in P. Grammatico1, G. Tadini6, F. Forzano3; zebrafish with different techniques and found promising similarities to hu- 1Division of Medical Genetics, San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Laboratory man cranial development. Especially non-invasive techniques open up the of Human Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, Galliera possibility to repeatedly investigate cranial structures over time in single in- Hospital, Genova, Italy, 4Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Unit, IRCCS-Ospedale dividuals. Conservation of gene expression patterns of craniosynostosis-as- Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 5Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Papa sociated genes in zebrafish hint to the notion that a similar genetic network Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy, 6Pediatric Dermatology Unit, Department of is established in both species to form sutures. To decipher this network in Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. more detail, we used gene expression analyses and different transgenic re- porter lines forT CviFs1u2alization of cellular processes. To furthermore conduct ftucfn1c2tional studies, we introduced site specific genomic alterations in the In 2010, a classification of palmoplantar keratoderma-congenital alopecia homologue of via CRIPSR/Cas9. The zebrafish carrying deletions in syndrome (PPKCA) was proposed with two distinct phenotypes: a benign develop cranial deformations resembling the patients´ phenotypes. form with occasional dominant transmission (Stevanovic type; ten patients Our findings demonstrate that zebrafish is a potent animal model for inve- from four families) and a more severe variant with pseudoainhum, sclero- stigating craniosynostosis and that it is possible to elucidate the functions of dactyly and recurrence in sibs (Wallis type - PPKCA-WT; seven patients from causative human mutations in fish. two families). In the same report, a 10-year-old, sporadic Italian girl was reported as a further case of PPKCA-WT. Here, we describe PPKCA-WT in P
S04 .19 an additional 18-year-old Italian woman with widespread keratosis pilaris, Whole-exome sequencing approach revealed Carvajal syndrome as a ulerythema ophryogenes, marked hypotrichosis, and palmoplantar kerato- differential diagnosis for Acrodermatitis enteropathica derma progressively causing contractures, pseudoainhum and sclerodactyly. S. KÜRY1, M. Sedghi2, T. Besnard1, C. Bossard1, M. Hosseinzadeh2, C. Acquaviva3, E. Blouin4, S. Bézieau1; Due to the non-congenital nature of palmoplantar involvement, this patient 1CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory, Alzahra University was previously considered affected by IFAP syndrome. We also present the Hospital, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Centre de Biologie et Pathologie Est, Bron, 5-year follow-up of theG pJBa2ti,eGnJtB p6u, bLlOisRhed inM 2B0T1
P0 S, 2w, ho demonstrates pro- France, 4Laboratoire LABCATAL, Montrouge, France. gression of the disease with worsening of sclerodactyly and pseudoainhum. Sanger sequencing of and as well as array-CGH (mean resolution: 200 Kb) excluded any pathogenic change in at least one Background: Acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE; MIM #201100) is a rare subject. These patients represent two unrelated examples of an extremely and severe autosomal recessive zinc deficiency disorder caused by a bialle- rare genodermatosis clinically distinguishable from partially overlapping 98 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG lic anomaly of zinc transporter gene SL
C39 A4. It is characterized chiefly by conditions, including Clouston, Lelis Olmested, KID and HOPP syndromes,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM04.24 The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VI spectrum: a genetically KFSD/IFAP syndrome, and odonto-onydche on-odveormal dysplasia. Although li- heterogeneous group of clinically overlapping conditions terature indicates autosomal recessive as the most likely inheritance, we T. Van Damme, D. Syx, S. Symoens, A. De Paepe, F. Malfait; cannot exclude a dominant or X-linked mutation in these patients. Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. A next-generation sequencing project is ongoing aimed at identifying the causative gene(s). PM04.22 The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome kyphoscoliosis type (EDS VIA) is an autoso- Mutational spectrum of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in Mexican mal recessive disorder characterized by severe kyphoscoliosis and neonatal mestizo patients muscular hypotonia, in addition to the classical signs of EDS, such as joint J. Abad Flores1,2,3, N. Monroy2, C. García1, A. Villaseñor1, C. Mena1, M. Toledo1, A. hypermobility and a hyperextensible and fraPgLilOeD s1kin. EDS VIA was the first Valencia1, A. Sánchez1, Y. Akaki1, B. Del Río1, J. Aguirre1, M. López4, A. Cervantes5, M. inborn error of collagen metabolism to be solved at the biochemical and Cerbón3, V. Morán1; molecular level. It is caused by mutations in leading to deficient acti- 1Hospital Infantil de México FG, Mexico, Mexico, 2Instituto Nacional de Neurología vity of lysylhydoxylase 1 (LH1), a collagen-modifying enzyme. Patients with y Neurocirugía MVS, Mexico, Mexico, 3Facultad de química UNAM, Mexico, Mexico, a phenotype resembling EDS VI but with normal LH1 activity were originally 4Sistemas Biológicos UAM-X, Mexico, Mexico, 5Hospital General de México DEL, Mexico, classified as EDS VIB. Several studies have now shown that EDS VIB compri- Mexico. ses a genetically heterogeneous spectrum that includes defects in dermatan sulfate biosynthesis (musculocontractural EDS, MC-EDS) and defects in the transcriptional regulation of collagen and other extracellular matrix genes Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is characterized by hypotrichosis, (brittle cornea syndrome, BCS). This study reports on the natural history of oligo/anodontia and hyEpDoAh idrosis. HED geEnDeAraRll y has anE XD-lAinRkAeDdD pattern of 31 EDS VI patients (EDS VIA n=12; MC-EDS n=10; BCS n=9). In addition, we inheritancWe, NaTut1o0sAomic dominant and recessive cases have been described. critically reviewed the clinical features of 135 molecularly proven EDS VI The affected genes are (Xq12-q13.1); (2q11); (1q42.2- patients (EDS VIA n=68; BCS n=48; MC-EDS n=19). We provide a compre- q43) and (2q35). Objective: to describe a cohort of Mexican me- hensive overview of the clinical characteristics of these three disorders and stizo patients with HED, their mutational analysis and phenotype-genotype highlight the disorder-specific features. Our results show that despite the correlation. Material and methods: fifteen pEaDtAients with HED belonging to unmistakable clinical overlap, EDS VIA, MC-EDS and BCS are three distinct fourteen different families were included. MLPA for the four genes was per- disorders. Based on this we propose to refine the outdated criteria for EDS formed for dosage alteration in all patients; sequencing was carried out VI, which should facilitate early and accurate clinical diagnosis of these rare, in nine patients. Results: Index cases were males (6 months to 24 years of but often severe, syndromes. age), eight of them showed an X-linked pattern of inheritance. The following mutations were characterized: Case 1: deletion of exon 1. Cases 2 and 3, two P
S04 .25 affected brothers (case 3 also suffers from Down syndrome): novel muta- Two cases of patients with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Type VIII and tion c.1037G>C, p.
C346 W in exon 8. Case 4: previously reported variant hoarseness c.467G>A; p.R156H in exon 2. Case 5: the described mutation c.1311C>T; S. George1, A. M. Vandersteen2, E. Nigar3, D. J. P. Ferguson4, E. J. Topham5, F. M. Pope6; 1East Sussex Hospitals NHS Trust, Eastbourne, United Kingdom, 2Maritime Medical p.R357W in exon 8. Case 6 presented the variant c.466C>T, p.R156C in exon Genetics Service, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada, 3North West London Hospitals 2. Cases 7, 8 and 9 exhibited a recurrent mutation c.463C>T, p.R155C in exon NHS Trust, Harrow, United Kingdom, 4Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory 2. Maternal samples of cases 2, 3 and 6 were unavailable for molecular study Science, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Brighton and Sussex but the clinical data suggested a heterozygous genotype. Carrier state was University Hospitals NHS Trust, Brighton, United Kingdom, 6Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, molecularly confirmed on the remaining mothers; all but one had clinical National Diagnostic Service, North West London Hospitals NHS Trust, Harrow, United data. Conclusion: our results confirmed the low frequency of related genes Kingdom. dosage alterations and the high prevalence of X linked HED in Mexican po- pulation. P
S04 .23 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) encompasses a genetically and clinically Genetic heterogeneity and clinical variability in musculocontractural heterogeneous group of connective tissue disorders, characterised by joint Ehlers-Danlos syndrome caused by impaired dermatan sulfate hypermobility, skin hyperextensibility and tissue fragility. Type VIII EDS is biosynthesis very rare. Clinical features include severe, early-onset periodontitis, skin D. M. Syx1, T. Van Damme1, S. Symoens1, M. C. Maiburg2, I. van de Laar3, J. Morton4, M. fragility and abnormal scarring. We report two cases of patients with EDS Suri5, M. Del Campo6, I. Hausser7, T. Hermanns-Lê8, A. De Paepe1, F. Malfait1; type VIII and hoarseness. The first patient is a 24 year old male from Bang- 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 2University Medical Center Utrecht, ladesh, the only child of unrelated parents. No other family members are Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, affected. He has marked skin fragility, with easy bruising and splitting on his Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham shins and elbows, early onset periodontitis and chronic hoarseness, the lat- Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5Notttingham Clinical Genetics ter due to bilateral vocal cord sulci. The second patient is a 33 year old white Service, Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 6Area de Genetica Caucasian woman with premature loss of her primary teeth and adult teeth, Clinica y molecular. Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 7Institute of Pathology, University Clinic Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Department of Dermatopathology, pretibial bruising and a hoarse voice since her twenties. Her father also had Liège University Hospital, Liège, Belgium. early onset periodontitis. She has two-year-old twin boys who are also likely to be affected. She had an abnormality of her cricoarytenoid and underwent CHST14 O surgical correction. MRI scan revealed subglottic stenosis. While EDS VIII Bi-allelic mutations in , encoding dermatan-4- -sulfotransferase-1 is clinically indistinguishable from vascular EDS, both patients had normal (D4ST1), cause musculocontractural EDS (MC-EDS), a recessive disorder collagen protein analysis and CO
L3 A1 sequencing, ruling out vascular EDS. characterized by connective tissue fragDilSiEty, craniofacial abnormalities, con- Voice abnormalities have been described with other EDS subtypes and may genital contractures and developmental anomalies. More recently, a bi-alle- result from defects in the collagen of the vocal ligament. Twenty-seven per- lic mutation was also identified in the gene, encoding dermatan sulfate cent of patients with EDS subtypes I, II, III, IV and VI have self-reported dys- epimerase-1 (DS-epi1), in a child with MC-EDS features, thereby suggesting phonia. Our cases demonstrate rarely reported laryngeal abnormalities and locus heterogeneity for this condition. DS-epi1 and D4ST1 are crucial for dysphonia, which is not a recognised feature of EDS VIII. biosynthesis of dermatan sulfate (DS) moieties in the hybrid chondroitin PM04.26 sCuHlSfaTt1e4 (CS)/DS glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains of proteoglyDcSaEns. We re- Molecular genetic diagnostics of epidermolysis bullosa in the Czech port four novel families with severe MC-EDS caused by unique homozygous Republic mutations and the second family with a homozygous missense L. Kopeckova1, P. Silerova1, H. Buckova2, B. Pinkova2, R. Gaillyova3, J. Nemeckova3, L. mutation, presenting a somewhat milder MC-EDS phenotype. The glycana- Fajkusova1,4; tion of the dermal DS proteoglycan decorin is impaired in fibroblasts from 1Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Pediatric Clinic, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department D4ST1- as well as DS-epi1-deficient patients. However, in D4ST1-deficieny of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Central European the decorin GAG is completely replaced by CS, whereas in DS-epi1-deficien- Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. cy still some DS moieties are present. The multisystemic abnormalities ob- served in our patients support a tight spatiotemporal control of the balance between CS and DS, which is crucial for multiple processes including cell differentiation, organ development, cell migration, coagulation and connec- Introduction: tive tissue integrity. Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANgDro,u Up Kof |d WisoWrdeWrs.. ETSheHreG a.rOe fRouGr major types of inherited EB: EB simp 9le 9x,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index junctional EB, dystrophic EB, and Kindler syndrome. A characteristic feature FOP mutation was confirmed. The osteogenic properties of the cells were of all EB types and subtypes is the presence of skin blistering and erosions. evaluated by the mRNA expression of Runt-related transcription factor 2 Methods: EB families presenting at our laboratory over a period of 10 years (Runx2), alkaline phosphatase (Alp), osteocalcin (OC) and the presence of were assessed using PCR-direct sequencing (KRT5, KRT14, TGM5, CO
L7 A1) mineralization by alizarin red staining. Given the pro-inflammatory role of and/or sequence capture and targeted resequencing (CO
L7 A1, KRT5, TGFβ, we performed pharmacological inhibition of TGFβ signaling by the KRT14, DSP, DST, JUP, PK
P1 , EXPH5, TGM5, PLEC, CO
L17 A1, LAMA3, LAMB3, TGFβ type I receptor inhibitor GW788388. During osteogenic transdifferen- LAM
C2 , ITGA6, ITGB4, ITGA3, FERMT1). tiation the expression of Runx2 and Alp over time was higher in FOP cell li- Results: Mutations associated with EB were identified in 139 probands: 22 nes compared to heathy controls (Runx2:p=0.001; Alp:p>0.05). All cell lines and 42 patients had dominant and recessive mutations in CO
L7 A1, respec- exhibited increase in mineralization. Addition of the inhibitor to the osteo- tively; 16 patients in KRT14; 10 patients in KRT5; 1 patient in PLEC; 36 pati- genic media resulted in the attenuation of osteogenic differentiation shown ents in TGM5; and 1 patient in CO
L17 A1. Eleven patients are without causal by the decrease in expression of osteogenic markers in patients vs untreated mutations despite that all known genes up to now associated with EB were cells (Runx2:p=0.045) and mineralisation. We suggest that TGFβ is involved analysed. Totally, mutations were identified in 128 probands (92%). in the molecular pathway of flare-up-induced ossification. Inhibition of this Conclusion: Besides identification of the spectra of mutations in Czech EB pathway may limit ectopic ossification in FOP. patients, the study present new method implemented into genetic diagno- P
S04 .29 stics of genodermatoses in the Czech Republic - sequence capture and tar- A rare association of congenital aplasia of the fibula, cleft palate and geted resequencing - that provides more complete diagnosis than a classical skeletal abnormalities: a case report gene-by-gene approach. Parallel analysis of known genes in a patient (or M. I. S. Crapanzano, M. C. Cutrupi, C. Pidone, E. Moschella, S. Meduri, M. R. Pizzino, I. in multiple patients) enables fast and cost-effective identification of gene Loddo, S. Briuglia; mutations. Currently, we are able to perform analysis of 81 genes associated UOC Genetics and Pediatric Immunology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy. with different inherited skin disorders. Supported by IGA MZČR NT14585-3 and TAČR T
E02000058 . P
S04 .27 We report the case of a 35-years old man, referred for genetic counseling Molecular genetic testing of FGFR3 gene mutation in the differential because of cleft palate and limb malformations. The family history was un- diagnosis of achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia in Ukraine remarkable. He was son of healthy non-consanguineous parents, born at 40 I. Dmytruk, H. Makukh, M. Turkys, N. Markevych, V. Shuvarska, H. Akopyan; weeks of gestation. Pregnancy was complicated by threatened miscarriage. Institute of Hereditary Pathology of the Ukrainian National Academy of Medical At birth, clinical evaluation showed cleft palate and presence of multiple Sciences, Lviv, Ukraine. malformations of limbs. Hands and foots showed agenesis of some fingers, with syndactyly and complex brachydactyly. Upper limbs were normal. Right femur was hypoplastic with agenesis of the right fibula, brevity and Introduction: The differential diagnosis of achondroplasia and hypochon- deformation of the proximal epiphysis of the tibia. Other associated anoma- droplasia in Ukraine is based on the typical clinical and radiologic features lies were scoliosis and hypoplasia of the pelvis. Growth and psychomotor that limits accurate diagnosis and leads to many false-positive diagnoses development were normal. Complementary investigations including eye when checked against a complete mutation search of the FGFR3 gene. The- fundus, abdominal, renal and cardiac ultrasound examinations and auditory reby, we outline the necessity of implementation molecular-genetic test of evoked potentials were normal. This syndrome is apparently distinct from FGFR3 gene mutations. The implementation is necessary to carry out diffe- other previously described conditions exhibiting fibular agenesis/hypopla- rential and prenatal diagnostic of achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia sia, because of the association of fibula aplasia/hypoplasia, cleft palate and among Ukrainian population. oligo-brachy-syndactyly of hands and foots is extremely rare. Figuera et al. Materias and Methods: The study included 61 patients with clinical things (1993) reported a girl with fibular agenesis, together with radial shortening of achondroplasia or hypochondroplasia and 94 relatives including sibs and and coalescence of the tarsal bones, telecanthus, flat nasal bridge, retrogna- parents. The molecular-genetic analysis was performed by PCR (Polymera- tia, cleft palate and oligo-polydactyly. This syndrome has been described as se Chain Reaction) and RFLP (Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism) “Oral-facial-digital syndrome with fibular aplasia”. Some defects are in com- analysis. We optimized the time and temperature conditions and chose spe- mon with our case, such as the occurrence of cleft palate and fibular aplasia, cific primers for revealing the c.1138G>A, c.1138G>C and p.Asn540Lys mu- but in OFD syndrome polydactyly is present, that is absent in our patient. tations of FGFR3 gene. Since this combination has not been described previously, we suggest a di- Results: Mutation c.1138G>A was found at 22 (36%) individuals aged from stinct new variant of this syndrome. 5 months to 40 years old with obvious phenotypical features of achondro- PM04.30 plasia of which 20 cases was sporadic. Additionally the mutation c.1138G>C Genome-wide association identifies a new susceptibility locus at was detected at 3 (5%) probands. Major p.Asn540Lys mutation of the FGFR3 2q13 associated with clinical vertebral fractures in post-menopausal receptor was identified at 3 (5%) probands which causes hypochondropla- women sia. N. Alonso, S. H. Ralston, The Clinical Vertebral Fracture Consortium; Conclusions: We concluded that 98% of mutations were sporadic because Rheumatic Disease Unit, CGEM-IGMM, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United no mutations were found at relatives; meanwhile we found one (1.6%) in- Kingdom. heritable c.1138G>A mutation at both mother and son. Due to conducting of molecular-genetic diagnostics of FGFR3 mutations c.1138G>A, c.1138G>C and p.Asn540L diagnosis achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia were con- Clinical vertebral fractures (CVF) are a serious complication of osteoporosis. firmed at 26 (43%) observed patients and extensive gene analysis are re- They are associated with back pain, kyphosis, height loss, cardiorespiratory quired for the other patients to search for rare FGFR3 rearrangements. compromise and increased mortality. Genetic factors play an important role PM04.28 in regulating bone mineral density (BMD) and susceptibility to non-verte- Inhibition of TGFβ signalling inhibits progression of fibrodysplasia bral fractures, but there is little information on the genetic determinants of ossificans progressiva in an in vitro model of the disease CVF. Here we report the results of a genome wide association study to iden- D. Micha, E. Voermans, H. W. van Essen, J. Drukker, C. Netelenbos, M. E. W. Eekhoff, G. tify loci that predispose to CVF, involving 1634 postmenopausal female CVF Pals, N. Bravenboer; cases (from 11 centres in Europe and Australia) and 4662 controls, matched Vrije Universiteit medisch centrum, Amsterdam, Netherlands. for region and gender. Genotyping was performed using the Illumina OmniX array and standard quality control measures were applied. Each cohort was analysed separately and results were combined using inverse-variance me- Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare congenital disorder ta-analysis. Replication was sought in 634 CVF cases and 2150 controls. We characterized by progressive heterotopic ossification. During the disea- identified seven loci suggestively associated with CVF (p-values=2.02x10-5 se course FOP patients present soft tissue lumps as a result of inflamma- - 3.35x10-7) and one locus on chromosome 2q13 significantly associated tion-induced flare-ups preceding the irreversible replacement of skeletal with CVF (p=2.42x10-8, OR=1.7 [95%CI 1.42-2.09]). The loci are distinct muscle tissue with bone tissue. Classical FOP patients possess a mutation from those previously identified as genetic risk factors for osteoporosis. We (c.617G>A; R206H) in the activin receptor IA (ACVR1)-encoding gene. No- went on to study mRNA expression of candidate genes in the 2q13 locus in netheless, disease progression in FOP patients with this mutation varies transiliac bone biopsies from normal and osteoporotic women. Four genes which indicates a strong contribution by environmental factors. Our objec- showed reduced levels of expression in osteoporotic patients (ANAP
C1 , SL- tive was to study the process of osteogenic differentiation in primary der- 
C20 A1, TMEM87B, Z
C3 H6) and two showed increased expression (MERTK, m 1a 0l 0fibroblasts from five FOP patients baEseSdH oGn a 2 n0o1ve5l m| GethLoAdS oGf gOroWwt,h S COZCT3LHA8)N. TDhi,s U stKud |y W haWs caWst. nEeSwH liGgh.tO oRn Gthe genetic architecture of CVF and factor-induced osteogenic transdifferentiation. In all patients the classical identified a novel variant has one of the largest effect sizes ever detected forABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index fracture risk. Further studies are in progress to identify the causal variants. In IP patients the skin defects are hallmarks of the disease, while the extra Grant: European Commission(HEALTH-F2-2008-201865-GEFOS) for the cutaneous defects (ocular, dental, hair, nail and central nervous system-CNS) Genetic Factors for Osteoporosis Consortium. are present at variable frequency. In 30% of IP patients CNS defects are ob- P
S04 .31 served, and the phenotype severity is variable. Moreover, it does not corre- Hemihyperplasia and embryonal tumor- presentation of two cases late with the genetic alteration in IP locus. Indeed, even when the common R. Zordania1, H. Põder2, M. Uritam2, I. Rebane2, K. Lepik2, K. Joost1; deletion is present (NEMOdel4_10 deletion) a wide range of CNS symptoms 1Tartu University Hospital United Laboratories Dept Genetics, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tallinn can occur, from neonatal seizures to severe mental retardation. Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. To evaluate the contribution of modifier genes on the variability of the IP intellectual disabilities we investigated the genomic background in three selected IP cases carrying the NEMOdel4_10 deletion and severe mental retardation: one was a familial case and two were sporadic cases. Whole Hemihyperplasia (HH) is an asymmetric body overgrowth due to an unre- exome-sequencing of trios samples was performed. From sequencing of an gulated cell proliferation. The frequency of HH might be 1:13500 - 1:86000 exome-enriched library a list of single nucleotide/indels variants was pro- newborns. HH may involve one side of the body or single limb or half of the duced. By applying combined filtering method with the information related face. Some cases are isolated , inherited dominantly or may be a symptom to the inheritance of the variants, we identified candidate genes by selecting with variety malformation syndroms- Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS), Sotos, those variants fitting to recessive model of inheritance and damaging by bio- Silver-Russell (SRS), Proteus. It is well documented that children with HH informatics analysis. aAnimd/.or BWS have an increased risk up to 10% of developing embryonal neo- Candidate genes were associated to cobalamin and folate pathways sugge- plasms, including nephroblastoma, hepatoblastoma, etc. sting that a masked metabolic defect underlines the IP clinical phenotype. Case dToe spcrreispetniot ntws.o unrelated paediatric patients with typical features of We will present the evaluation of candidate genes acting as modifiers and asymmetric body overgrowth, diagnosed HH and embryonal neoplasms. contributing to the severity of phenotype in IP. The first patient - a girl, body asymmetry was detected P
S04 .35 at the age of 3 months and as her mother had also HH, autosomal dominant Congenital infiltrating lipomatosis of the face caused by a somatic HH was diagnosed and the regular surveillance focusing to embryonal tu- PIK3CA mutation mors was recommended. Systemic abdominal ultrasound (USD) revealed an J. J. van den Ende1, E. Legius2, H. Brems2; adrenal tumor at the age of 22 months, which was successfully operated. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, The second patient -a boy, whose HH was diagnosed at the age of 2 months. 2Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Abdominal USD was performed at the age of 15 months nephroblastoma was diagnosed and treatment started. CCloinnicclauls ainodn pedigree data of the patients are presented, literature data and Congenital infiltrating lipomatosis of the face is a rare disorder, occuring in follow up discussed. infancy or early childhood, in which mature lipocytes invade adjacent tissu- . Regular surveillance focusing to embryonal tumors is indicated es of the face. It is characterized by rapid growth, associated osseous hyper- for children with isolated HH-they have higher risk for embryonal tumor plasia and high recurrence rate after surgical interventioPnI.K A3lCsAo premature and must be systematically investigated by USD up to six years. dental eruption and regional macrodontia have been described. In 2014 PM04.32 Maclellan et al. identified causal missense mutations in in affected Hereditary Heterotopic Ossification Syndromes: Effect of GNAS tissue samples of patients with this disorder. AKT1, AKT2, inactivation in progressive osseous heteroplasia: A case report Torh Ae KpTh3osphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway is PcIrKit3icCaAl P. Ata1, A. Turkyilmaz1, K. Delil1, I. Yagci2, K. Gencer2, E. Ozturk2, G. Akyuz2; for cellular growth and metabolism and activating mutations in 1Marmara University Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, PhIaKv3eC bAeen found in distinct disorders featuring overgrowth. 2Marmara University Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Physical Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. encodes the p110α catalytic subunit of PI3K. Several related syndromes with segmental overgrowth have been described before, like MCAP syndrome (Megalencephaly-Capillary Malfor- Bone formation initiates within subcutaneous fat before progressing to mations), Hemimegalencephaly, CLOVES syndrome (Congenital Lipomatous deeper tissues in progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH),suggesting that asymmetric Overgrowth of the trunk, Vascular malformations, EpiPdIeKr3mCaAl osteogenesis may involve abnormal differentiation of mesenchymal precur- nevi, Skeletal and SpinPaIKl 3aCnAomalies) and FH (fibroadipose hyperplasia). sors present in adipose tissues. GNAS is a gene encoding two stimulatory G Because even more clinical entities were shown to be caused by proteins and is a key regulator of fate decisions in adipose-derived mesen- mutations, the nPaImK3eC „A -Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS)“ was chymal progenitor cells that are involved in bone formation. Herein we had suggested. Almost all cases are caused by postzygotic (mosaic) mutations in detected a patient with GNAS mutation previously not reported. one allele of the gene. Case: A 6-year-old boy admitted to our clinic with complaint of left wrist We report a patient who presented with asymmetry of the face, with hyper- stiffness and limitation in May 2014. His prenatal history revealed oligohy- trophy of the right cheek and hemihypertrophy of the tongue. Segmental dramnious, gestational age as 34 week at birth, delivered with sectio, had neurofibromatosis was suspected, but after a biopsy no Schwann cells were 1750 gr birth weight and 45 cm in lenght. At postnatal period he had recur- found, but only fat cells and fibroblasPtIsK, 3leCaAding to the diagnosis of Conge- rent infections and apnea . His parents noticed a hard mass on his left wrist nital infiltrating lipomatosis of the face. DNA analysis of the affected tissue when he was 3 months old. The mass progressively became bigger through showed a c.1625A>T mutation in the gene. his first year of life. The biopsy revealed findings as osteoma cutis and could PM04.36 not prove whether it was FOP or POH. In physical examination; he had left Development of a comprehensive workflow for the analysis of wrist and hand deformity, pain with palpation of palmar area. Extension and RYR1 and CACNA1S genes associated with malignant hyperthermia; flexion of left wrist was completely limited, while the range of both supi- hybridization-based capture and next generation sequencing (NGS) nation and pronation were at 30°. He had normal serum PTH, Ca, P, TSH implemented into a routine genetic diagnostics set-up. levels. Serial radiographic examinations were reviewed and the progressive I. Valaskova1,2,3, S. Dudova1,2, E. Ostadalova1, R. Spesna1, Z. Svestkova1, R. Gaillyova1,2; HO was noted. The genetic analysis demonstrated GNAS exon 6 mutation 1University Hospital Brno, Medical Genetics Dpt., Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk as p.Asn167Glnfs*7 (c.498-499insC) heterozygosity and the diagnosis was University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biology, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk confirmed as POH certainly. With this case we disscussed the effect of this University, Faculty of Science, Department of Experimental Biology, Brno, Czech particular, previously unreported mutation on disease pathogenesis. Republic. PM04.34 EXOME-SEQUENCING APPROACH TO IDENTIFY CANDIDATE GENES FOR Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is potentially fatal pharmacogenetic disor- INCONTINENTIA PIGMENTI SEVERITY PHENOTYPE der in which intracellular calcium homeostasis in the skeletal muscle of F. Fusco1, M. I. Conte1, M. Paciolla1, A. Pescatore1, M. F. Branda1, M. C. Girone1, M. B. Lioi2, M. V. Ursini1; susceptible individuals is disrupted upon exposure to halogenated anae- 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Naples, Italy, 2University of Basilicata, Potenza, sthetics, suxamethonium, or both. MH is linked to the ryanodine receptor Italy. (RYR1) on chromosome 19 and the α1S subunit of the voltage dependent L-type calcium channel (CACNA1S) on chromosome 1. Molecular diagnosis of MH is essential for provision of genetic counseling and to establish cas- Incontinentia pigmenti (IP, MIM308300) is a rare X-linked neuroectodermal cade screening in MH families. We have performReYdR 1a hsyost tsepmoattic molecular disorder, caused by mutations in the IKBKG/NEMO gene, regulatory protein genetic screening program for MH probands. Many techniques has been im- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 101 of the IKK complex, required for the activation of the NF-kB pathway. plemented and optimized such as DNA/cDNA “ ” sequencing,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index melting analysis on Real-Time PCR, MLPA or QF PCR to the routine diagno- immediate and future health care too. No pregnancy had been terminated stics screening algorithm in MH patients. 385 patients from 105 different following the detection of mutation. families underwent molecular genetic testing. In about half of the patients P
S04 .39 included in our cohort, we identified candidate mutation. There was a RnYeRed1 Severe fetal phenotype of a dominant mesomelic dysplasia, associated for aC mACoNreA 1pSowerful screening tool. A NGS-based workflow was designed with a 790 kb microduplication of HOXD gene cluster at 2q31.1 using capture library to target the coding and splice site sequences of S. M. M. ODENT1,2, C. Jeanne-Pasquier3, P. Balouet4, A. Molin3, N. Leporrier3, S. Jaillard5, V. and genes followed by GS Junior pyrosequencing. The developed Jauffret5, E. Cherot1, M. Fradin1, C. Quélin1, L. Pasquier1, V. David6,2, C. Dubourg6,2; workflow permitted the identification of MH candidate mutations in 10 of 1CHU de Rennes. Hôpital Sud. Service de Génétique clinique, Rennes, France, 2CNRS UMR 12 patients examined so far. The workflow meets the sensitivity and speci- 6290, IGDR, Université Rennes1, Rennes, France, 3CHU de Caen, Caen, France, 4Centre Hospitalier Mémorial, Saint-Lo, France, 5CHU de Rennes. Laboratoire de cytogénétique, fity requirements for the genetic diagnosis of MH and improves on the cost- Rennes, France, 6CHU de Rennes. Service de genetique moleculaire et genomique, Rennes, effectiveness of current approach. This strategy has been implemented into France. a routine genetic diagnostics set-up as a first screening approach, potential- ly before the need of more invasive and specific clinical investigations. Objective: P
S04 .37 Failure of ossification of the occipital bone : a radiologic handle for The aim of this study was to elucidate the genetic etiology of a diagnosis of mandibuloacral dysplasia type B. vMeertyh eoadrlsy: fetal phenotype of mesomelic dysplasia inherited from the father, D. HAY
E1 , H. DRIDI1, V. LAMBERT2, F. ADJIMI2, J. KOHLHAS
E3 , A. VERLOE
S1 ; and to compare with other phenotypes of mesomelic dysplasia. 1Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris, France, 2Regional Hospital, Saint Laurent Du Maroni, Guyana, 3Center for Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany. Results: AWe performed molecular cytogenetic analysis using array CGH and the molecular results were confirmed using QMPSF and FISH. t 11 weeks of gestation ultrasound showed a cystic hygroma of 4.5 mm, a punctate appearance of the forearm’s bones, shortening of the Mandibuloacral dysplasia type B (MADB) is a rare autosomal recessively in- lower limbs, clubfeet, and an unilateral pleural effusion. A TOP was per- herited disease charectirized by atrophic skin, lipodystrophy and skeletal formed at 13 weeks of gestation. Mesomelic dysplasia was confirmed by fe- features. It is caused by mutations in ZMPST
E24  gene encoding a zinc me- tal autopsy, X-rays, and a particular histological appearance(organization of talloproteinase important in the post-translational modification of lamin. chondrocytes in shortened columns, triangular densification at diaphyseal Eleven different mutations in this gene have been identified in 11 patients angulations). The father was followed since childhood for a growth retar- with MADB from 9 independant families until now. dation (-2.5 SD) with macrocephaly (+4 SD), ulnar deviation of hands and We report a description of a 12 year-old boy with MADB resulting from a club feet, a significant shortening of ulna and fibula, bowed foreaHrmOXsD and novel missense homozygous mutation in ZMPST
E24  (c.1196A>G ; p.Y399C). HleOgsX,D difficHuOltXieDs witHhO fXleDxion H/ OeXxtDensHioOnX oDf thHeO fiXnDgerMs. TFeXtal DNA analysis by The patient had typical skin, sparse hair and skeletal features of MADB, array-CGH revealed a microduplication of a 790 Kb involving genes 13, short stature, mild microcephaly, facial dysmorphism and a striking failure of ossification of the interparietal region of the occipital, up to the position Concl1u2s,i ons: 11, 10, 8, 4, 3, 2. This microdupli- cation was also identified in the father. where transverse occipital suture can be observed. The different phenotypes of mesomelic dysplasia with early Skeletal anomalies such as acrosteolysis, long bone osteolysis, clavicular prenatal expression are close, sometimes more sSeHvOeXre than the phenotype hypoplasia, spontaneous fractures, delayed closure of cranial sutures, man- of an affected parent; research of a genomHicO mXDic rorearrangement is indi- dibular hypoplasia and skull anomalies are commonly reported in MADB. cated since it can reveal notably a deletion of the region in Xp22.33, or Wormian bones have described in five cases, but failure of ossification of 2q31.1 microduplication encompassing the cluster. the occipital bone, reported previously in a single case, appears to be almost pathognomonic for this entity. Occipital bone counts several parts (squama, PM04.40 basio-, exo-, and supraoccipal) and its ossification is multicentric. This ob- Severe phenotype of metaphyseal dysplasia due to a novel servation illustrates that ZMPST
E24  mutations could play a specific role in homozygous frameshift mutation in the MM
P13  gene intramembranouseous ossification of the interparietal part of the squama S. Verheyen1, P. M. Kroisel1, H. M. Pfingstl1, U. Gruber-Sedlmayr2, M. Sperl3, M. R. Speicher1, C. Windpassinger1; (Inca bone) but not in the intracartilaginous ossification the supraoccipital. 1Department of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Department The failure of ossification in the squama appears to be a good handle for of Pediatrics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 3Department of Pediatric radiological diagnosis of mandibuloacral dysplasia type B. Orthopaedics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. PM04.38 PREDICTIVE PRENATAL TESTING FOR KNOWN FAMILIAL MUTATIONS IN FAMILIES WITH MARFAN SYNDROM Introduction: Two sisters of a consanguineous family with Turkish back- R. Krenkova, J. Indrakova, M. Dvorakova, P. Cibulkova; ground presenting with short stature and bowlegs were introduced for ge- Laboratore AGEL a.s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic. netic assessment. The older sister showed more pronounced bowing of the femur and the tibia. Leg pain when walking lead to first surgical correction of both legs at the age of five years. Radiological examination showed genua Objectives: and coxa vara and metaphyseal and epiphyseal dysplasia of the lower limbs. Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disor- Additional metaphyseal dysplasia of the radius and the ulna and incomplete der caused by mutations in the FBN1 gene, resulting in defective glycopro- closure of the sacral vertebral arch were found concerning the younger si- tein fibrillin-1. The major features of MFS involve the cardiovascular, ocular ster. Due to suspected recessive inheritance, exploratory genetic testing for and skeletal systems. Each child of an affected parent has a priori 50% chan- shared homozygous alleles was employed. ce of inheriting the mutation. We describe three families with FBN1 mutati- Material and Methods: Homozygosity mapping was conducted via whole ons which caused classic type of MFS and one family with neonatal form of genome SNP analysis using a CytoScan® 750K Array. Subsequent Sanger MFS as a result of maternal germline mosaicism. sequencing of MM
P13  gene was performed. Methods: Results: Only one homozygous region (11q22.1-q23.3; HG19:101,897,234- In the first step a clinically affected future parent was tested. DNA was isola- 116,462,585) was identified, surprisingly containing the MM
P13  gene which ted from peripheral blood and the molecular analysis of FBN1 gene was per- is associated with different subtypes of metaphyseal dysplasia. Sequencing formed by MLPA and NGS. If the causal mutation was found, fetal samples of the MM
P13  gene revealed a homozygous frameshift mutation (c.381delT) were taken in the first or second trimester of pregnancy. DNA was isolated presumably leading to a premature stop codon in the catalytic region of the from chorionic villus samples or uncultured amniotic fluid. The potential MM
P13  protein. contamination of fetal samples with maternal cells was excluded by charac- Conclusion: We describe a novel frameshift mutation in MM
P13  gene terization of alleles using STR. (c.381delT). Inconsistent with previous reports of inherited metaphyseal Results: dysplasia due to homozygous mutations in MM
P13  gene, the associated We tested 15 fetal samples whose one parent is a carrier of the causal mu- phenotype of bone dysplasia is severe and requires surgical correction. tation of the FBN1 gene for classical type of MFS, and 2 fetal samples whose P
S04 .41 mother is a carrier of the germline mosaicism mutation of the FBN1 gene Deletion of the miR-17-92 cluster in association with digital for MFS neonatal form. anomalies and growth delay Conclusion: S. E. Anderson1, S. F. Jose1, E. McCann2, S. M. Morgan1; We have confirmed 9 fetuses with a classic type of MFS and all results were c1o0nf2irmed after their birth. Knowledge oEf SdiHagGno 2si0s 1is5 im | pGorLtAanSt GfoOr tWhe,i rS COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Laboratory Genetics Service for Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2All Wales Medical Genetics Service, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Discussion others clustered around theN FR1as-binding domain. MicroRNA’s (miRNAs) play a key role in the regulation of gene expression. Missense substitutions in predict a lower cutaneous NF burden. It is Hemizygous deletions of the MIR17HG gene, encoding the miR-17-92 po- likely that further specific genotype-phenotype correlations will emerge lycistronic miRNA cluster, are extremely rare. L. de Pontual et al., 2012, re- wCoitnhc ltuesstiionng of more patients. Exclusion of rare complications will require ported the first two cases of a germ-line deletion of the miR-17-92 cluster collaborative approachesN aFn1d long term follow up data. in association with a distinct phenotype consisting of microcephaly, short stature and digital anomalies (Feingold syndrome Type 2, OMIM #614326). CReerftearienn scuebstitutions in segregate with very mild disease. Molecular We report one further patient with a hemizygous deletion of the miR-17-92 diagnosis can inform prognosis and management of these patients. cluster. The patient was referred to our laboratory because of failure to thri- Funding: ve and clinodactyly. Array CGH analysis showed a 648kb deletion of the long Pinna et al, Eur J Hum Genet. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.243 arm of chromosome 13 at q31.3 that includes the MIR17HG gene, encoding the miRNA cluster, and one other OMIM gene, GP
C5 . Real-time quantitati- Wellcome Trust (research training fellowship to EBW), National Institute for ve PCR analysis confirmed the result. To date, the mechanism by which the Health Research (Senior Investigator Award to DGE) miR-17-92 cluster modulates skeletal development remains uncertain. This PM04.44 case, however, provides further evidence that miR-17-92 plays an important Amplicon-based Next Generation Sequencing: an effective approach role in normal growth and skeletal development. A full clinical assessment to molecular diagnosis of Epidermolysis Bullosa and parental studies will be presented. E. Tenedini1, L. Artuso1, I. Bernardis1, V. Artusi1, A. Percesepe2, R. Manfredini3, L. De PM04.42 Rosa3, R. Contin3, G. Pellacani4, A. Giannetti5, J. Pagani1, M. De Luca3, E. Tagliafico1; 1Centre for Genome Research, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, Executive function and adaptive behavior in Muenke syndrome 2Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for Children and Adults, Medical Genetics D. W. Hadley, Y. A. Addissie, C. M. P. Yarnell, M. Guillen, N. B. Agochukwu, R. A. Hart, E. Unit, University Hospital of Modena, Modena, Italy, 3Centre for Regenerative Medicine Wiggs, P. Kruszka, M. Muenke; “Stefano Ferrari”, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, 4Department National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. of Surgical, Medical, Dental and Morphological Sciences with Interest in Transplants, Oncology and Regenerative Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, Modena, Italy, 5Professor Emeritus of Dermatology, University of Modena and Objectives: The study investigated executive function and adaptive behavior Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, Modena, Italy. in persons with Muenke syndrome, the most common craniosynostosis syn- drome, using validated instruments with a normative population and unaf- fected siblings as controls. Additionally, an analysis of modifying factors in- Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB) is caused by mutations in genes encoding for cluding absence of craniosynostosis, history of surgery for craniosynostosis, proteins of the epidermal–dermal junction assembly. Due to the extreme seizures, and hearing loss was done. clinical/genetic heterogeneity of the disease, current methods in EB diagno- Methods: Participants in a cross sectional study included individuals with stics comprise immunohistochemistry on bioptic samples and transmission Muenke syndrome (
P250 R mutation in FGFR3) and their mutation negative electron microscopy followed by single candidate gene Sanger Sequencing siblings. Participants completed validated assessments of executive functio- (SS) that therefore represents the final phase of a labour intensive and ex- ning (Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function; BRIEF) and adaptive pensive clinical pathway. behavior skills (Adaptive Behavior Assessment System; ABAS-II). According to the recently published recommendations for diagnosis and Results: Forty-four FGFR3 mutation positive individuals, median age 9, range treatment in EB, the assessment of mutational landscape is instead a fun- 6 months to 52 years were evaluated with the BRIEF and ABAS-II. Additio- damental step to a comprehensive diagnosis path; Next Generation Sequen- nally, 10 unaffected siblings were used as controls. For the General Executive cing (NGS), throughout parallel ultra-deep sequencing of many genes, would Composite scale of the BRIEF, 32.1% of the cohort had scores greater than represent a proper method for reducing timing and costs in EB diagnostics. +1.5 SD, signifying “Potential Clinical Significance.” For the General Adaptive We developed an EB disease-comprehensive amplicon panel (AmpliSeq pa- Composite of the ABAS-II, 28.2% of affected individuals scored in the “Ex- nel), to accomplish NGS onto Ion Torrent PGM platform. The panel was dealt tremely Low” category” (3rd -8th percentile of normative population) and on ten patients with known genetic diagnosis, and then employed in eight 53.9% were below the “Average” category (less than the 25th percentile). family trios with unknown molecular footprinting. Multiple regression analysis showed that the presence of craniosynostosis The AmpliSeq panel, obtaining a proof of concept of the sensitivity, speci- was not a predictor (P = 0.7) of BRIEF and ABAS-II scores. ficity, and accuracy of this kind of procedure, showed successful in finding Conclusion: Individuals with Muenke syndrome are at an increased risk for the causative mutations in all the ten patients with known mutations, fully exhibiting differences in adaptive and executive functioning when compa- confirming SS data. Besides, showing consistent with the clinical diagnosis, red to a normative population and unaffected siblings. These differences it was effective in trios, identifying all the variants, even the ones SS missed were observed regardless of whether craniosynostosis was present. or in case of de novo mutations. NGS and AmpliSeq therefore demonstrated P
S04 .43 to be an effective approach in the diagnosis of EB, resulting in a cost and Missense substitutions in NF1 and a lack of cutaneous neurofibromas time-effective 72 hours procedure. E. M. M. Burkitt Wright, M. Pereira, M. Bulman, S. M. Huson, G. Evans; Grants: Ministero Istruzione Universita’ e Ricerca; POR-FESR 2007-13- Manchester Center for Genomic Medicine, St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United Tecnopolo; Programma Ricerca Regione-Universita’, RARER – Area1 Kingdom. (
E35 E09000880002
). Background P S04
.45 Targeted NGS for analysis of craniosynostosis identifies a novel mutation in MEGF8 Café-au-lait macules (CAL) are the commonest presenting feature of neurofi- E. König1, S. Spranger2, T. Schweitzer3, W. Kress1, E. Klopocki1; bromatosis type I (NF1), and hence indicators of risk for future NF1-related 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Praxis pathology. Few genotype-phenotype correlations in NF1 are known. Predic- fuer Humangenetik, Bremen, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, tors of mild, ‘CAL only’ phenotypes allow for better prognostication and pa- University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. tient care; p.(992del Met) is the only longstanding example. p.(Arg1809Cys) hMaest rheocdently been reported in association with a similar phenotype (Messia- en, unpublished; Pinna et al, 2014). Craniosynostosis is a frequent craniofacial malformation affecting 1 in 2500 newborns and is defined as the premature fusion of one or more cranial WRees uexltasmined genotypes of a cohort of patients with NF1 for evidence of sutures. Premature fusion of the cranial sutures can occur either as isolated variants predicting a mild phenotype. malformation in non-syndromic craniosynostoses or as part of a syndrome. So far genetic causes have been identified mainly for syndromic craniosyn- Cutaneous neurofibromas (NFs) are less common in patients with missense ostoses, i.e. mutations in FGFR2, FGFR3, TWIST1, and EFNB1. However, in variants than in those with truncating, frameshift or splice variants (p<0.05). more than 50% of cases the underlying genetic cause remains unknown. p.(Arg1809Cys) is a recurrent substitution (7 individuals from 4 families) in We compiled a next generation sequencing (NGS) gene panel comprising patients without NFs. This mutation has recently been suggested by other 68 genes. In addition to known and candidate craniosynostosis genes of groups to be associated with a CAL only phenotype, indicating that this is the syndromic and isolated type, the panel includes downstream targets a robust association. Further substitutions seen in pedigrees without NFs of participating signaling pathways and genes associated with bone deve- include p.(Arg1276Gln), in 10 inEdSivHidGua 2ls0 fr1o5m | 2G uLnAreSlaGteOd Wfam, iSliCesO, aTnLdA NlDop,m UeKnt .| TWargWetW en.EricShHmGen.tO wRaGs performed by the Nextera Rapid Ca 1pt 0ur 3e Enrichment kit of Illumina and sequencing was done on the Illumina MiSeqABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index platform. Sequencing data were analysed with the NextGENe software. Per- effect on the IL-1β secretion of NHEKs suggesting that this non-coding RNA formance of the NGS gene panel was validated by sequencing 5 control pati- does not have any regulatory role in the AIM2 inflammasome signaling. ents with known mutations. All of these mutations were detected correctly. PM04.48 Subsequently, we sequenced DNA of 13 patients with syndromic as well as Olmsted syndrome: a novel homozygous TRPV3 mutation with severe isolated craniosynostosis. Two patients are siblings and children of consan- phenotype guineous parents. Both patients show an a-typical Carpenter phenotype A. Gezdirici1, Y. Bayram2, B. Engin3, U. Celik3, T. Gambin2, C. Demirkesen4, E. Karaca2, S. with sagittal craniosynostosis. We identified in both a novel homozygous N. Jhangiani5, T. Baris6, Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics, R. A. Gibbs5, J. R. splice site mutation (c.828G>A) in MEGF8 leading to a predicted loss of the Lupski2,7,8; splice donor of exon 5. The mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor Mutations in MEGF8 were shown to be associated with Carpenter syndrome College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Department of Dermatology and 2 (MIM 614976). Venereology, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty at Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, PM04.46 4Department of Pathology, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty at Istanbul University, Istanbul, Successful identification of causative single-gene defects using NGS Turkey, 5Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, disease-associated genome sequencing approach in a patient affected TX, United States, 6Burc Genetic Diagnostic Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 8Texas Children’s by perinatal type of hypophosphatasia Hospital, Houston, TX, United States. A. Jamsheer1,2, E. M. Olech1, T. Zemojtel3,4,5, A. Sowinska-Seidler1, P. N. Robinson3,6,7, S. Mundlos3,6,7; 1Poznan University o Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2NZOZ Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute for Medical Olmsted syndrome (OLMS) (MIM#614594) is a rare, severe keratinization Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, disorder characterized by bilateral mutilating palmoplantar keratoderma 4Labor Berlin-Charité Vivantes GmbH, Humangenetik, Fohrer Strasse 15, Berlin, and periorificial keratotic plaques. Other associated features include corne- Germany, 5Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Noskowskiego al lesions, diffuse alopecia or sparse hair, digital constriction, nail dystro- 12/14 Street, Poznan, Poland, 6Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, Berlin, Germany, 7Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), phy, autoamputation of fingers and/or toes. Infections and squamous cell Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. carcinomas can arise on the keratotic areas. OLMS should be differentiated from several genodermatoses, such as Vohwinkel syndrome and Acroder- matitis enteropathica. Although most cases are sporadic, both autosomal Lethal skeletal dysplasias are highly heterogeneous and phenotypically va- dominant and X-linked inheritance have also been reported. The heterozy- riable group of genetic condition, often unrecognizable based on the clinical gous mutations in TRPV3 were identified as a cause of autosomal dominant symptoms. Here we report on a foetus affected by severe skeletal dysplasia type, while the X-linked recessive inheritance was associated with the mu- that resulted in stillbirth at weeks 22 of gestation. The patient presented tations in MBTP S2
. Recently, the homozygous TRPV3 mutations have also with generalized limb shortening and intrauterine fractures of the lower been reported in a few recessive cases. leg bones revealed by prenatal ultrasound and autopsy examination. Since We report a 16-year-old male patient who has referred to our clinic with se- no clinical diagnosis could be established, we performed NGS panel encom- vere palmoplantar keratoderma, autoamputation of fifth toes, mild periori- passing all 2741 genes known to be associated with Mendelian disorders ficial, perianal and genital keratotic plaques, and mild intellectual disability (i.e. disease-associated genome; DAG). With this approach, we were able to with prediagnosis of OLMS. His parents had consanguinity and his brother, demonstrate the diagnosis at a molecular level, which turned out to be peri- who has died at the age of 8 due to complication of infections, had similar natal lethal hypophosphatasia (HPP). This severe form of HPP, characterized phenotype. We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) for the index by an inborn defect of ossification, results either in stillbirth or early post- case and a novel homozygous TRPV3 mutation (NM_145068;c.1247G>T;p. natal death. NGS panel detected compound heterozygous ALPL missense Arg416Leu) was identified in our patient. Additionally, we confirmed this mutations: c.1283G>C (p.R428P) and c.1363G>A (p.G455S), next confirmed mutation by using Sanger sequencing and the parents were found to be he- by Sanger sequencing. Mutations demonstrated in our proband, although terozygous carriers for this mutation. To our knowledge, this is the third previously described in other HPP cases, have not been reported to coincide reported autosomal recessive OLMS case in the literature. We conclude that in a single individual. Our study therefore extends the knowledge on HPP the homozygous TRPV3 mutations result in a more severe OLMS pheno- and helps in genetic counseling of other patients harboring identical muta- type. tions. Importantly, the diagnosis in our index was established by means of GRANT: NHGRI/NHLBI grant U54HG006542, Baylor-Hopkins Center for NGS-based DAG panel sequencing and would be extremely difficult to reach Mendelian Genomics. by any other diagnostic approach. Thus, our report highlights the efficiency P S04
.49 and important role of NGS strategies in the diagnosis of prenatally manife- Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate: Genome-wide sting skeletal dysplasias, especially if the clinical data is insufficient to allow imputation identifies four novel risk loci and an enrichment of for clinical diagnosis association signals in enhancer datasets relevant to craniofacial P S04
.47 development PRINS, the psoriasis susceptibility related non-coding RNA is involved K. U. Ludwig1,2, A. C. Boehmer1,2, H. Schuenke1,2, J. Klamt1,2, J. Hecker3, S. Barth1,2, K. Aldhorae4, A. Rojas-Martinez5, L. Goelz6, A. Rada-Iglesias7, H. Fier3, M. M. Noethen1,2, M. in stress response of cells, but not in inflammation Knapp8, E. Mangold2; J. Danis1, A. Göblös1, Z. Bata-Csörgő1, L. Kemény1,2, M. Széll3,2; 1Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human 1Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute for Genomic Mathematics, Bonn, 2MTA SZTE Dermatological Research Group, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, Germany, 4Othodontic Department, College of Dentistry, Thamar University, Thamar, 3University of Szeged, Dept of Medical Genetics, Szeged, Hungary. Yemen, 5Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico, 6Department of Orthodontics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 7Center for Molecular Medicine, University of We have previously identified a non-coding RNA, PRINS, as a differentially Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 8Institute of Medical Biometry and Informatics and expressed transcript in psoriatic uninvolved and healthy epidermis. Our in Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. vitro experiment showed that PRINS expression is altered after exposure to various stressors i. e. UVB, translation inhibition and microbial agents. A potential stress signal in psoriatic involved skin may be the extracellular Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/P) is a common DNA, which activates the AIM2 inflammasome. The activated inflammasome congenital malformation and has a multifactorial etiology. Currently, 15 cleaves the precursor proIL-1β form into mature, functioning IL-1β which nsCL/P susceptibility loci have been established. Some of the yet unidenti- plays a well-known role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. fied genetic risk factors might be detected by increasing the marker density The aim of our study was to investigate whether PRINS affects the expressi- in genome-wide datasets. We used data from a genome-wide meta-analysis on and activation of IL-1β in normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) of European individuals (Ludwig et al. 2012, Nature Genetics). Based on and the elevated expression of PRINS in psoriatic uninvolved epidermis con- ~500.000 genotyped markers, imputation was performed using 2184 alle- tributes to the inflammatory aspect of the disease. les (1kGP data). After quality control, a high-density dataset of ~8.26 milli- The highest level of IL-1β secretion could be induced by priming the NHEKs on variants was statistically analyzed. with TNF-α and IFN-γ and a subsequent treatment with the synthetic DNA One previously unreported SNP was identified with genome-wide signi- analogue poly(dA:dT). This treatment resulted in a 2-fold PRINS expression ficance (rs6740960 at 2p21, P=1.6x10-08). Interestingly, this variant maps and a significantly elevated (p=0.02) IL-1β secretion. Next we silenced and 5bp adjacent to a predicted Myc binding site upstream of the PKDCC gene. o 1v 0er 4expressed PRINS in NHEKs and perfEoSrmHeGd t2h0e 1ab5o v| eG ILL-A1βS GinOduWcin,g S COPk Td Lcc A i Ns d Do ,w Unr Keg |u Wlat Wed Win .m Ei Sc He c Gar .r Oyi Rng G a deletion of the region homolo- treatments. Neither the silencing nor the overexpression of PRINS had any gous to the 8q24 nsCL/P major risk locus (Uslu et al. 2014). Additionally,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM04.52 Osteoblasts from Type V OI patients demonstrate gain-of-function for SNPs at 64 loci showed suggestive evidence of association. Replication at mineralization despite decreased CO L1
A1 expression 29 loci in an independent nsCL/P sample (609 cases, 1.745 controls) was A. Reich1, A. Bae1, A. Barnes1, W. Cabral1, A. Hinek2, J. Stimec3, S. Hill4, D. Chitayat5, J. performed. After combined analysis, three additional loci reached genome- Marini1; wide significance: 2p24.2, 14q22.1 and 15q13.3. At genome-wide level, we 1Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, observed a significant overrepresentation of association signals in functio- 2Physiology and Experimental Medicine Program, Heart Center, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Division of Diagnostic Imaging, nal datasets relevant to craniofacial development such as enhancer datasets Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, from human neural crest cells (Rada-Iglesias et al. 2012) and murine em- ON, Canada, 4Diagnostic Radiology Department, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, bryonic craniofacial tissue (Attanasio et al. 2013). 5The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics Our study identified four novel risk loci for nsCL/P and revealed an over- and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, representation of association signals in functionally relevant datasets. On- Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for Sick, Toronto, ON, Canada. going analyses include assessment of heritability estimates, and ingenuity pathway analyses. PM04.50 Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder cha- Antenatal detection of intracranial calcification in a baby with racterized by bone fragility. OI is now understood to be a collagen-related osteocraniostenosis disorder, with mutations in type I collagen structure causing dominant OI, A. Smith, J. Campbell, A. Dobbie; while deficiency of collagen-related proteins cause rare recessive OI forms. Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United Kingdom. Type V OI is the only rare OI type to also have dominant inheritance. It is caused by a heterozygous mutation (c.-14C>T) in IFITM5, which encodes BRIL, a transmembrane protein expressed in osteoblasts. The mutation ge- Osteocraniostenosis (OCS) is a rare, perinatally lethal skeletal dyspFlaAsMia1 c1h1aA- nerates a start codon, adding five residues to the BRIL N-terminus. Howe- racterised by gracile bones, premature closure of basal cranial sutures and ver, the mechanism of type V OI and its relationship with type I collagen is microphthalmia. Recently, heterozygous mutations in the gene unknown. We identified 8 patients with type V OI. Using cultured patient have been shown to cause OCS. osteoblasts, we verified normal expression and stability of mutant IFITM5 OCS is allelic to Kenny-CaffFeAyM sy1n1d1rAome (KCS), which has a less severe phe- transcripts and BRIL protein level. Both early (ALPL and IBSP) and late notype of small, dense bones, short stature FaAndM 1p1r1imAary hypoparathyroi- (osteopontin and osteocalcin) markers of osteoblast differentiation are in- dism with hypocalcaemia. mutations have been identified in both creased in type V OI osteoblasts. Mineralization, assayed by alizarin red stai- disorders. Recent publications suggest that plays an important ning, was increased in type V OI osteoblasts vs control. In contrast, type V OI role in a pathway controlling calcium homeostasis. osteoblasts have one-third the level of CO L1
A1 transcripts in control in mid We present a case of an infant who was found antenatally to have a clover- to late differentiation, with concomitantly decreased collagen protein secre- leaf skull, reduced bone density and intracranial calcification (presenting as tion, crosslinked collagen in matrix, and altered appearance of fibrils depo- intracranial echogenicity on ultrasound scanning). The presence of intrac- sited in culture. The increased mineralization and advanced differentiation ranial calcification led to a relatively long list of differential diagnoses. The of type V OI osteoblasts demonstrate a gain-of-function mutation leading to baby was born at term but died within a fedwe nhoovuors of birth. On post mortem the overactive tissue calcification and hypertrophic callus formation seen in eFxAaMm1i1n1aAtion features of OCS were identified and there was confirmation of type V patients. Decreased type I collagen expression, secretion and matrix foci of calcification in the basal ganglia. A heterozygous mutation in incorporation establish type V OI as a collagen-related defect. was subsequently detected, confirming the diagnosis. This work was supported by NICHD intramural funding. Intracranial calcification is a recognised feature of OCS, but only on postna- P S04
.53 tal imaging. Antenatal detection of intracranial abnormalities has not pre- Mutational analysis in Osteogenesis Imperfecta patients viously been reported. We report the clinical and radiological findings of this D. Nadyrshina1, R. Khusainova1, N. Marycheva2, A. Nurgalieva1, E. Khusnutdinova1; rare skeletal dysplasia, review the literature and suggest that OCS should be 1Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State in the differential diagnosis of antenatal intracranial calcification. Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. P S04
.51 Novel form of recessive osteogenesis imperfecta caused by missense mutations that alter a collagen type I-interacting protein Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous R. Mendoza-Londono1, S. Fahiminiya2, J. Majewski2, The FORGE Canada Consortium, M. brittle bone disorder. The aim of our study was to identify mutations in Tétreault2, J. Nadaf2, L. Dupuis1, P. Kannu1, E. Sochett1, A. Howard1, J. Stimec1, P. Roschger3, CO L1
A1, CO L1
A2, CRTAP, LEPR E1
, PPIB and SERPINF1 genes in Russian OI K. Klaushofer3, S. Boudko4, T. Palomo5, H. Al-Jallad5, J. S. Mort5, P. Moffatt5, H. Bachinger4, patients. F. Rauch5; We examined 78 patients with OI and 100 healthy controls corresponding 1The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, by age, gender, ethnicity and place of residence. We sequenced the coding 2Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and Génome Québec Innovation and exon-flanking regions of CO L1
A1, CO L1
A2, CRTAP, LEPR E1
, PPIB and Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch SERPINF1 genes. Hospital of WGKK and AUVA Trauma Center Meidling, Vienna, Austria, 4Shriners Hospital for Children, Portland, OR, United States, 5Shriners Hospital for Children, We identified 7 distinct mutations, undescribed before. Montréal, QC, Canada. For the first time previously unreported nonsense mutation c.967G>T (p.Gly323X), 2 novel frameshift mutations c.3541insC (p.Gly1181ArgfsX38) and с.1098_1099insA (p.Gln367ThrfsX5) and one splicing mutation CO L1
A1 CO L1
A2 Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable bone fragility disorder that is с.3208+1G>C in CO L1
A1 gene was observed in 7 patients, most often caused by mutations in (MIM 120150) or (MIM The splicing mutation c.1724+4G>A in LEPR E1
 gene was identified in 120160). Defects in sixteen other genes have been identified in association two patients. And novel compound heterozygous mutations (с.913C>G with dominantly and recessively inherited forms of OI. These genes play a (p.Leu305Val) of SERPINF1 gene and c.641T>C (p.Val214Ala) of CRTAP role in the processing of collagen type I or in the control of osteoblast dif- gene) was observed in three patients. ferentiation or function. Despite these advances, a small proportion of indi- We also detected three previously described nonsense mutations in seven viduals that present with a phenotype of severe OI do not have mutations Russian patients: c.1081C>T (p.Arg361X), c.1243C>T (p.Arg415X) and in any of the genes that are known to be associated with OI. We performed c.2869C>T (p.Gln957X), two frameshift mutations in two patients: c.579delT whole-exome sequencing to identify the molecular defect in two unrelated (p.Gly194ValfsX71) and c.2444delG (p.Gly815AlafsX293) and two splicing girls with severe bone fragility and a clinical diagnosis of osteogenesis im- mutations in three patients: c.4005+1G>T and c.697-2A>G. perfecta type IV, and identified two homozygous variants that affect very In conclusion, the present study revealed 11 mutations in CO L1
A1 gene, 1 conserved and interacting residues in a novel protein that interacts with mutation in SERPINF1 gene, 1 mutation in LEPR E1
, 1 mutation in CRTAP collagen type I and other matrix proteins. The residues substituted by these gene, 7 of them was not observed before and no mutations in CO L1
A2 and mutations are essential for the binding of this protein to collagen type I. Skin PPIB genes in Russian patients with OI. Future research will focus on other fibroblasts from our patients express the protein at apparently normal levels genes responsible for OI development in Russian patients but secretion of collagen type I was delayed. Binding of the mutated protein to collagen type I was decreased. Analysis of an iliac bone sample from one affected individual showed that the trabecular bone was hypermineralized on the material level. Herein we present a detailed clinical, radiological and molecular description of this novel form of autosomal recessive OI. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 105ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM04.54 PM04.56 Targeted sequencing of the Paget’s disease associated 14q32 locus Molecular basis of aggressive periodontitis identifies several missense coding variants in RIN3 that predispose to R. Werner1, A. Schossig1, K. M. Eckl1, B. Krabichler1, H. Thiele2, P. Nürnberg2, J. Zschocke1, Paget‘s disease of bone H. Hennies1,2, I. Kapferer-Seebacher3; M. Vallet1, D. C. Soares2, S. Wani1, A. Sophocleous1, J. Warner3, D. M. Salter1, S. H. Ralston1, 1Division of Human Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, O. M. E. Albagha1; 2Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Department 1University of Edinburgh, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, of Restorative and Operative Dentistry, Dental School, Innsbruck Medical University, United Kingdom, 2University of Edinburgh, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, Innsbruck, Austria. United Kingdom, 3South East Scotland Clinical Genetic Service, Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Chronic periodontitis is an inflammation disorder affecting 30-50% of the adult population, leading to teeth attachment loss and degradation of the Background: Paget’s disease of Bone (PDB) is a common skeletal disorder alveolar bone. Aggressive periodontitis (AP) is a rare form of the disease with a strong genetic component. We identified a susceptibility locus for with a prevalence of approximately 0,1%. It is characterized by an early age PDB on chromosome 14q32 by GWAS, tagged by rs1049863 within the RIN3 of onset, rapid rate of progression and high inflammation activity leading to gene. Here we investigate the candidacy of RIN3 as a predisposing gene for loss of teeth before the age of 35, if untreated. PDB. Here we report on a Tyrolean four-generation family indicating an autoso- Methods: We conducted re-sequencing of the 14q32 locus in PDB cases and mal dominant inheritance pattern for AP. The result of our genome-wide controls and studied expression of RIN3 in bone tissue and bone cells by linkage analysis revealed one large co-segregating chromosomal region in quantitative PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry. affected individuals. The interval is 12 Mb in length and contains approxi- Results: We detected 16 missense variants in RIN3, including 12 rare poten- mately 300 genes. In addition, we performed whole exome sequencing in tially damaging variants, 7 of which were detected only in PDB. A common four affected family members to identify possible common variants in the coding variant (p.R279C) in LD with the GWAS hit (r2=0.96) was strongly linkage region. Assuming a monogenic cause for the disease we have been associated with PDB (OR=0.64, P=1.4x10-9). The rare variants were also looking for an unknown, heterozygous mutation in the coding sequence and strongly associated when combined (OR=3.72; P=8.9x10-10). mRNA for exon/intron boundaries. Identified variants were filtered with common pa- RIN3 was strongly expressed in lung, bone and liver with increased expres- rameters including alignment against various mutation databases and prio- sion in osteoclasts as compared with bone marrow (p=0.02). Expression of ritized based on their translational and predicted functional effects. RIN3 increased at the mRNA and protein level during osteoclast differentia- In our functional studies we have already shown a significant reduction of tion in vitro. chemotactic and phagocytic activity of neutrophils in affected individuals. Conclusions: These findings indicate that RIN3 is the causal gene for PDB In regard to on 14q32 and suggest that its susceptibility is mediated by a combination these preliminary results we propose a mutation contributing to an immu- of common and rare coding variants. While the function of RIN3 in bone nological dysfunction. Signs of Ehlers-Danlos-syndrome (EDS) present in biology is incompletely understood the data are consistent with a model some family members may also suggest a mutation resulting in disturbed whereby RIN3 acts to inhibit osteoclast formation and that the predisposing connective tissue deposition. variants damage its ability to do so, resulting in the osteoclast activation P S04
.57 characteristic of PDB. A zebrafish model for Bruck Syndrome caused by PLOD2 mutations Grants: European Research Council (311723-GENEPAD); Arthritis Research S. Symoens1, C. Gistelinck1, A. Willaert1, P. Simoens1, E. P. Witten2, A. Huysseune2, C. UK (19799&19520); Arthritis Research UK (18304&18163); Medical Re- Vanhove3, F. Malfait1, A. De Paepe1, P. Coucke1; search Council (09-800-05). 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, University Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 2Biology Department, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Electronics and P S04
.55 information systems, University Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. DESCRIPTION OF A NEW POLYMORPHISM IN SQSTM1 GENE IN PLOD2 PATIENTS WITH PAGET´S DISEASE OF BONE R. Usategui-Martin1, I. Aurrekoetxea Rodriguez2, J. Fernandez-Mateos1, I. Calero- FKB P10
 Paniagua3, J. Del Pino-Montes3, R. González-Sarmiento1; Bruck syndrome, a disorder caused by recessive mutations in either 1Molecular Medicine Unit. Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca- Institute or , is characterized by contractures and bone fractures and shows of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL)., Salamanca, Spain, 2Universidad de strong clinical overlap with Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI). Animal models for Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Department of Rheumathology. University Hospital of OI are indispensable for unraveling molecular mechanisms in OI pathogene- Salamanca- Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL)., Salamanca, Spain. sis. The zebrafish was recently shown to be a useful vertebrate organism to model OI both at the phenotypic and molecular level. ZebrafisPhL OmDu2tants that model OI display generalized reduced bone density and misshapPeLnO bDo2- Paget‘s disease of bone (PDB) is a focal disorder of bone that affects seg- nes with evidence of fractures. Although the molecular rolPeL oOfD 2 has mentally the skeleton, presenting an increase in osteoclast number, size and been documented, no animal models for Bruck syndrome, causedp bloyd 2 activity that results in a variegated and anarchic bone structure that alters mutations, have been reported. To elucidate the function of in verte- the mechanical properties. brate skeletal development, zebrafish harbouring a homozygous non- The existence of genetic factors is one of the etiopathogenic hypothesis that sense mutation were phenotyped using µCT scanning, alizarin red staining attempts to explain the origin of PDB. The most plausible candidate gene is for bone, toluidine blue staining and ultra-thin sectioning. Mutants presen- sequestosoma1 gene (SQSTM1), encoding the p62 protein, which plays an ted with a shortened body axis and malformed craniofacial structures. The important role in cellular signal crossroads related with osteoclastogenesis skeleton was severely affected with evidence of bone fragility and fractures, Only 3% of patients in a historical cohort of 288 patients were carriers of bowing and kinking of the ribs and fin bones. The vertebral column was sco- a mutation in SQSTM1 gene. Five patients were carriers of the c.1000G>C liotic with compressed vertebrae and excessive periosteal bone formpaltoiodn2 (p. E273
D) mutation, not described to date in the literature. at the vertebral end plates. The observed phenotype is concordant with the The aim of our study was to try to evaluate the putative role c.1000G>C clinical findings detected in Bruck Syndrome patients. Therefore, the (p. E273
D) mutation in the development of PDB. zebrafish mutant is a promising model for elucidation of the underlying pa- “In silico” study categorizes c.1000G>C mutation as pathogenic. A popula- thogenetic mechanisms leading to Bruck Syndrome. tion study in 100 healthy individuals alleles by dHPLC failed to detect mu- This work was supported by Ghent University Methusalem grant tation. BOF08/01M01108 to A.D.P and by funding from the Belgian Science Policy Then, the cDNA of SQSTM1 gene was cloned in the expression vector pCEFL- Office Interuniversity Attraction Poles (BELSPO-IAP) program through the FLAG. After site directed mutagenesis the c.1000G>C mutation was incor- project IAP  P7
/43-BeMGI. porated into the construction. Finally CO S1
 cells were transfected with our PM04.58 construct to perform western blotting and immunofluorescence assays. Whole Exome Sequencing as a novel tool for the detection of modifier By immunofluorescence and western blot assays we did not find differences genes in Pseudoxanthoma elasticum between the transfected cells with the wt construct and transfected cells E. Y. G. De Vilder1,2,3, F. Van Nieuwerburgh4, D. Deforce4, L. Martin5, G. Lefthériotis6, P. with the c.1000G>C construct (Fig1-2). Coucke1, A. De Paepe1, O. M. Vanakker1; In conclusion, our results suggest that c.1000G>C (p.  E273
D) mutation 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2PhD Fellow of should be considered as a neutral mutation, a polymorphism that increases the Research Foundation – Flanders, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Ophthalmology, risk to suffer PDB. Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Department of Pharmaceutics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 5Department of Supported in part by PI13/01741 and GR S969
/A/14 Dermatology, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France, 6Department of Vascular 106 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Physiology and Sports Medicine, Angers University, Angers, France. therapy for this disease, and death is usually the result of aggressive squa- Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), an autosomal recessive ectopic minerali- mous cell carcinoma, sepsis, or malnutrition. zation disorder caused by ABC C6
 and ENP P1
 mutations, is characterized by We are developing an autologous, genetically-modified fibroblast cell the- skin, ocular and cardiovascular (CV) symptoms. PXE shows distinct clinical rapy that is anticipeaxt-evdiv too improve skin fun cCtOioLn7 Ain1 RDEB patients through variability, with growing importance of modifier genes. Modifiers have pre- restoration of collagen leEvexl vs.i vAo patient’s fibroblasts will be harvested, ge- viously been studied using a candidate gene approach, which only yielded netically modified with a functional gene, and expanded in VEGFA as a modifier of the PXE retinopathy. culture (GM-HDF-CO L7
). transduction will occur through the use of We introduced Whole Exome Sequencing (WES), capable of analyzing mul- a replication-defective, self-inactivating (SIN) lentiviral vector. After expan- tiple genes in a single reaction, to identify potential modifiers by comparing sion, the fibroblasts are administered back to the patient as a local intrader- patients with extreme phenotypes. WES was performed in 13 molecularly mal injection into target wound margins. The resulting increase in ancho- and histologically confirmed PXE patients with an extreme (absent or se- rInin vgi tfriborils is anticipated to stabilize the connection between skin layers and vere) CV phenotype (based on clinical presentation and vascular calcium reduce blistering tendency. scoring). product development data indicates that cGMPin s cvaitlreo G/iMn -HviDvoF -CO L7
 Comprehensive functional analysis of variants unique to the severe cohort cells express full-length type VII collagen exhibiting the proper trimeric led to 9 modifier candidates, which were subsequently validated using San- structure, size, and binding functionality. A hybrid phar- ger sequencing and screened in an independent cohort of 50 PXE patients. macology/toxicology study using an organ culture/SCID mouse model is Genotype/allele frequency analysis and multiple logistic regression confir- underway at Stanford University to confirm type VII collagen persistence, med significant association of 3 SNPs with severe CV disease: rs2228570 distribution, localization and toxicology. (VDR gene), rs13006529 (CAS P10
 gene) and rs1042714 (ADRB2 gene). All P S04
.61 were previously linked to CV disease and functional data mining yielded Patients with isolated oligo/hypodontia caused by RUNX2 duplication links to the PXE pathophysiology. Particularly for rs2228570, reported to A. Molin1, S. Lopez-Cazaux2, O. Pichon3, M. Vincent3, B. Isidor3, C. Le Caignec3; increase VDR transcriptional activity, upregulation of several VDR transcrip- 1CHU, Caen, France, 2Departement d’odontologie pédiatrique, faculté de chirurgie tional targets was demonstrated in PXE. dentaire, Nantes, France, 3CHU, Nantes, France. In conclusion, WES enables to characterize candidate modifier genes through a targeted analysis approach in patients with extreme phenotypes. Our results suggest a role for VDR, CAS P10
 and ADRB2 in determining the RUNX2 severity of CV complications in PXE, providing valuable assets for manage- ment of PXE families. FWO14/ASP/084 Loss-of-function mutations of are responsible for cleidocranial dys- P S04
.59 plasia, an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by delayed closure of Co-inherited ENP P1
 mutations can intensify the cardiovascular cranial sutures, aplastic or hypoplastRicU cNlaXv2icles, moderate short stature and phenotype of pseudoxanthoma elasticum supernumerary teeth. In contrast, an increased gene dosage is expected for M. J. Hosen1, I. Vermeulen1, D. G. Devos2, J. De Backer3, S. Fisher3, P. Coucke1, A. De Paepe1, duplication of the entireR sUeNqXu2en ce of anMdI,R t5h8u6s, aC dLIifCf5er ent phenotype O. M. Vanakker1; as cleidSoUcPrTan3iHa l dysp lasia. To date, two cousins with a duplication including 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of the entire sequence of in addition to , and the 5’ half Radiology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Cardiology, Ghent of the genehave been reported. The patients presented with the University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. association of metopic craniosynostosis and hypodontia. RUNX2 SUPT3H We report here a family with four patients carrying a 285 kb duplication Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is characterized by aberrant mineraliza- including the entire sequence of and the 5’ half of the gene. tion and fragmentation of elastic fibers, leading to skin, ocular and cardio- Two patients presented with the association of RmUNetXo2pic craniosynosto- vascular symptoms with a significant variability in severity. The molecular sis and oligo/hypodontia previously described, confirming the phenotype etiology of PXE has become increasingly challenging as mutations in both caused by a duplication of the entire sequence of . Interestingly, the ABC C6
 and ENP P1
 were shown to cause overlapping phenotypes and mo- two other patients had isolated hypodontia without any craniosynostosis, difier genes are beginning to be identified. We evaluated the causal role of enlarging the phenotype observed in patients with such duplications. ENP P1
 mutations in PXE patients with an incomplete ABC C6
 genotype in both an autosomal recessive or digenic inheritance model. Further, we as- sessed whether ENP P1
 variants, which also cause a severe cardiovascular PM04.62 disease called Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy (GACI), could Childhood osteoporosis and enamel dysplasia: expanding the have a disease modifying effect in PXE patients with an exceptionally seve- spectrum of duplication in RUNX2 re and rapidly progressive (cardio)vascular phenotype. ABC C6
 and ENP P1
 G. Baujat, V. Querol, S. Bacrot, F. Poulain, M. Biosse-Duplan, M. Polak, V. Malan, M. genotyping of 40 clinically and histologically confirmed PXE patients was Veckemans, A. Munnich, V. Cormier-Daire, S. Romana; performed by Sanger sequencing and MLPA. A vascular calcium score was Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. obtained through whole body CT scanning. In a cohort of 40 PXE patients (13 with an unidentified and 17 with an incomplete ABC C6
 genotype; 10 with severe cardiovascular disease), no additional ENP P1
 mutations could RUNX2 gene encodes CBFA1, a master transcription factor, regulating both be found. In one patient of the cardiovascular cohort, an additional ENP P1
 osteoblasts and terminal chondrocytes differentiation, is essential for bone mutation co-inherited with biallelic ABC C6
 mutations was identified. The development and mineralization. vascular calcification score of this patient was exceptionally high (Agatston A 105-kb duplication containing exons 3-5 of the RUNX2 gene was recently score of 3600 compared to an average of 422 in PXE patients), resembling found in affected members from a family with Metaphyseal Dysplasia and the findings in GACI patients. We demonstrate that the co-inheritance of EN- Maxillary Hypoplasia with or without Brachydactyly (MDMHB, OMIM P P1
 mutations together with ABC C6
 mutations has an intensifying effect on 156510). Transfection studies with murine dup3-5 Runx2 cDNA showed a the cardiovascular phenotype of PXE. higher transactivation activity suggesting of gain of function of the gene in patients with MDMHB, contrary to the RUNX2 haploinsufficiency, which is PM04.60 associated with Cleidocranial Dysplasia (CCD, OMIM 119600), defined by Development of a Genetically-Modified Human Dermal Fibroblast for persistent open skull sutures, clavicles hypoplasia and dental anomalies. the Treatment of Recessive Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (RDEB) MDMHB is described in only 3 families (2 Canadian and 1 Finnish), and is V. K. Dailey1, M. Chakiath1, A. Elayadi1, S. Krishnan1, J. Maslowski2, M. P. Marinkovich3; 1Intrexon Corporation, Germantown, MD, United States, 2Fibrocell Science, Exton, PA, characterized by metaphyseal flaring, wormian bones, mild osteoporosis, United States, 3Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States. enlargement of the proximal portion of the clavicles, and yellowish teeth. We have identified 3 children from 2 unrelated families (Cambodia and Al- geria), presenting with clinical features resembling to MDMHB. They were Recessive dyCsOtrLo7pAh1ic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) is an autosomal recessi- all referred for Osteogenesis Imperfecta. CGH array and Q-PCR detected a ve, inherited skin disease caused by null mutations within the type VII col- RUNX2 duplication spanning exon 2 to exon 6, resulting, as in the MDMHB lagen gene ( ). The mutations cause an absence or reduction of func- Canadian family, to the duplication of the functional CBFA1 QA and RUN do- tional collagen VII, which make up anchoring fibrils that maintain binding main. In both families, RT-PCR detected interestingly that the fathers were of the epidermis to the dermis. The disease is characterized by a mechanical mosaic for this RUNX2 duplication. We highlight the main features of this fragility and repeated blister formEaStiHonG in 2 t0he1 s5u b|- GlamLiAnaS dGeOnsWa, a, tS thCeO leTvLelA Nr Dec ,o Ugn Kiz a | b Wle Wph Wen .o Et Syp He Gof . Och Ril Gdhood osteoporosis with abnormal t 1e 0et 7h. of the structurally defective anchoring fibrils. Currently, there is no effective Finally, we discuss the RUNX2 threshold for consequences on the formati-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM04.66 JmjC demethylase mutation and Split Hand/Foot Malformation with on of endochondral and intramembranous bone tissue and odontogenesis Long Bone Deficiency. process. C. Fusco1, P. De Nittis1, A. Alfaiz2, L. Micale1, M. Pellico1, B. Augello1, N. Malerba1, L. P S04
.63 Zelante1, B. Mandriani1, A. Reymond2, G. Merla1; 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Center for Variants of the matrix metalloproteinase-3 gene are not associated Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. with anterior cruciate ligament ruptures A. P. Gibbon1, H. Hobbs1, W. van der Merwe1, S. Raleigh2, M. Posthumus1, M. Collins1, A. September1; 1University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2The University of Northampton, We studied an Italian nuclear family with three individuals (mother and two Northampton, United Kingdom. of the siblings) presenting Split Hand/Foot Malformation with Long Bone Deficiency (SHFLD). The duplication at 17p13.3, encompassing bHLHA9 gene and commonly associated with this disease, segregated within the fa- Introduction: DNA sequenceM vMaPri-a3nts have been associated with the risk of mily. The duplication was detected in a set of healthy subjects originating musculoskeletal soft-tissue injuries, including several mapping to the MmMatPr-i3x from Southern Italy, suggesting that it could be merely a susceptibility factor. metalloproteinase-3 gene ( ). This gene encodes an endopeptidase, Consistent with this hypothesis, the bHLHA9 duplication was found asso- which by function, degrades extracellular matrix components. Three ciated with a range of other limb malformations. variants namely; rs679620, rs591058 and rs650108 have previously been To possibly identify the causative genetic lesion we exome sequenced all associated with Achilles tendinopathy. Moreover, variants; rs679620 and members of the family. We filtered, consistently with the expected autosomal rs3025058, have been studied for theMir MasPs-o3c iation with anterior cruciate dominant inheritance, a heterozygous nonsense mutation (c.4000C>T/p. ligament ruptures (AC L) in two studies. Therefore, the aim of this research R1334X) in the KDM5B gene that co-segregates with SHFLD and targets was to explore all four variants within with the risk of ACL injuries. transcripts to nonsense-mediated mRNA-decay, contributing to protein Material and Methods:A case-control geneticM-aMsPso-3ciation study was employ- haploinsufficiency. KDM5B encodes a JmjC demethylase, which regulates ed. In total, 232 control participants (CON) and 234 participants with ACL genes with a role in bone metabolism. The expression of two of its targets, ruptures (ACL) were genotyped for all four variants. Within the ACL SMAD7 and TCF3, is modified in KDM5B haploinsufficient cells. We similarly group, 120 participants reported a non-contact mechanism of injury (NON showed through luciferase assays that wild-type KDM5B, conversely to the subgroup). Investigated polymorphisms included; rs3025058 (5A/6A), truncated form, controls the promoter of RUNX2, a key transcription factor rs679620 (G/A), rs591058 (C/T) and rs650108 (G/A) respectively. Statisti- involved in osteoblastic differentiation. Moreover the expression levels of cal analysis involved investigating the allele and genotype frequency distri- RUNX2 and OPG are altered in a model of osteoblast-like cells, established butions in addition to conducting inferred haplotype analysis between the from patient’s skin fibroblasts. Overall these results suggest that haploinsuf- cases and control participants. Significance was accepted when P<0.05. ficiency of KDM5B could cause transcriptional alteration of genes linked to Results:After adjusting for age, sex and weight, no independent associati- bone development. ons were noted for all genotype frequencies (>P=0.350). Furthermore, no Therefore, considering the variable expressivity and reduced penetrance of differences i n the inferred haplotypes amongst the cases and controls were SHFLD, we propose KDM5B as a likely second genetic event participating in observed. All variants were in Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (P>0.05). the index family. Conclusion:These preliminary observations are in contrast to the previous P S04
.67 findings and therefore this genomic region requires further interrogation. Silver-Russell syndrome phenotype in a patient with a methylation Grants: Research supported by NRF and UCT. Andrea Gibbon funded by NRF abnormality associated with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and UCT. Michael Posthumus funded by the Thembakazi Trust. F. Ryan1, C. Wenman1, J. Short1, H. Gosrani1, F. Byrne1, H. A. Spoudeas2, R. Taylor1; PM04.64 1South West Thames Regional Genetics Laboratory, St George‘s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Analyses of the molecular pathways involved in the sarcopenic Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. process in functional and non-functional elderly population. G. Queipo1, M. Fonseca2, Y. Trujillo1, J. Rivera1, I. Palma3, G. Ariti1; 1Hospital General de Mexico Eduardo Liceaga-Facultad de Medicina UNAM, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Hospital General de Mexico Eduardo Liceaga, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Molecular Introduction: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), an overgrowth dis- and Cellular Morphology Laboratory, Escuela Superior de Medicina, Instituto Politécnico order, and Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS), a growth retardation disorder, are Nacional, Mexico City, Mexico. imprinting disorders associated with abnormalities of the 11p15 region. Abstract The majority of BWS cases result from loss of methylation at the KvDMR imprinting control centre whilst ~40% of SRS cases arise from loss of me- thylation at the H19 DMR imprinting control centre. Sarcopenia is one of the most deleterious effects of aging. The involuntary Materials and methods: 11p15 MS-MLPA was performed to detect dosa- loss of muscle mass, strength, and muscular function have a major impact ge and methylation abnormalities of the 11p15 region in a patient with a on quality of life in the elderly population. The etiology of the sarcopenia suspected diagnosis of SRS. is not clearly established, although, a multifactorial propceer ssse that develops Results: The patient was found to have loss of methylation at KvDMR at all from the fourth decade of life is proposed. In a previous clinical report we probes tested and no 11p15 dosage abnormalities. Loss of methylation at found that evaluation of the muscular contractility is a and indepen- KvDMR is a known cause of BWS but not SRS. dent factor in the sarcopenia development not related with the muscle vo- Conclusion: This is the first report, to our knowledge, of a patient with loss lume. In order to understand this phenomenon, we analyzed the molecular of methylation at KvDMR only presenting with a SRS phenotype. There pathways involved in the muscle performance and the sarcopenic process. have been previous reports of rare patients with loss of methylation at both Genetic expression patterns in functional and non-functional elderly groups KvDMR and H19 DMR that present with SRS. It has been hypothesised that were studied in 15 muscle biopsies from both groups, using a QRTPCR ar- the region with greater demethylation gives the dominant phenotype and ray (RT2Profiler, Qiagen). We studied critical signaling pathways involved in that, in cases where multiple regions have a similar degree of methylation, the sarcopenic process (apoptosis, autophagy, WNT, TGF-Beta, TNF-Alpha one region might have a dominant effect. Also ~45% of SRS cases have an and interleukins). Immunohistochemestry and confocal analysis were also unknown etiology. Therefore, a possible reason that this patient is presen- performed in order to explore differences in the distribution of the muscu- ting with a SRS phenotype despite having loss of methylation at KvDMR only, lar proteins involved in the contractile process (actin, myosin, myopalladin could be that another, as yet unknown, locus with a dominant effect is also and SERCA). Preliminary results showed an overexpression of genes invol- affected. ved in apoptosis, autophagy and interleukins in the non functional group. PM04.68 Confocal analysis showed a different protein distribution in a qualitative a High success of a next generation sequencing panel in the genetic quantitative fashion in both groups. Our data suggests that inflammatory analysis of rare skeletal dysplasias and apoptotic process in the muscular fiber impacts the proteins involved J. Barraza1,2,3, C. I. Rivera-Pedroza1,3, L. Sentchordi-Montané4,1,3, E. Vallespin1,2, V. E. in contractility and muscular functionality, observed in the clinic as less Montaño1, E. Mansilla1,2,3, A. Belinchón1,2,3, S. Benito-Sanz1,2,3, A. Del Pozo1,2, K. Ibañez1, contractility, strength and muscular performance in the sarcopenic and non I. González-Casado5,3, E. Guillén-Navarro6,2, P. Prieto7, J. Sánchez del Pozo8, E. Galan9, J. functional population. Cruz8, P. Lapunzina1,2,3, S. García-Miñaur1,2,3, F. Santos-Simarro1,2,3, K. E. Heath1,2,3; CONACyT Grant number 181798 1Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Multidisciplinary Unit for Skeletal Dysplasias, Hospital Universitario la Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4Dept. of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario Infanta Leonor, Madrid, Spain, 108 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 5Dept. of Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, UAM, Madrid, Spain, 6Dept. of Genetics, Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 7Dept. of Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 8Dept. of FGFR (OMIM*146000) gene mutation screening (negative) were done. Pediatric Endocrinology & Dysmorphology, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, SNP array revealed 4.8 Mb long heterozygous microdeletion at 4q28.3q31.21 Madrid, Spain, 9Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Hospital Materno Infantil de Badajoz, Badajoz, that spanned 14 OMIM genes. SNP array examination of the parents showed Spain. 0, 87 Mb long microdeletion at 4q28.3 in the phenotypically normal father. Father’s microdeletion was shorter and compared to the foetus microdeleti- on did not span 13 OMIM genes. One of the genes deleted only in the foetus In 2010, 456 skeletal dysplasias (SD) were classified by molecular, biochemi- was the RAB33B gene (OMIM*605950), in which the recessive mutations cal and/or radiological criteria, into 40 groups. The precise, final diagnosis were recently identified in individuals with skeletal Smith-McCort Dysplasia is often difficult due to the high phenotypic and genotypic variability. Aim: 2 (SM C2
, OMIM#615222). Although the phenotypic signs in the foetus were To improve SD molecular diagnosis using a custom-designed Next-genera- not typical for SM C2
, microdeletion was considered to be likely pathogenic tion sequencing (NGS) panel, including a total of 315 genes or regulatory for the foetus. Results were discussed with the couple and the parents de- regions (967Mb). cided to continue pregnancy. Repeated ultrasound examination at 16th WG A total of 60 SD probands without known mutations were clinically and confirmed significant femurs shortening, thoracic kyphosis and mild shor- radiologically evaluated. All probands and in some cases family members, tening of the upper limbs. Ultrasound at 27th WG showed apart from the were analyzed using the SKELETALSEQ.V3 panel and sequenced (16 pati- skeletal dysplasia ventricular septal defect, clinodactyly and IUGR. Postnatal ents/run) on a MiSeq (mean coverage 100X). All variants were confirmed examinations of the boy were in a concordance with prenatal findings. by Sanger sequencing or aCGH. Even though the skeletal phenotype does not precisely match the SM C2
, we The molecular defect was identified in 24 probands (40%): 23 mutations believe the extension of the microdeletion during the parental transmission (missense, stop or small deletions) and one GLI3 deletion. Interesting cases is likely causal. include the identification of the first FGF9 mutation in a family with cranio- P S04
.71 synostosis, a second case of spondylometaphyseal dysplasia due to PO P1
 Molecular analysis of 94 Short-Rib Polydactyly (SRP) individuals mutations and the detection of POCA1 mutations in two families with pri- using targeted Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) mordial dwarfism/SOFT syndrome. C. Huber1, G. Baujat1, K. H. Le Quan Sang1, M. Zarhrate2, C. Bole2, C. Masson3, P. Nitschké3, In conclusion: 1) The SD-NGS panel has permitted a high mutation detection S. Saunier4, the SRP consortium, V. Cormier-Daire1; rate, 40%, higher than in other pathologies (average 26%). 2) We have de- 1Department of Genetics, INSERM UMR 1163, Université Paris Descartes- Sorbonne monstrated that FGF9 mutations can cause not only multiple synostosis but Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (AP-HP), PARIS, France, also sagital/coronal craniosynostosis in humans, as observed in the sponta- 2Plateforme de Génomique, Fondation IMAGINE, PARIS, France, 3Plateforme de neous mouse model. 3) The advancement in genetic diagnosis of these dis- Bioinformatique, Université Paris Descartes, PARIS, France, 4INSERM, UMR 1163, orders will improve the management, monitoring and treatment of the pa- Laboratory of Inherited Kidney Diseases, Université Paris Descartes- Sorbonne Paris tients and allow prenatal and preimplantational studies. 4) Exome sequen- Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (AP-HP),, PARIS, France. cing may be helpful in those cases in which no mutation was identified. P S04
.69 Objective: The SRP group includes 4 lethal disorders (type I Saldino-Noo- An interstitial deletion of chromosome 7q35q36.1 in a 3-year-old boy nan, type II Majewski, type III Verma-Naumoff, type IV Beemer-Langer) 2 with clinical features of Weaver syndrome disorders compatible with life, asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia (ATD) and L. Roht1, K. Reinson1, I. Talvik2,3, R. Zordania4, K. Kuuse1, O. Zilina1,5, K. Õunap1,3; 1Tartu University Hospital, United Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Tartu, Estonia, Ellis-van Creveld (EVC) syndrome and 2 related conditions, Sensenbrenner 2Children’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Paediatrics, and Saldino-Mainzer syndromes. To date, 14 genes encoding primary cilia University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Tartu University Hospital, United Laboratories, proteins have been involved in the SRP group. Here, we report the molecular Department of Genetics, Tallinn, Estonia, 5Department of Biotechnology, Institute of screening of 94 SRP individuals by targeted NGS. Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Methods: We performed targeted NGS of a customized ciliopathy gene pa- nel, called ciliome, on a cohort of 94 individuals including 50 ATD, 23 EVC, 13 SPRIII, 2 SRPII, 1 SRPIV, and 5 Sensenbrenner. The phenotype of EZH2-related overgrowth known as Weaver syndrome Results: We identified 93 variations in 56/94 individuals. Among the 50 usually incorporates tall stature, variable intelligence, advanced bone age ATD cases, 30 were found to harbor variations in DYN C2
H1 (21), IFT140 (100%), poor coordination, soft doughy skin, camptodactyly, umbilical her- (2), IFT144 (2), WDR34 (1), WDR35 (1), WDR60 (1) or IFT43 (1), whereas nia, a hoarse low cry in infancy. Facial characteristics may contain macroce- and one heterozygote variation in DYN C2
H1 and in IFT140 was identified in phaly, broad forehead, round face, large, fleshy ears, hypertelorism, almond- another case. DYN C2
H1 variations were also identified in 9/13 SRPIII cases. shaped eyes and retrognathia. Most cases of Weaver syndrome are sporadic WDR34 or IFT122 variations were identified in 2/5 Sensenbrenner cases. and caused by a heterozygous mutation in the EZH2 gene on chromosome Finally, among the 23 EVC cases, EVC (9) or EV C2
 (6) variations were iden- 7q36. tified in 15. Interestingly, a maternal deletion of EVC (4) or EV C2
 (3) was The aim is to present a case report of a 3-year-old boy first investigated be- present in 7 cases. cause of speech delay. His birth weight was 5080 g (> + 2 SD), length 53 cm Conclusion: By ciliome analysis, we identified variations in ~60% of indi- (0 SD) and head circumference 39 cm (> + 2 SD). In early neonatal period viduals. DYN C2
H1 is responsible for ~48% of ATD-SRPIII spectrum, while he had an episode of hypoglycemia. At the age of 3 years his head circum- EVC/EV C2
 account for 65 % of EVC cases, with the presence of a maternal ference was rather large (+2 SD) but his height was normal (102 cm, +0.5 deletion in half cases. Exome sequencing is in progress for the remaining SD). He had mild dysmorphic features - round face, large, fleshy ears with cases. speech delay, which could be the statement of intellectual disability. Chro- PM04.72 mosomal microarray analysis (Human CytoSNP-12 BeadChip, Illumina Inc.) Bi-allelic TBX6 variations in a patient with spondylocostal dysostosis revealed a 3Mb de novo interstitial deletion on paternal chromosome 7 in N. Jean-Marçais1, G. Pierquin2, J. St-Onge3, P. Callier4, Y. Duffourd1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,3, bands 7q35q36.1. The region contained 2 disease-related genes: CNTNA P2
 B. Aral4, J. Rivière1,3, L. Faivre1,3, J. Thevenon1,3; and EZH2. 1Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies du Conclusion: In this case we present the patient who has some clinical fea- Développement (TRANSLAD), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France, tures of Weaver syndrome caused by 7q35q36.1 microdeletion. This is a 2Centre de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Régional de Liège, Liège, Belgium, 3Equipe very rare microdeletion and at the moment its prevalence is unknown. d’Accueil 4271, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire de génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, Plateau PM04.70 Technique de Biologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France. Prenatal detection of likely causal 4q28.3q31.21 microdeletion in a Background: TBX6 foetus with skeletal dysplasia. M. Trková1, A. Baxová2, M. Hejtmánková1, V. Bečvářová1, E. Kulovaný1, M. Doležal1, J. Recurrent 16p11.2 microdeletions encompassing are Horáček1, D. Stejskal1; associated with a wide-spectrum of symptoms including developmental 1Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, 2General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder or obesity. Approxi- mately 15% of patients with the recurrent deletion presentT BabXn6ormal seg- mentation of vertebrae (ASV). Recently, it was demonstrated that congenital We report a newborn boy (37th WG, Caesarean section) prenatally monito- scoliosis in 16p11.2 patients was associated with aT sBpXe6c ific haplotype red for multiple ultrasound anomalies. 37 year old woman underwent first in trans. Conversely, a unique family with autosomal dominant spondylo-co- prenatal ultrasound examination at her first pregnancy at 13th WG. Consi- stal dysostosiTs B(SX C6
D) secondary to a heterozygous stop-loss mutation. derable shortening of the lower limbs and spine kyphosis were found and These observations suggest the existence of a continuous spectrum of ASV chorionic villi sampling with a suEbSseHqGue n2t0  S1
N5P a|r GraLy A(3 S0
G0KO, IWllu,m SinCaO) aTnLdA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 109 secondary to haploinsufficiency.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Methods: DL L3
, MES P2
, LFNG, HE S7
 TBX6 The CHU de Dijon is the french referring centre for SCD molecular ticaria. The allelic frequency of the mutation in patients is 1.4% while in diagnosis.The genes implicated in SCD, namely controls it is 0.53%. However all shown differences are not of statistical si- and were sequenced on a MiSeq instrument using Nextera XT protocol gnificance. (RIellsuumltisn:a). Array-CGH was performed by each genetic centre before mole- PM04.76 cTuBlXa6r testing. Type III collagen is important for collagen fibrillogenesis and for A case with an inherited 16p11.2 microdeletion encompassing dermal and cardiovascular development was referred because of a classical SCD. X-ray showed more than 10 S. D‘hondt1, B. Guillemyn1, S. Symoens1, W. Toussaint2, L. Vanhoutte2, R. De Rycke2, P. contiguous ASV, associated with costal anomalies. Global examination was Coucke1, B. Lambrecht2, P. Segers3, A. De Paepe1, S. Janssens2, M. Bertrand2, F. Malfait1; normal, with a normal psychomotor dTeBvXe6lopment, no visceral malformati- 1Center for Medical Genetics, UGent, Ghent, Belgium, 2Inflammation Research Center, on. The deletion was inherited from an asymptomatic mother. The sequen- UGent, Ghent, Belgium, 3Institute Biomedical Technology, UGent, Ghent, Belgium. cing of the 5 genes identified a single missense (chr16:30100121G>T, CCD S10670
.1:p.His221Asn) inherited from the healthy father. This genomic vCaorniactliuosni owna:s absent from public databases, affected a conserved position Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (vEDS) is a severe, life-threatening he- (GERP: 6,02) and residue (PhastCons : 0,982). ritable connective tissue disorder, characterized by translucent skin, easy TBX6 Together with the literature data, this observation highlights bruisinCgO, La3nAd1 propensity to rupture of arteries and hollow organs. The mole- the hypothesises of a continuous spectrum of ASV secondary to bi-allelic cular basis of vEDS has been well-studied, showing a wide range of mutati- variations. ons in C,O eLn3cAod1ing type III procollagen. Most mutations lead to glycine substitutions in the helical domain of procollagen. Despite the identification P S04
.73 of numerous mutations, the mechanisms by which mutant type III TGFB3-related connective tissue disorder : a third report with collagen cause dermal and vascular fragility are not well understood, but evidence of autosomal dominant inheritance J. Piard1, C. Altuzarra1, E. Puzenat1, Y. Bernard1, P. Coucke2, A. De Paepe2, J. De Backer2, L. factors, other than mechanical failure, are believed to contribute to the phe- Van Maldergem1; notype. Col3a1 1CHU Besançon, Besançon, France, 2University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. To study the role of type III collagen in development and disease, we genera- ted a tranCsogle3nai1c mouse model, which expresses harbouring a typical glycine substituMtiUoTn (p.(Gly183Ser)) within the α1(III)-procollagen helical Several new connective tissue disorders (CTD) recently came to attention. domain. animals display clinical features reminiscent of human Among these, TGFB3 mutations were reported in two sporadic patients. vEDS patients including thin translucent skin and wound healing Cporol3bale1ms We describe here a mother and her son with a heterozygous c.797G>A leading to the development of severe transdermal skin wounds. BiomechMaUT- (p.Arg266His) missense variant in TGFB3. The index patient was evaluated nical testing revealed substantial fragility of the skin and aorta of for hypotonia and gross motor delay. When examined at 3 ½ y, epicanthic animals. Collagen fibrils in the skin and aorta were loosely packed, displayed folds, anteverted nares, a long philtrum with full cheeks, a high-arched pa- a highly variable diameter, and secretion to the ECM was severely disturbed. late, a large uvula, joint hyperlaxity, scoliosis and marked pectus excavatum The adventitia was significantly thinner and, smooth muscle cells made less were noted. His mother had a history of recurrent joint dislocation. At 34 y, connection with elastic fibers, and showed more intracellular space. she presented with joint hyperlaxity, scoliosis, pectus carinatum, high-ar- Together, our findings underscore a key role for type III collagen in collagen ched palate, a large uvula and a similar facial gestalt. Slit lamp examinations fibrillogenesis in skin and arterial tissue. This novel animal model provides were normal. Maximal diameter of tubular aorta was 19 mm in the index opportunities for in-depth analyses of the role of abnormal type III collagen case and 37 mm in his mother. This is the third report describing patients in vEDS, and for investigation of possible therapeutic interventions for this with a mutation in TGFB3. In 2013, Rienhoff et al identified a de novo mis- devastating disease. sense mutation (c. 1226G>A; p. C409
Y) in a young girl with hypotonia, low P S04
.77 muscle mass, distal arthrogryposis, bifid uvula, hypertelorism, and hyper- Autosomal recessively inherited auto-inflammatory disorder (Weber extensible large joints but no evidence of vascular disease. Matyas et al re- Christian disease) responsive to tumour necrosis factor alpha ported in 2014 a de novo missense mutation (c.899G>A; p.Arg300Gln) in a inhibition hypotonic girl with cleft soft palate, bifid uvula, hypertelorism, pectus exca- H. L. Titheradge1,2, N. Morgan1, J. Ainsworth3, E. R. Maher4; vatum, kyphoscoliosis, generalized hyperextensibility, aortic root diameter 1University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Birmingham Women‘s at the upper normal limit and mild mitral valve prolapse. Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Birmingham Children‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4Academic Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrooke’s Treatment This new familial observation gives further support to the existence of a new Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom. autosomal dominant CTD comprising hypotonia, joint hyperlaxity, pectus carinatum/excavatum and a distinctive facial dysmorphism. P S04
.75 Introduction: Weber Christian disease (also known as relapsing febrile no- FLG gene mutations in urticaria development dular nonsuppurative panniculitis) is an eponymous condition characte- G. F. Gimalova1, A. S. Karunas1,2, E. F. Khantimerova3, S. Z. Zagidullin3, E. K. rised by idiopathic recurrent inflammation in the subcutaneous fat layer of Khusnutdinova1,2; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre, Russian Academy of the skin. The inflammation results in recurrent erythematous subcutaneous Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, nodules with systemic symptoms including fever, myalgia, arthralgia, vomi- 3Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. ting, and weight loss. The cause of this rare sporadic condition is unknown. Very rarely severe recurrent panniculitis has been reported in families with the PiZZ genotype of alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency. Urticaria is a kind of a skin rash that usually starts as an itchy patch and Clinical Summary: We describe a multiply consanguineous family in whom turns into swollen red welts. It is frequently caused by allergic reactions. two siblings and a cousin have relapsing nodular panniculitis. This presen- Filaggrin is the major component of the stratum corneum and is involved in ted in the newborn period and continued as frequent flare-ups involving maintaining of skin barrier function. FLG gene loss-of-function mutations widespread painful lumps in the skin associated with fever, a raised CRP lead to epidermal barrier abnormality and are one of the main genetic risk and white cell count. Additional features in this family include cataract, mi- factors for the allergic diseases development. Nevertheless, FLG gene muta- cronodular cirhosis, developmental delay and growth delay. tions were not studied in urticaria before. Initial treatment with systemic steroids and Anakinra partly ameliorated The aim of our study is the analysis of two FLG gene loss-of-function muta- the condition. The cousin responded well to treatment with a monoclonal tions (p.R501X and c.2282del4) in patients with urticaria and healthy in- antibody against tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α). dividuals from Volga-Ural region of Russia. The patients group include 103 This family were recruited into the Molecular Pathology of Human Gene- individuals of different ethnic origin (36 Russians, 30 Tatars, 32 Bashkirs tic disease study. Whole exome sequencing studies are in progress. We are and 5 individuals of mixed origin). The control group consists of 106 healthy looking for other similar families to join this study. donor without atopic diseases (24 Russians, 18 Tatars, 4 Bashkirs and 60 Conclusions: We report this very interesting family and ask for other fami- individuals of mixed origin). Mutations were genotyped by PCR-RFLP. lies with a similar phenotype. There are two individuals (1.9%) with urticaria in patients group who have Grant and fellowships: Genetic Approaches to Novel Pathway Target Disco- c.2282del4 mutation. One of them has acute urticaria and another one has very in Human Genetic Disease with UCB Celltech. chronic from of the disease. The allelic frequency of the deletion is 0.96%. The allelic frequency of the c.2282del4 in healthy donors is 2.12%. Three patients (2.9%) with urticaria are heterozygous for the p.R501X mutation. 110 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG Two of them have acute from of urticaria and one of them has chronic ur-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM04.78 A homozygous deletion of exon 1 in WIS P3
 causes progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia in 2 siblings cently, several studies indicated that microRNAs (miRNAs) circulating in se- B. Neerinckx1,2, C. Wouters3, R. Westhovens2,1, H. Van Esch4; rum or in plasma are attractive biomarkers for several human diseases. The 1Rheumatology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Skeletal Biology and objective of the present study was to examine the expression of the miRNAs Engineering Research Center, Department of Development and Regeneration KU miR-208b and miR-499 in plasma of AMI patients and to investigate whe- Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Pediatric Rheumatology University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, ther these miRNAs could be useful biomarkers for AMI. Belgium, 4Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. Materials and Methods: 20 AMI patients and 20 healthy controls were re- trospectively recruited for a comparison of their plasma miR-208b and miR- 499 expression. The levels of miRNAs in plasma were determined using Progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia (PPD) is a rare autosomal reces- TaqMan-based miRNA quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction sive disease, causing progressive joint stiffness, pain and typical radiogra- (qRT-PCR). phic abnormalities in young children. Classically, the disease presents with Results: Our data indicated that both miR-208b and miR-499 were signi- decreased joint mobility, in particular reduced hip movements, and a pro- ficantly over expressed in plasma of AMI patients. We have found that the gressive involvement of metacarpophalangeal joints (MCPs), interphalange- levels of miR-208b and miR-499 were increased by 16-fold and 128-fold, al joints, wrists, elbows, knees, shoulders and ankles. The first symptoms respectively, in plasma of AMI patients compared to healthy controls. mostly manifest in childhood, between three and eight years of age. There Conclusion: We conclude that plasma levels of miR-499 and miR-208b could are no extra-skeletal manifestations. Stature of patients with PPD is normal be used as potential diagnostic biomarkers for AMI. in infancy but deviates generally to lower than the third percentile in adult- P S05
.03 hood. It is a progressive disease although the rate of progression is variable RNA expression profiling of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysmal disease between patients. A. IJpma1,2, I. van der Pluijm3,4, L. te Riet5, K. van de Luijtgaarden4, P. van Heijningen3, R. Most patients are initially misdiagnosed because of the rarity of the disea- Kanaar3, E. Rouwet4, J. Essers3,4,6; se and the unawareness of most clinicians. Presentation of PPD can mimic 1Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, juvenile idiopathic arthritis as osseous joint swelling can be mistaken for Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Vascular synovitis. Although, there are no arguments for inflammation in PPD as in- Surgery, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Pharmacology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, flammatory markers are always within the normal range. Radiographs can Netherlands, 6Radiation Oncology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. also help to distinguish, as destructive or erosive bone changes are never seen on radiographs from PPD patients. PDD arthropathy is associated with loss of function mutations in the WIS P3
 Introduction: An abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a widening of the gene, firstly described in 1999. Here, we describe the clinical case of two aorta below the renal arteries, usually asymptomatic until rupture causes sisters suffering from PPD in whom molecular genetic analysis showed a fatal bleeding. AAA risk increases after the age of 65 years. Genetic suscep- homozygous deletion of exon 1 and the 5’UTR of the WIS P3
 gene. This is the tibility, smoking, hypertension, and atherosclerosis are established risk fac- first time that a gross deletion is described as the causal mutation in PPD. tors. Targeted ultrasound screening of high risk cases allows reduction of AAA related mortality, thus a better risk prediction model based on clinical P S05
.01 characteristics and biomarkers is needed to earlier identify persons at risk. Genetic variants in familial abdominal aortic aneurysms D. Heijsman1, A. IJpma2, M. Oomen1, H. Brüggenwirth1, I. van den Boogert1, D. Majoor- We aim to identify molecular markers for AAA disease by identifying genes Krakauer1; involved in aortic vascular wall remodeling in AAA patients. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Methods: Microarray based genome wide expression analysis in affected Clinical Genetics, ErasmusMC, Department of Bioinformatics, ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, aortic tissue of AAA patients was performed. Netherlands. Results: In our gene expression studies in affected aortic tissues, we found genes which have been associated with AAA before: CO L11
A1, AdipoQ and LPL. Using Ingenuity IPA we identified immunity related pathways. Intere- Introduction: Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a frequent disorder with stingly, expression levels of genes involved in the TGFβ signaling were si- a prevalence of approximately 5% in the elderly population. In 20% of the gnificantly changed. We designed a flow chart to select genes as possible patients AAA is familial. No genetic causes for AAA have been identified so markers based on their level of expression, potential as blood marker and far. The goal of this study is to identify genes that play a role in the formation possible relevance for aneurysmal disease. We will validate these markers of abdominal aneurysms. in experimental models for aneurysmal disease and study them further in Methods: The study includes approximately 950 AAA patients, 250 patients blood of AAA patients. with- and 700 patients without a family history of AAA. So far we sequenced Conclusions: Our analysis not only identifies genes and pathways previously the DNA of 92 patients with a family history of abdominal aortic aneurysm. associated with AAA genes, but also reveals novel genes and key regulators Whole genome sequencing (WGS) was performed in three families (15 in- that will shed light on the processes involved in AAA formation and pro- dividuals) and whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in eleven gression. families (29 individuals) and 48 single AAA patients with familial disease. Funding: Euro Trans Bio and Stichting Lijf en Leven Prioritization of resulting variants was performed according to the follo- PM05.04 wing gene sets: Family screening for abdominal aorta aneurysm: don’t forget the 1. Genes in diagnostics panel as applied in the Erasmus MC in thoracic or women syndromic aneurysms (n=23) K. M. van den Luijtgaarden, M. W. Oomen, E. Rouwet, H. J. M. Verhagen, D. Majoor- 2. A broad selection of genes involved in vascular function or disease Krakauer; (n=4209) Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 3. All genes in the genome Results: We present the detailed workflow of the analysis of the genomics data, including the results so far. In six families a variant in one of the set 1 genes was found. Further analysis of the set 2 and 3 genes so far led to the Introduction: Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) occurs in 6% of male and identification of one candidate gene that shows variants in four AAA fami- 1% of female population. Recommendations for family screening, allowing lies and eight single familial AAA patients, and has not been linked to AAA timely diagnosis and treatment, depend on estimates of risk for relatives. before. This study investigated risk for relatives and clinical risk profiles for familial Supported by Stichting Lijf en Leven. AAA. Methods: Family histories of 568 AAA patients were classified as fa- PM05.02 milial AAA when at least one first-degree relative was reported with an aor- Plasma miRNA-208b and miRNA-499 as biomarkers of acute tic aneurysm. Multivariable regression analysis was performed to identify myocardial infarction clinical characteristics discriminating familial from sporadic AAA. Results: K. Agianitopoulos1, P. Pavlopoulou1, K. Tsamis2, K. Bampali1, D. Babalis2, K. Lamnissou1; Familial AAA was reported in 23% of patients: 27% of female and 22% of 1Dept of Genetics & Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, male AAA patients. Female AAA patients had more affected relatives than Greece, 2Dept of Cardiology, „KAT“ General Hospital, Athens, Greece. male AAA patients (9.0% versus 5.9%, p = .022). Risk was increased 2 to 4 fold for relatives of male and female patients respectively. In familial AAA risk for relatives was increased 6 to 15 fold. Familial AAA was more frequent Introduction: Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is a leading cause of morbi- in young patients, without diabetes and hypertension. dity and mortality worldwide. Early and correct diagnosis might afford great Conclusions: Risk for relatives is much higher in familial benefits in treatment for AMI, thus the exploration of new biomarkers with AAA than in the general population. When family history is not taken into high sensitivity and specificity inE dSiaHgnGos 2is 0of1 A5M |I Gis LtoAdaSyG a OmWajo,r S gCoaOl. TReL-AN aD cc, o U unK t, | a W n iW ncrW ea. sE eS iH n G ris. kO rR emG ains and family screening is still re1co1m1-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S05
.07 Lamin A/C gene mutations underlie Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy mended. It is important that families of female AAA patients have similar with atrio-ventricular block access to screening as families of male patients, and that female relatives E. Lazzarini, I. Rigato, M. Cason, B. Bauce, E. Carturan, G. Thiene, C. Basso, K. Pilichou; are screened. University of Padua, Padua, Italy. The new insights in familial risk and family screening for AAA are impor- tant in counseling to inform AAA patients and allow their relatives to benefit from screening. Background: Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy (AC) is an inherited heart Funding: Stichting Lijf en Leven muscle disease associated with mutations in genes mainly encoding des- P S05
.05 mosomal components, however mutations in extra-desmosomal genes can Aortic dissection in a male with 1q21.1-q21.2 and 9p22.2 cause cardiomyopathies with overlapping AC features. microduplications. Case Presentation and Methods: A 76 years-old man diagnosed with bi- N. S. Karp1,2, S. Shickh1, P. Yang1,2; ventricular AC died on the waiting list for cardiac transplantation. He had 1London Health Science Centre, London, ON, Canada, 2University of Western Ontario, frequent syncopal episodes since young age, left bundle branch block and London, ON, Canada. inverted T waves in V1-V3. He was implanted with pacemaker and then with cardioverter with frequent ventricular fibrillation shocks. Echocardio- graphy exhibited a severe dilatation and hypokinesia in the right ventricle We report a male patient who developed an aortic dissection at the age of while the left ventricle was apparently normal. Genetic screening was per- 47. He is tall with the height of 191cm and weight of 83.5 kg, macrocephalic formed by direct sequencing for all major desmosomal encoding genes on and normoteloric. He had mild joint hyperflexibility and a high arched pa- a Applied Biosystems ABI310 genetic sequencer and subsequently whole late. He did not meet diagnostic criteria for Marfan syndrome. He reporAteCd- exome sequencing (WES) using TruSeq technology on a Illumina HiSeq2000 hTAav2i,n CgB dS,e CvOelLo3pAm1e, CnOtaLl 5dAe1la, yC OgLro5wA2in, FgB uNp1 a, nFdB Nle2a, rFnLiNngA ,d MifEfiDcu1l2ti, eMs YaHt 1s1ch, SoKoIl., was carried out. HSLeC t2eAs1te0d, SnMeAgaDt3iv, eT GfoFrB a2n, T aGoFrBtiRc 1a naeur TyGsmFB pRa2nel of 16 genes including Results: Genetic screening was unable to detect genetic variations in des- mosomal genes associated with the disease. WES identified a heterozygous nd . point mutation c.949G>A, p. E317
K in the lamin A/C gene (LMNA). This ge- An Affymetrix CytoScan HD microarray analysis showed an 1.935 Mb mi- netic variant, absent in the 1000 Genomes and Exome Variant Server data- croduplication 1q21.1- q21.2 {arr[hg19] 1q21.1q21.2(145,895,746-147- sets, has been previously associated with autosomal dominant Dilated Car- ,830,830)x3}, and another 0.951 Mb microduplication in 9p22.2 region diomyopathy and atrio-ventricular block. The mutation was also detected in {arr[hg19] 9p22.2(17,494,208-18,444,711)x3}. The 1q21.1-q21.2 microdu- the proband`s daughter and son, who exhibited a AC-like pattern. plication was maternal in origin. The brother and the niece also had 1q21.1- Conclusion: This study highlights that LMNA gene mutations can mimic the q21.2 microduplication. The father was not available for genetic testing. AC phenotype but always accompanied with atrio-ventricular block. A com- 1q21.1 microduplication is associated with increased risk for developmen- prehensive genetic test enables a clear differential diagnosis in cardiomyo- tal delay, autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, congenital heart disease, pathies. macrocephaly, tall stature and obesity. A recent study suggested that 1q21.1 PM05.08 duplication may cause abnormalities of connective tissue origin, such as Co-inheritance of mutations associated with Arrhythmogenic and cysts, varicose veins, carpal tunnel syndrome and congenital hip dysplasia. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: how does it affect the phenotype? Significance of 9p22.2 duplication remains unknown. M. De Bortoli1, B. Bauce2, C. Calore2, A. Lorenzon1, M. Calore1, G. Poloni1, E. Mazzotti2, I. To date aortic dissection has not been reported in patients with Rigato2, L. Daliento2, C. Basso2, G. Thiene2, P. Melacini2, D. Corrado2, A. Rampazzo1; 1q21.1microduplication. We suggest that aortic dissection might be a pos- 1Department of Biology, Padua, Italy, 2Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular sible complication of 1q21.1-q21.2 duplication and that patients carrying Sciences, Padua, Italy. the duplication may need to undergo regular cardiac surveillance. PM05.06 Absence of connective tissue remodeling in Smad3 mutant mice leads Background: Arrhythmogenic (ACM) and Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy to aggressive and accelerated aneurysmal growth through disturbed (HCM) are genetically and phenotypically distinct diseases of the myocar- downstream TGFβ signaling dium, showing an autosomal-dominant inheritance with incomplete pene- I. van der Pluijm, N. van Vliet, J. Robertus, R. Yanto, P. van Heijningen, B. van Thiel, M. trance and variable expressivity. They are the most common causes of sud- Vermeij, L. Buijs-Offerman, R. Kanaar, A. Bertoli-Avella, J. Essers; den cardiac death in the young and athletes. Here we report 2 families with Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. digenic inheritance of ACM and HCM mutations. Methods and Results: The ACM probands of two families (A+B) were screened for mutations in 5 ACM genes (PK P2
, DSP,DSG2, DS C2
, JUP and Aneurysm-osteoarthritis syndrome (AOS) is an autosomal dominant con- CTNNA3). Moreover genetic analysis of the 2 major HCM genes (MYH7 and dition characterized by aortic aneurysms and early-onset osteoarthritis, MYBP C3
) was performed in 2 HCM patients, one for each family. In family caused by mutations in the SMAD3 gene. Smad3 is a part of the A, 5 patients resulted to be double heterozygotes for a missense mutation key transcription factor complex Smad2/3/4, essential for TGFβ-activ-/a-ted (p.Met1601Ile) in DSP gene and a frameshift mutation (p.F305PfsX27) in downstream transcription of CTGF, MMPs, SMAD7 and others. Smad3 mice MYBP C3
 gene. The genetic analysis in Family B has identified the presence show aneurysmal development at young age, but the underlying mechanism in 1 patient of an in frame deletion (p.del765L) in CTTNA3 gene and a mis- is unknown. -/- sense mutation (p.Met877Ile) in MYH7 gene. Five single ACM and 7 single Echocardiograms of cross-sectional studies in Smad3 mice showed a HCM mutation carriers were also found. Clinical evaluation of the 6 double significant increase in diameter of root and ascending aorta (18-20%), and a heterozygotes has revealed a phenotypic heterogeneity with 1 asympto- significant increase in length (16-20%) already at age 6 weeks, -b/-ut no matic case, 3 patients affected with ACM, 1 with HCM and 1 showing both difference in aortic distensibility. Importantly, 50% of Smad3 mice died phenotypes. suddenly between 6 and 24 weeks of age. Successive macroscopic analysis Conclusions: This is the first time that patients showing co-inheritance of showed up to a 5-fold increase in ascending aortic diameter. We next perfor- ACM and HCM mutations are reported. The genotype-phenotype correlation med longitudinal studies, showing a steep increase of aneurysmal growth in these rare patients indicates that such digenic inheritance is associated within only 6 weeks. Since the aneurysmatic aortic wall remained translu- with heterogeneous phenotypes, probably due to the incomplete penetran- cent, this was indicative for the absence of large scale extracellular matrix ce and variable expressivity of both mutations. remodelin-/g- or collagen deposition. Indeed, immunohistochemical analysis P S05
.09 of Smad3 aortic walls showed A founder PK P2
 gene deletion in arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy no increase in extracellular matrix accumulation, no excessive collagen or G. Occhi1, B. Bauce2, D. Regazzo3, M. De Bortoli1, M. Calore1, G. Poloni1, E. Lazzarini2, E. CTGF s-t/a- ining, nor loss of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Hoorntje4, I. Rigato2, E. Mazzotti2, L. Daliento2, G. Thiene2, C. Basso2, J. van Tintelen4, D. Smad3 animals recapitulate the aortic phenotype observed in patients Corrado2, A. Rampazzo1, A. Lorenzon1; with SMAD3 mutations. Smad3 deficiency leads to imbalanced activation of 1Department of Biology, Padua, Italy, 2Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, and Vascular Sciences, Padua, Italy, 3Endocrinology Unit, Department of Medicine DIMED, Padua, downstream genes such as Smad6/7 and no activation of CTGF and MMPs Italy, 4Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. in VSMCs. Initial minor dissections in the medial layers of the aortic wall trigger an extensive immune response and sudden acceleration of aneurysm formation, leading to rupture of Background - Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy (ACM) is an inherited heart the aortic wall. muscle disease characterized clinically by ventricular arrhythmias and in- 112 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO crT eaL sA edN rD isk, oU f K su | d W denW deW at. hE , S anH dG p. aO thR olG ogically by fibro-fatty replacementABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of the myocardium. Conventional genetic testing of genes encoding desmo- disease in this family (i.e. SNP genotyping, haplotype analysis, whole-exome somal components results in a diagnostic yield of about 50% of ACM pro- and whole-genome sequencing). We have identified candidate genomic bands. regions shared among affected individuals, however the precise causative Aim - To search for large deletions/duplications in desmosomal genes in a mutation remains elusive. To assist in identifying the causative factor and to large cohort of ACM index cases. study the underlying disease mechanisms, we have used a novel inducible Methods and Results - Genetic screening for large deletions/duplications pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technique to generate disease specific CMs that in 5 desmosomal genes was carried out in 68 unrelated index patients dia- were derived from B-lymphocytes of ARVC patients. Human iPSC lines were gnosed affected with ACM according to revised 2010 Task Force criteria, successfully developed by using episomal plasmid vectors to over express and resulting negative for pathogenic point mutations in the same genes. reprogramming factors. CMs were then differentiated from iPSC by modu- Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) experiments were performed on an ABI lating Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Currently, gene expression analyses with PRISM 7900HT Sequence Detector by using at least three different sets of RNAseq from RNA isolated from iPSC derived CMs that were generated from primer pairs located within exons from the proximal to the distal part of affected and healthy control samples are underway. The iPSC technique used each gene. In 3 patients (4.4%) we identified a plakophilin-2 (PK P2
) copy in this project may help identify the specific mutation that causes this spe- number reduction when compared to control samples thus suggesting a lar- cific form of ARVC, enabling life-saving intervention in at-risk individuals. ge heterozygous gene deletion. The PK P2
 gene deletion was confirmed by Additionally, this technique offers a potential pathway for identifying causal Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification with the SALSA MLPA kit variation in diseases in which coding-sequence changes are not obvious.  P168
 (MRC-Holland). Haplotype analysis revealed a conserved haplotype PM05.12 among the PK P2
 mutation carriers, strongly indicating a common founder. Bioinformatics analysis of the genomic candidate markers for Conclusions - Among desmosomal genes, only PK P2
 shows large deletions diagnostic panel of atherosclerosis of the entire coding region. These findings support the importance of expan- E. Derevyanchuk, E. Butenko, D. Potemkin, D. Romanov, T. Shkurat; ding genetic testing in ACM patients with inclusion of PK P2
 large deletion Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. analysis when the results of conventional sequencing are negative. PM05.10 A novel locus on chromosome 19p13.3 linked to arrhythmogenic Despite the significant achievements in the field of medicine and biology, cardiomyopathy morbidity and mortality from atherosclerotic lesions remain at a high level, G. Poloni1, I. Li Mura1, B. Bauce2, M. Calore1, E. Mazzotti2, I. Rigato2, A. Lorenzon1, M. De and the range of adequate antiatherosclerotic therapy goals is still limited Bortoli1, L. Daliento2, C. Basso2, D. Corrado2, G. Thiene2, A. Rampazzo1; due to the lack of validated biomarkers. Therefore, the main goal of our re- 1Department of Biology, Padua, Italy, 2Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, and Vascular search is the development of a new reliable genomic indicators panel for Sciences, Padua, Italy. early, pre-clinical diagnostics of possible future disease. We performed a bioinformatics analysis of potential candidate genes direct- ly or indirectly involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. The analyzed BACKGROUND: genes list included lipid metabolism, matrix metalloproteinases, folate cycle, Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is an autosomal dominant myocar- oxidative stress genes and some others. The motifs search was implemented dial disorder at risk of sudden death in the young and athletes. Thirteen cau- using bioinformatics package MEME Suite. sative genes have been found, with a central role of the desmosomal genes. In the investigated genes vicinity we detected 670 motifs, homologous pre- Since causative mutations in ACM genes have been detected in about 50% of mi-RNA, and 4300 motifs, homologous mature mi-RNA. The average mi-RNA probands, additional disease genes remain to be identified. distribution density in genomic sites ranged from 0 to 2.2 pre-mi-RNA per METHODS and RESULTS: 1000 p.n. and mature mi-RNA - from 0 to 6.9 per 1000 p.n. Inside the inve- In a large ACM family, where the proband resulted negative for mutation stigated genes we identified 433 motifs, homologous pre-mi-RNA, and 2780 screening of desmosomal genes, genome-wide linkage analysis highligh- motifs, homologous mature mi-RNA. The average motifs distribution densi- ted a shared region of 2 Mb on chromosome 19p13.3 (multipoint LOD ty amounted to 0.4 per 1000 p.n. for pre-mi-RNA and 3.3 per 1000 p.n. for score=3.85). CNV analysis was carried out in order to exclude the presence mature mi-RNA. The most frequently encountered were motifs, homologous of structural variations. Whole exome sequencing was performed in 4 affec- mmu-mir-466i, hsa-mir-5096, hsa-mir-1273g, ppy-mir-1268 and hsa-mir- ted patients, through two different platforms (HiSeq2000 Illumina, Ion Tor- 619. According to the MirTarBase data we established that hsa-miR-138-5p rent) at a mean coverage of 80X. Sequencing data didn’t reveal the presence is the multigene regulator for the studied genes groups. of any novel variant shared by the 4 subjects, neither into the linkage region The obtained results could be used to develop atherosclerosis diagnostic nor in the rest of the exome. Exons with insufficient reads (≤15 depth) of the panel. 13 ACM genes and of the genes inside the critical region were further evalu- This research was supported by the Ministry of Education and Science ated by Sanger sequencing but no additional coding mutations were found. of Russia project N6.703.2014/K. Analytical work was carried out on the Only a novel intronic variant (c.766+8C>A) in TMEM43 gene was identified. equipment of Center for collective use of Southern Federal University „High The segregation of this variant among all the available family members ex- Technology“, grant RFMEFI59414X0002. cludes an association with the disease phenotype. P S05
.13 CONCLUSION: Whole exome sequencing identifies a novel germline mutation in In this ACM family showing no mutations in known ACM genes segregating calcium ion channel; associated with atrial fibrillation. with the disease phenotype, a novel locus was mapped on chromosome G. Ahlberg1, I. E. Christophersen1, L. Refsgaard1, J. B. Nielsen1, S. Haunso1, A. Holst1, J. 19p13.3 and a critical region of 2 Mb was defined. Hastrup-Svendsen2, M. S. Olesen1; P S05
.11 1Danish Arrhythmia Research Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Rigshospitalet - Inducible pluripotent stem cell technology as a tool to study Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC) in a Maritime family P. CHEN1, D. Gaston1, A. Orr2, S. Dyack3,4,5, C. M. McMaster6, M. Gardner4, K. Bedard1; Introduction - AF is the most prevalent sustained cardiac arrhythmia, re- 1Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 2Department of sponsible for considerable morbidity and mortality. Due to the complex Ophthalmology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 3Department of Pediatrics, pathophysiology of AF the underlying mechanisms are incompletely under- Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 4Department of Medicine, Dalhousie stood. In the few cases of familiar form of AF, where the causative mutation University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 5Maritime Medical Genetics Service, IWK Health Centre, has been found, it has been identified in genes encoding ion-channels invol- Halifax, NS, Canada, 6Department of Pharmacology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, ved in sodium or potassium handling. Nevertheless in the majority of cases Canada. with familiar forms of AF the cause is still unknown. Methods and Results - Whole exome sequencing was performed on seven individuals from a Danish family, presumably with a highly penetrable mo- ARVC is an inheritable disease featuring potentially lethal arrhymias and nogenetic form of AF. Quality control showed that the whole exome could be heart failure characterized pathologically by fibrofatty replacement of car- investigated sufficiently. diaomyocytes (CMs). We have ascertained a large Maritime family segrega- Analysis, following Broad institute current best practices, revealed 2 novel ting a form of ARVC that is mutation-negative for all genes currently known variants (not found in over 60,000 controls, of which 2000 Danish). Intere- to cause ARVC, suggesting that a novel variant must be responsible. Using stingly one of the novel mutations was found in a calcium ion channel. In sili- DNA derived from formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tissue, as well as from co predictions supported the pathogenic potential of this variant, predicted blood or saliva of known carriers and relatives, we have performed exten- sive genetic investigation to idenEtifSyH thGe n2o0ve1l 5m u| tGatLioAn SreGspOonWsi,b SleC foOr TthLeA NdDam, UagKin g| Win 7W/8W pr.EedSicHtiGon. OtoRolGs. 113 Discussion - In this study a calcium ion channel variant that co-segregatedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM05.16 Molecular autopsy of sudden cardiac death with structurally normal fully with AF in a large family was identified as the potential monogenetic heart: the circumstances of death and ECG tracings can address the cause of AF. This study suggests a previously undescribed pathophysiologi- final diagnosis cal pathway for AF. M. Cason, F. Migliore, S. Rizzo, E. Carturan, E. Bertaglia, K. Pilichou, G. Thiene, C. Basso; PM05.14 Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of Padua, Padova, Italy. Next-generation sequencing of AVNRT patients identifies high prevalence of mutations in genes involved in sodium and calcium handling L. Andreasen, P. Weeke, M. S. Olesen; Background. Sudden cardiac death with normal heart can occur in the set- University Hospital of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, Department of Cardiology, ting of inherited ion channel diseases. Among these, Brugada syndrome Laboratory of Molecular, Copenhagen O, Denmark. (BrS) is characterized by non-ischemic ST segment elevation associated with PR prolongation and right bundle branch block, whereas Lenégre di- sease is characterized by atrio-ventricular block with progressive structural Atrioventricular nodal re-entry tachycardia (AVNRT) is the most common changes of the conduction system. In these arrhythmic syndromes, more paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, affecting women twice as fre- than 1300 nucleotide variations has been identified in SCN5A gene. quently as men, often before turning 40 years. Familial clustering, early Methods & Results. A 35-years old asymptomatic male died suddenly du- onset of symptoms, and lack of structural anomaly indicate involvement of ring sleep. Post-mortem examination excluded extracardiac causes of sud- genetic factors in the development of AVNRT. However, the field is poorly den death as well as the absence of structural abnormalities in the working investigated, and a great amount of work is to be done, in order to reveal the myocardium. Personal clinical history re-assessment revealed a ‘coved-type’ plausible genetic causes. ST segment elevation on right precordial leads with PQ prolongation (220 We hypothesized that AVNRT patients have a high prevalence of mutations msec) in a patient’s ECG performed during blood donation, compatible in 38 genes potentially involved in arrhythmic diseases and highly expressed with BrS. Detailed conduction system investigation by serial section tech- in the heart. nique showed severe fibrosis of the bifurcating His and proximal bundles Next-generation sequencing of 38 genes previously associated with car- with sclerotic interruption of the left bundle branch. Genetic screening of diac arrhythmia and highly expressed in the atrioventricular conduction SCN5A (NM. 198056.2) gene identified a mutation in exon 22 (c.3673 G>A axis was applied to the DNA profile of 99 AVNRT patients using Haloplex ,  E1225
K), defined as “likely to be pathogenic” by in silico tools, and pre- target enrichment system and the results were verified using an Illumina viously linked to BrS phenotype with atrio-ventricular block. Cascade gene- next-generation sequencing amplicon-based platform, the TruSeq Custom tic screening detected 5 additional family mutation carriers, and provoked Amplicon Kit. electrical stimulation unmasked ECG abnormalities in 2 of them. In total, we found 28 mutations in 11 genes; 25 missense mutations, two Conclusion. Lenégre disease and BrS are overlapping clinical entities, synonymous, and one in-frame mutation. Twelve of these were novel. The «bookends» in a continuum of sodium current deficiency, accounting for a main part of these mutations are in genes responsible for sodium and calci- structural cardiomyopathy of the specialized conducting tissue occurring in um handling, such as SCN5A, SCN10A, the CACNA genes, AT P2
A2 encoding the setting of an otherwise normal heart. the SERCA pump, and RYR2, indicating that AVNRT might be a sodium- and P S05
.17 calcium-channel disease like Brugada Syndrome as opposed to atrial fibril- Functional analysis of a coding variant in Z C3
H C1
 at 7q32.3 associated lation which in addition has a potassium channel affection. This is, to our with protection against coronary artery disease knowledge, the first study to report a genetic component in AVNRT. T. Linseman, S. Soubeyrand, M. Nikpay, P. Lau, A. Turner, A. Martinuk, R. McPherson; P S05
.15 University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada. The first SCN5A founder mutation in a Belgian cohort of Brugada syndrome patients D. Proost1, C. Claes1, T. Robyns2, P. Koopman3, R. Willems2, G. Mortier1, C. Vrints4, B. Genetic and environmental factors are believed to contribuZteC 3eHquCa1lly to the Loeys1, L. Van Laer1, J. Saenen4; risk of coronary artery disease (CAD). The CARDIoGRAM Consortium first 1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University identified a coding variant, rs11556924, (MAF, 0.3-818) in the gene as- of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of sociated with protection against CAD (p= 9.8x10 ; OR= 0.90). ThZeC a3mHiCn1o Cardiovascular Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, KU Leuven and Leuven University Hospital, acid change (Arg363His) is in a conserved region of the gene and is predic- Leuven, Belgium, 3Heart Center Hasselt, Jessa Hospital, Hasselt, Belgium, 4Department of ted to have functional effects (Polyphen-2). The gene product of , Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium. Nuclear Interaction Partner of ALK (NIPA), is a regulator of cellular prolife- ration and is an essential component of an SCF-type  E3
 ligase complex. This complex catalyses the ubiquitinationZ Co3fH pCr1oteins (such as cyclin B1) targe- Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a heritable primary electrical disorder with ty- ting them for proteasomal degradation. We have investigated the functional pical ECG alterations accounting for up to 20% of sudden cardiac death in effects of this amino acid change in . Here we demonstrate a) allele young patients (<45 years) without apparent structural cardiac abnorma- specific differences in mRNA expression in whole blood, b) differential ERK lities. BrS is genetically heterogeneous and so far a dozen causative genes dependent phosphorylation of Arg363 vs His363, c) a small but reproducib- have been identified, of which SCN5A is the predominant gene. At present a le decrease in mobility of the risk variant, Arg363 by Fluorescence Recovery causal mutation is identified in about 20-30% of BrS patients. SCN5A enco- After Photobleaching (FRAP), that may reflect differences in their steady des a sodium channel and loss of function mutations will lead to a decreased state interaction with nuclear partners. Additional studies are underway to sodium inward current. In the Netherlands, an SCN5A founder mutation further characterize effects on NIPA structure and activity, relevant to car- (p.1795insAsp) was previously described, which gives rise to an overlap dioprotection. syndrome between BrS, Long QT syndrome and cardiac conduction defects Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada Grant (T7268) (Postema et al., 2009). PM05.18 Here, we present 23 BrS patients of 17 different Belgian families carrying Is lipoma-preferred partner (LPP) a cause of cardiac malformations the identical c.4813+6_4813+7insGGGT mutation in SCN5A. This mutation, with reduced penetrance? previously described in two families of Western European descent, creates D. A. Mordaunt1, L. Fitzgerald1, B. Coppin2, J. Nicholl1, C. P. Barnett1; a cryptic splice site in exon 27 leading to complete loss of function of the 1Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital/SA Pathology, North Adelaide, Australia, 2Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, Australia. sodium channel (Hong et al., 2005; Rossenbacker et al., 2005). We identified a shared haplotype consisting of seven genetic markers spanning a region of 5.2 Mb. Based on the haplotype size, we estimate that the common ancestor There are two published reports of variants in LPP (OMIM #600700) in as- of these families lived approximately 300 years ago. The clinical spectrum of sociation with isolated conotruncal defects and congenital heart disease in mutation carrying individuals ranges from asymptomatic to full blown BrS. VACTERL association. Variants have included deletions and missense muta- In this cohort, a relatively low number of sudden cardiac death has been tions. Here we report a child with transposition of the great arteries (TGA) observed. and coarctation of the aorta (CoA) with a deletion of multiple exons of LPP. As such, we have identified the first Belgian BrS founder mutation. These We discuss the evidence for the role of LPP in the causation of cardiac mal- families will be instrumental for the future identification of BrS phenotype formations. modifying genes. The 2 ½-year-old patient was born at 37 weeks gestation. TGA and CoA were diagnosed on day 1 and surgically corrected shortly after. Developmental 114 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOmTileLsAtoNneDs ,w UerKe n| oWrmWal Wan.dE tShHe cGhi.lOd RanGd her mother have no dysmorphicABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index features. Array CGH (BlueGnome Cytochip oligo ISCA 4080-5 8x60k array) mutations, 80% which were founder mutations. Some were more common identified a 205kb interstitial deletion involving exons 2-4 of LPP (#600700) in specific geographic regions. All mutation carriers had variability in clini- in the child. The deletion was inherited from her unaffected mother. cal presentation of the arrhythmias (no symptoms to sudden death). In 6 LPP has been linked to cell-cell adhesion, cell motility and transcriptional families, index patients presented with arrhythmias and deafness, (Jervell regulation however a mechanistic link between LPP function and cardiac Lange and Nielsen syndrome JLNs), with mutations in both alleles of the embryogenesis has not yet been established. We have performed a compre- KCNQ1 gene. The proportion of JLNS among LQTs was higher than most po- hensive review of mutation databases (DECIPHER, ISCA and DGV) for other pulation studies. We identified novel, recurrent and also founder mutations LPP deletions and identified 21 patients and 9 controls with deletions va- in the genes involved in cardiac function. rying from large (12.6 Mb) deletions to small exonic and intronic (5.2 Kb) P S05
.21 deletions. Three of these individuals were reported to have cardiac malfor- Genetic investigation of exons of 100 heart genes in a forensic setting mations. S. L. Christiansen1, C. L. Hertz1, L. Ferrero-Miliani1, M. Dahl2, P. Weeke3, C. T. Have4, O. Our case provides an additional case of LPP deletion associated with conge- B. Pedersen4, T. Hansen4,5, N. Grarup4, G. L. Ottesen6, R. Frank-Hansen1, H. Bundgaard7, N. nital heart disease raising the possibility that rare loss-of-function variants Morling1; of LPP may be associated with cardiac, in particular, conotruncal malforma- 1Section of Forensic Genetics, Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of tions, with reduced penetrance. Clinical Biochemistry, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, University of P S05
.19 Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3The Department of Cardiology, Laboratory of A microRNA target site in SHOX2 associates with cardiac arrhythmia Molecular Cardiology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, University of S. Hoffmann1,2, S. Clauss3,4, I. M. Berger5, B. Weiß1, A. Montalbano1, R. Roeth1, M. Bucher1, Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic I. Klier3, H. Seitz6, E. Schulze-Bahr7, H. A. Katus8,2, F. Flachsbart9, A. Nebel9, W. Rottbauer5, Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, S. Kääb3,4, S. Just5, G. A. Rappold1; Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2DZHK (German Centre for Odense, Denmark, 6Section of Forensic Pathology, Department of Forensic Medicine, Cardiovascular Research), Heidelberg/Mannheim, Germany, 3Department of Medicine Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, I, Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, 4DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Denmark, 7The Unit for Inherited Cardiac Diseases, The Heart Centre, Copenhagen Research), Munich, Germany, 5Department of Internal Medicine II, University of University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, Montpellier, France, 7Institute for Introduction: Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is responsible for a large Genetics of Heart Diseases, Münster, Germany, 8Department of Internal Medicine III, proportion of sudden, unexpected deaths in young individuals (<50 Universityhospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 9Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel, Germany. years). In forensics, one-third of the cases remain unexplained after autopsy. In the remaining two-thirds, structural cardiac abnormalities are found, although often unspecific and without a clear cause of death. Cardiac arrhythmias contribute significantly to cardiovascular morbidity Sudden deaths are frequently suspected to be caused by inherited car- and mortality. Developing approaches towards disease prediction and treat- diac diseases. Implementation of genetic investigations in forensic me- ment of heart rhythm disorders is therefore an important topic in healthy dicine may increase the diagnostic rate in cases of sudden death in the aging. Although environmental factors play an important role in the patho- young. The purpose of the study was to explore the utility of genetic genesis of cardiac arrhythmias, multiple studies have demonstrated that testing using next-generation sequencing (NGS) by investigating the there is also a strong genetic component. Molecular pathways involving frequency of pathogenic variants in 100 genes associated with cardiac the homeoSdHoOmXa2in transcription factor Shox2 control the development and diseases in a cohort of suspected SCD victims. Methods: Genetic inve- function of the primary cardiac pacemaker. Genotyping untranslated regi- stigation of 133 unrelated, young SCD victims with (1) sudden unex- ons of the p gene in 378 arrhythmia patients and 1870 control indivi- plained death (SUD), or (2) non-diagnostic structural cardiac abnor- duals demonstrated a significant association between a 3’UTR variant and malities without cause of death, or (3) structural cardiac abnormali- the disease ( =0.00515, OR=2.373). Patients with the 3´UTR variant clini- ties diagnosed as cardiomyopathy, was performed. Using NGS, all exons cally presented significantly longer PR intervals. Mechanistically, this vari- and UTR regions of 100 genes associated with inherited cardiomyo- ant creates a novel functional microRNA binding site. Circulating microRNA pathies and cardiac channelopathies were investigated. Results: The lepvels in plasma were found to be significantly altered in all testable patients results show that 45% of SUD cases, 35% of cases with non-diagnostic carrying the 3’UTR variant, compared to patients with the wild typeS HalOleXl2e structural cardiac abnormalities and 48% of cases with cardiomyo- ( =0.0095). pathy had likely pathogenic variants in one or more disease-related These results provide direct evidence that a genetic variant in the genes. Conclusion: Screening by NGS of these 100 genes revealed that gene is associated with cardiac arrhythmias and point to amicroRNA as po- between one-third and half of the suspected SCD victims had likely pa- tential biomarker and therapeutic target in this disease. thogenic genetic variants. Large-scale genetic testing seems a powerful Funding: DFG [RA 380/14-2], DZHK (Deutsches Zentrum für Herz-Kreislauf- supplementary tool in forensic investigations in sudden death cases Forschung – German Centre for Cardiovascular Research) and increases the diagnostic efficiency. PM05.20 Genetic Analysis of Cardiac Arrhythmias in Patients from Saudi Arabia PM05.22 J. Al-Aama1,2, A. Bdeir1, S. Alghamdi3, K. Dagriri4, A. Al-Qarawi1; 11Princess Al Jawhara Albrahim Center of Excellence in Research of Hereditary Study of the consequences of BAG3 molecular variants associated with Disorders, King Abdulaz, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 2Department of Genetic Medicine, human dilated cardiomyopathy Faculty of Medicine , King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 3Department of A. Korniat1, T. Hery1, S. Westphal2, E. Villard1; Cardiology, NGH, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Prince Sultan Cardiac Center, Riyadh, Saudi 1INSERM/UPMC UMRS 1166, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Department of Arabia. Internal Medicine 2, University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany. Hereditary arrhythmias are hereditary due to mutations in genes respon- Introduction: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a rare pathology defined by sible for normal cardiac rhythm generation and propagation. These genes left ventricular dilatation anBdA rGed3ucBeCdL e2j-eacstsioocni afrtaedct iaotnh,a lneoagdeinnge t3o heart fai- include KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A, RYR2, CASQ2. Mutation detection leads lure and often heart transplantation. We identified DCM-causing dominant to proper clinical diagnosis, therapy, behavioral management, and family heterozygous mutations in ( ). BAG3 is screening. This may decrease the incidence of sudden cardiac death. a cytoprotecBtiAvGe 3co-chaperone involved in protein homeostasis, and plays a Our center took a pioneering initiative to set up a comprehensive cardiac ar- role in clearance of proteotoxic misfolded, aggregated, or altered proteins. rhythmia genetic research and diagnostic laboratory to provide specialized DeleBteArGio3us mutations are located in the BAG domain, which interacts cardiogenetic clinical services in Saudi Arabia and neighboring countries with the chaperone Hsp70 family (heat shock protein 70). We hypothesized and to create a database of local mutations to develop a “genomic chip” to be that mutations induce cardiomyocyte dysfunction due to impaired cel- used in routine screening for cardiac arrhythmia patients in these countries. lular proteostasis. Our ultimate goal is to discover new genes in arrhythmia pathology, which Methods/Results: We studied biochemical and cellular effects of BAG do- will lead to development of novel gene targeted pharmacotherapy for car- main mutations in heterologous cell models with transient overexpression diac arrhythmia. Presently, we receive referrals from all over the Kingdom of GFP-BAG3 chimeric proteins, or in the zebramfuitsh model organism. Rat and neighboring countries. neonatal cardiomyocytes overexpressing BAG3 displayed disorganized Over 3 years, 46 families were assessed, and genetic analysis was perfor- sarcomeres, BAG3-positive cytoplasmic aggregates, and atrophy, resulting med in our lab. Arrhythmogenic mutations were found in 29 index patients in cell death. Using GST pmuutll-down and co-immunoprecipitation, we demon- (63%). Cascade screening of famE ilS y H mG em 2 be0 r1 s 5 id e| nG tiL fieA dS 1G 76O rW ela, t S ivC esO wT itL hA NsDtr,a tUedK a| WlosWs oWf B.EASG3HG-H.OspR7G0 interaction, indicating strong struc1tu1r5alABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index BAG3 effects of mutations and potential impairment of HS P70
-dependent -003-2014, LD14073, IGA NT13770.to M.M. and IKEM 00023001 to V.M. proteostasis. Accordingly, using heat-shock induced transient denaturation P S05
.25 of luciferase reporter mimicking proteotoxic stress,m wute showed decreasewdt Functional analysis of the 9p21 coronary artery disease-associated protein refolding in HEK cells transfected with BAG3 compared to BAG3 . locus using isogenic cell lines generated by genome editing Finally, zebrafish microinjected with mutant BcDAGN3A developed pericardial D. G. McVey1, V. Codd1, D. Lodwick1, N. Samani1,2, T. R. Webb1; edema mimicking cardiac dysfunction. 1Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Conclusion: Our results strongly suggest that mutants fail to bind to Kingdom, 2National Institute for Health Research Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical HS P70
, blunting HS P70
-dependent response to proteotoxic stress. Such Research Unit, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, United Kingdom. functional alteration leads to protein aggregation, cardiomyocyte loss and probably cardiac insufficiency. It reveals a new putative DCM pathological mechanism. Introduction: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified Acknowledgement: This research was supported by a grant from: German- multiple loci associated with coronary artery disease, the most significant French ANR „Insight-DCM“, Conny Maeva charitable fundation, EU-F P7
 Bes- of which is located on chromosome 9p21. tAgeing. Harismendy et al (Nature, 2011) suggest that the causal variants at this locus are two SNPs that disrupt STAT1 transcription factor binding to an P S05
.23 enhancer element. This may therefore result in altered gene expression of TTN truncating mutations are a major cause of dilated and nearby protein and RNA genes. Here, we investigated this hypothesis by uti- noncompaction cardiomyopathy H. Bruggenwirth1, J. van Waning1, M. van Tienhoven1, I. de Graaf - van de Laar1, K. lising genome editing to produce isogenic cell lines that differ at only the Caliskan2, D. Majoor - Krakauer1, M. van Slegtenhorst1; two SNPs of interest. This allows any functional effects of these variants, in 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, response to inflammatory signalling, to be determined. 2Department of Cardiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Methods: Genome editing by recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) was used to specifically alter the genotype of the two SNPs in HeLa- S3
 cells, with all other variants remaining constant. Heterozygous lines were derived Cardiomyopathies are characterized by extreme genetic and clinical hetero- from the homozygous-protective parental line. geneity, with >50 causative genes known to date. With Sanger sequencing, Genotype-specific variation in STAT1 binding was assessed following in about 45% of the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients a patho- interferon-γ treatment using chromatin immunoprecipitation and quanti- genic mutation was identified, whereas only 15-20% of the dilated cardio- tative PCR (ChIP-qPCR). Local gene expression of treated cells was also in- myopathy (DCMT)T aNnd noncompaction cardiomyopathy (NCCM) cases were vestigated using qPCR. solved. Nowadays we make use oTf TaN targeted NGS panel (48 genes) including Results: ChIP-qPCR revealed a reduction in STAT1 binding by approximately the Titin gene ( ), the largest known human protein that plays a central 50% in cells heterozygous for the risk alleles compared to the homozygous role in sarcomere organization. truncating mutations have been found non-risk control. However, no difference in gene expression of CDKN2A, CD- to be a major cause of DCM, but these type of mutations have not frequently KN2B and several ANRIL transcripts was observed. Analysis of additional been reported in NCCM or HCM. local genes is on-going. Sixty-seven NCCM patients, 84 DCM patients and 150 HCM patients were te- Discussion: The observed reduction in STAT1 binding suggests that these sted with a NGS targeted sequencing approach, including the largest isoform SNPs are functional, but the absence of a gene expression difference indi- of TTN (NM_001267550.1).Twelve DCM patients (~14%) and 9 NCCM pa- cates that other functional variants in the region may be required to contri- tients (~13%) showed a truncating mutation in exons encoding the A-band bute to disease. of TTN (exons 259-359), whereas no mutations were detecteedt ainl. HCM pati- PM05.26 ents in this region. This A-band of Titin was recently reported to contain the A novel de novo TFA P2
B mutation in a sporadic patient with Char majority of truncating mutations in DCM patients (Roberts Sci Transl syndrome Med. 2015,14;7; 270). M. Y. Alp, A. Yeşilyurt, F. Alpaslan Pınarlı; In conclusion, targeted NGS is an effective approach for cardiomyopathy dia- Dışkapı Yıldırım Beyazıt Research and Training Hospital Genetic Diagnostic Center, gnostics, resultingT TinN increased diagnostic yield for all types of carTdTioNmyo- Ankara, Turkey. pathies. For DCM patients, the majority of mutations are caused by trunca- ting mutations in . We now report that truncating mutations in also are a major cause of NCCM. Char syndrome first described by Florence Char in 1978, is a rare autosomal PM05.24 dominant disorder characterized by patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), facial Whole exome sequencing (WES) in 41 Czech families with inherited dysmorphism, and anomalies of the fifth finger. Char syndrome is caused cardiovascular diseases by mutations in TFA P2
B gene encoding a neural crest-derived transcription N. Ptakova1, L. Piherová2, A. Krebsová3, M. Kubánek3, V. Stránecký2, V. Melenovský3, J. factorthat play an important role in development, apoptosis, cell-cycle con- Kautzner3, S. Kmoch2, M. Macek Jr1, M. Macek Sr1; trol, and complex morphogenic processes. Also it is suggested that TFA P2
B 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine and FN Motol, mutations may be associated with isolated nonsydromic PDA. Here we de- Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, 1st Faculty of scribed a 4 year-old male patient associated with PDA, clinodactyly of the fifth Medicine and VFN, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Cardiology, Institute of fingers, facial dysmorphism and developmental delay. Sequence analysis of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. TFA P2
B gene revealed a single-base heterozygousc.698T>A (cDNA.867T>A, V233D) mutation in exon 4 which results in the replacement of valine by aspartic acid at codon 233. Parental mutation screening detected wild type WES facilitates genetic diagnostics of inherited cardiovascular diseases, genotype. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of V233D enables genetic stratification and may eventually foster individualized the- mutation in TFA P2
B gene associated with Char syndrome. rapies. Due to integrated cardio-genetic care, altogether 96 families with ≥ 2 P S05
.27 affected individuals were characterized and WES was carried out in a total High yield of copy number variations in individuals with complex of 41/96 families (TruSight Exome, Illumina, USA). 23/41 families suffered congenital heart disease in Saudi Arabs from dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 1/41 - non-compaction cardiomyo- N. Dzimiri, S. M. Wakil, N. P. Muiya, E. Andres, S. Hagos, H. Aldusery, M. Dasouki; pathy (LVNC), 14/41 - hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 1/41 -aryth- King Faisal Spec. Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. mogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) and 2/41 had unexplained cardiac arrest Introduction (UCA). Detected variants were confirmed by Sanger DNA sequencing and by segregation analysis. WES revealed a putative molecular genetic mecha- nism in 22/41 (64%) families. The pathogenic mutations were identified in Congenital heart diseases (CHDs) are complex cardiac disorders that mani- 12/22 (54 %) DCM, 1/1 LVNC, 13/14 (92%) HCM, 1/1 ACM and in 1/2 fa- fest in different forms, such as tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), ventricular septal miles with UCA. The most frequently mutated gene in DCM was TTN (23%) defects (VSDs), atrial septal defects (ASDs), coarctation, and may occur in and in HCM the MYH 7 (29%). In case of LVNC, the likely pathogenic variant combination with other defects. Copy number variations (CNVs) have been was identified in the OBSC, for ACM in PK P2
 and in the family with UAC in implicated in many complex disorders, including cardiovascular and cancer. SCN5A genes, respectively. Although disease genes were already identified, HMoewtheovders, the impact of such variants on congenital heart disease (CHD) ma- most mutations were novel. Our results and mutation distribution are in nifestation is not fully explained yet. accordance with other studies. Our model of integrated genetic care of pa- tients with inherited cardiovascular diseases is the first one in Czech Repu- b1li1c.6 Supported by: FNM 00064203, CZ.2.1 E6
S/3H.1G.0 02/0214052 2| ,G NLF-ACZ S1
G1-OPDWP-,3 SCOInT tLheA pNreDse, nUt sKtu |d Wy, wWe Wsel.eEcSteHd Gan.dO pRerGformed Copy Number Analysis on 50 Saudi (Arab) cases of complex CHDs, including TOFs, bicuspid aortic val-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM05.30 A loss-of-function mutation in the haptoglobin gene is associated vRee (sBuCltVs), tricuspid atresia (TCA) and subaortic membrane (SAM) disorders, with a decrease in serum haptoglobin and an increase in non-HDL to determine the possible link of the disease to changes in copy numbers. cholesterol and cardiovascular risk E. Bjornsson1,2, P. Sulem1, H. Holm1,3, A. Helgadottir1,2, H. Helgason1,2, S. Gretarsdottir1, Among the 50 individuals, 22 exhibited CNVs on four chromosomal regi- A. Oddsson1, R. P. Kristjansson1, I. Olafsson3, D. F. Gudbjartsson1,2, G. Thorgeirsson2,3, U. ons. Out of these were 16 TOFs exhibiting duplications, three of which were Thorsteinsdottir1,2, K. Stefansson1,2; linked to chromosome 17q21.31, two to 16p11.2, and one each to 2q13,, 1DeCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland. 19p13.3 and 20p12.3. Furthermore, one TOF together with three complex cases involving BAV, and SAM, Kartagener’s syndrome, exhibited deletions at 16p11.2 and 15q11.2. Interestingly, an individual case with TCA showed copy number gain at 2q13, while another with Kartagener syndrome sho- Human haptoglobin is a plasma protein which binds free hemoglobin re- wed a copy number loss at the same locus. These duplications/deletions leased by the destruction of red blood cells, thereby protecting against oxi- involved sequences of 420-1200 kbp. The qPCR verification assays on five dation. Whether serum levels of haptoglobin contribute to cardiovascular oCfo nthcelu sstiuodnied individuals confirmed the duplications and deletions found disease remains controversial. Here, through whole-genome sequencing by cytoscanning. of 2,230 Icelanders followed by imputation into 5,411 Icelanders with se- rum haptoglobin measurements, we found a rare (miPn or allele frequency Our study reveals a high yield of CNVs in CHD, mostly in the regions of chro- = 0.57%) loss-of-function mutation associated with a decrease -2i5n serum mosomes 16p11.2 and 17q21.31, which could be used clinically to identify haptoglobin levels (effect = -1.28 SD per minor allele, = 7.4x P1
 0 ). In ad- dition, this variant associated with an increase in non-HDLP c holesterol (e-5f- such patients routinely. fect = 0.18 SD per minor allele, corresponding to 0.18 mmol/l,H P= 1.2x10 ) PM05.28 and increased risk of coronary artery disease (OR = 1.26, = 0.011). This Sporadic congenital heart disease and copy number gains on mutation is a splice donor variant in the haptoglobin gene ( ) on chro- chromosome 21 mosHomPe 16q22 and represents a founder mutation in the Icelandic popu- D. L. Brown1, I. Wilson1, L. Sutcliffe1, J. O‘Sullivan2,1, B. Keavney3, J. Goodship1; lation. This signal was independent of a common copy-number variation in 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon the gene and a previously reported common SNP (rs2000999) at that Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, Manchester University, locus, previously shown to associate with haptoglobin levels. In addition to Manchester, United Kingdom. haptoglobin, these common variants were also associated with non-HDL cholesterol, demonstrating an inverse relationship betweeHn Ptheir effects on the two traits. Congenital heart disease (CHD) is 1000 times more common in people with In summary, we report a loss-of-function mutation in the gene, present Down syndrome (DS) than the general population. Complete atrioventricu- in about 1 out of 90 Icelanders, which is associated with a decrease in serum lar septal defects have the strongest association with DS, and the combi- haptoglobin levels and an increase in non-HDL cholesterol and cardiovas- nation of AVSDs and tetralogy of Fallot is almost unique to people with DS. cular risk. Our genetic results point to a role of haptoglobin in cholesterol To evaluate the hypothesis that copy number (CN) gains on chromosome metabolism. 21 are associated with sporadic CHD we analysed more than 2000 non-DS P S05
.31 case samples and 800 controls using the Illumina 660W quad array. After an Identification of rare potential CAD-causing variants in GWAS loci extended quality control pipeline, CN gains larger than 10kb called by both M. Kleinecke1, I. Brænne1, B. Reiz1, T. Strom2, H. Schunkert3, J. Erdmann1; QuantiSNP and Penn CNV algorithms were included. Cases were enriched 1Institute for Integrative and Experimental Genomics, Luebeck, Germany, 2Institute for copy number gains in DSCAM and CO L6
A1 which have been previously of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Deutsches identified as candidates for DS-related CHD. These results suggest they may Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. also have a role in sporadic, non-DS CHD. The identification of genes causing coronary artery disease (CAD) is one of P S05
.29 the most important tasks to understand the disease and to develop potential Polygenic risk for coronary artery disease is associated with cognitive new treatments. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified ability in older adults more than 50 loci associated with CAD. If common variants increases the S. P. Hagenaars, S. E. Harris, T. Clarke, L. Hall, M. Luciano, A. Fernandez-Pujals, G. risk of CAD, it is likely that rare variants within the same locus also increase Davies, C. Hayward, G. Scotland, J. M. Star, D. J. Porteous, A. M. McIntosh, I. J. Deary; the risk. Indeed, the presence of such variants may even point the GWAS University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. locus to the causal gene. Further, as rare variants are expected to have stron- ger effects, unraveling the disease mechanism might be easier. Hence, this study aims to identify rare variants in known CAD risk genes and to find Introduction: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is associated with cognitive potential causal genes in CAD GWAS loci. decrements and risk of later dementia, but it is not known if shared gene- We screened for variants- 8in a total of 82 genes close to or harboring CAD tic factors underlie this association. We tested whether polygenic risk for associated SNPs (p<5x10 ). For these candidate genes, we screened for rare CAD was associated with cognitive ability in community-dwelling cohorts of (<1%) truncating variants in a pool of 255 exome sequenced early onset MI middle-aged and older adults. patients with a positive family history. Each variant was validated by San- Materials and Methods: Individuals from Generation Scotland: Scottish Fa- ger sequencing and tested for co-segregation with CAD in respective family mily Health Study (GS:SFHS, N=9865) and from the Lothian Birth Cohorts of members. 1921 (LB C1921
, N=517) and 1936 (LB C1936
, N=1005) provided cognitive We only identified a small number of rare variants in a subset of the can- data and genome-wide genotype data. Polygenic risk profile scores for CAD didate CAD genes. Exemplary, LDLR and ABCG8 are known to harbor rare were calculated for all of the cohorts using the largest available GWAS data variants increasing CAD risk and we confirm these findings. In addition, we set, the CARDIoGRAM consortium (22,233 cases and 64,762 controls). Poly- also report rare variants in NgeBnEeAsL w1here only common risk variants are re- genic risk profile scores for CAD were then tested for their association with ported so far. For instance, to our knowledge, we are the first to report rare cognitive abilities in the presence and absence of manifest cardiovascular loss-of-function variants in . disease. Results: A meta-analysis of all three cohorts supported a negative associati- PM05.32 on between CAD polygenic risk and fluid cognitive ability, verbal intelligence A Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Based Approach for Investigating and memory. Whereas these findings were not statistically significant in the Cardiovascular Disease-Related Genetic Variants Lothian Birth Cohorts, in GS:SFHS polygenic risk for CAD was negatively and S. K. Rai1, T. R. Webb1, N. J. Samani1,2, D. Lodwick1; 1Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, United significantly associated with fluid cognitive ability (β = -0.02, p = 0.03), Mill Kingdom, 2National Institute for Health Research Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Hill Vocabulary test (β = -0.03, p = 0.006) and Logical Memory (β = -0.02, p Research Unit, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, United Kingdom. = 0.042). Conclusions: Increased polygenic risk for CAD is associated with lower co- gnitive ability in older adults. Common genetic variants may underlie some Introduction: Large-scale genetic studies have identified many loci that con- of the association between age-related cognitive decrements and the risk tribute to complex disease. We have explored the use of Mesenchymal Stem for CAD. Cells (MSCs) as a system for creating genotype-specific cell models to inve- Saskia Hagenaars is supported by the Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Co- stigate the biological mechanisms of complex disease-related genetic vari- gnitive Epidemiology (MR/K0269 E9
S2 H/1G) 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANaDnt,s U inK v i|t rWo. WHeWre .wEeS dHeGscr.OibeR tGhe differentiation of MSCs down a vas1cu1la7rABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index smooth muscle (VSMC) lineage in order to investigate a coronary artery di- duction of PR and QRS intervals) including mutations in the intron regions: sease (CAD)-associated genetic variant. rs7428779 C/T and rs41312433, G/T were identified. In five patients was Materials and Methods: MSCs were isolated from umbilical cords using an found the rare variant rs11408120, -/G in TCEA
L6  gene. The variant was explant method. Flow cytometry and StemPro® Differentiation Kits were confirmed by Sanger sequence analysis using ABi 3500 xl DNA Sequencer used to characterise MSCs. MSCs were differentiated to VSMCs using TGF- (Applied Biosystems). In recent years the progress in identifying the genetic β1, and characterised by qPCR, immunofluorescence and calcium imaging. causes of cardiomyopathies. Introduction of screening methods forms po- Results: A bank of 114 umbilical cord-derived MSCs was created, and cha- tential benefits of gene based diagnosis to identify individuals at risk for racterised by cell surface markers (99.7% positive for CD105, CD90 and developing heart failure. CD73, and 0.2% positive for the negative markers CD45, CD34, CD11b, CD19 This study is the result of implementation of the projects APVV-0644-12 and and HLA-DR) and differentiation into adipocytes, chondrocytes and osteo- ITMS 26220120241. blasts. MSCs were differentiated towards a VSMC lineage, demonstrated by P
S05 .35 an upregulation of VSMC markers; ACTA2, TAGLN2 and CNN1 (p<0.001). As Genomic study of familial and idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy in a proof of concept, we investigated the functional CAD-associated coding va- Mexican patients. riant, rs3825807, located in the protease ADAMT
S7  in MSCs carrying either R. Rosendo1, E. López-Mora2, S. Rosas-Madrigal1, F. Reyes-Prieto1, S. Romero-Hidalgo1, G. the risk or non-risk allele. A trend showed MSCs with the risk allele had Vargas-Alarcón2, A. Carnevale1; increased migratory ability, consistent with findings reported by Pu et al., 1Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Instituto Nacional de (2013). We are currently undergoing studies with differentiated VSMCs. Cardiología, Mexico D.F., Mexico. Conclusion: Our findings show that our MSC bank can be used to study ge- netic variants associated with complex disease including CAD-related phe- notypes. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a disease of the myocardium caracterized by left ventricular dilatation, systolic dysfunction and myocardial fibrosis. It P
S05 .33 is a major cause of morbility and mortality and the first indication for car- Mypn knock-in mutant mice develop dilated cardiomyopathy R. A. Peat1, S. Alcoléa2, T. Héry1, L. Duboscq-Bidot1, N. Mougenot1, A. Jacquet1, G. diac transplantation. Clinical manifestations are variable and include heart Dilanian1, M. Komajda1,3, E. Villard1; failure, thromboembolism and sudden cardiac death. The etiology may be 1INSERM UMRS 1166, Paris, France, 2Université de Nantes, Nantes, France, 3AP-HP CHU genetic for up to 50% of cases either sporadic or familial (F-DCM). Most F- Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. DCM cases have an autosomal dominant form of inheritance (90%). More than 40 genes have been associated with the disease, and the frequency of mutations varies from one population to another. The purpose of our stu- Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) causes severe heart failure, but even with dy is to describe the mutations producing DCM in Mexican patients. Coding over 30 causative genes identified, DCM pathophysiology is poorly under- exons and intron flanks of 31 well characterized genes responsible for DCM, stood. In addition, current treatments only amelMioYraPtNe symptoms without were sequenced by NGS with the Ion Torrent technology looking forT pNaNthTo2-, treating underlying causes, therefore developing genetic therapies is es- gReBnMic2 g0eneticC vSaRrPia3nts in Mexican patients diagnosed as having idiopathic or sential. We identified human DCM mutations in (myopalladin), and F-DCM. Preliminary results in 22 index caSsCeNs 5shAow mutations in the created a knock-in mouse model carrying one such mutation. We also in- and geneMs,Y aSnHd7 two different mutations already detected in troduced two synonymous variations into the murine recombination vec- patients with Brugada Syndrome, in the gene. In one index case we tor, creating an experimentally validated shRNA target sequence permitting found a mutation in the gene associated to Hypertrophic cardiomyo- specific extinction of mutant allele expression. Introduced variations did not pathy (HCM). Also, two new SNVs causing a stop gain, one in TTN, the other interfere with normal allelic splicing, nor allelic expression ratios in either in LMNA were found in different patients. At present, we detected a known skeletal or cardiac muscles when assessed via allele-specific qPCR. Mice mutation in six patients and a new variant in two. We are confirming by were fertile, with normal growth rates and long-term survival. Mutant heart capillary sequenciation and completing the study including the available gross morphology appeared normal, but electron micrographs demonstra- relatives. ted thickened sarcomeric Z-lines. Echocardiography until 18 months de- PM05.36 monstrated that both heterozygote and homozygote mutant mice displayed Truncating titin mutations cause a mild and treatable form of dilated cardiac insufficiency from the age of three months. In mutant mice, systolic cardiomyopathy ventricular diameter and volume were increased, and ejection fractions and J. A. Jansweijer1, K. Nieuwhof2, F. Russo1, E. T. Hoorntje2, J. D. Jongbloed2, R. H. Lekanne fractional shortening reduced, confirming systolic dysfunction. In contrast Deprez1, A. V. Postma1, M. Bronk1, I. A. van Rijsingen1, S. de Haij1, E. Biagini3, P. L. van to most published murine models of dominant human DCM which display Haelst4, J. D. van Wijngaarden5, M. P. van den Berg2, A. A. Wilde1, M. M. Mannens1, R. A. de recessive phenotypes, we generated a knock-in mouse model of persistent Boer2, J. P. van Tintelen2, Y. M. Pinto1, K. Y. van Spaendonck-Zwarts1; 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center mild dominant DCM, highlighting its particular utility for potential allele- Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy, speciMficy pgennetic therapy. Future analysis of mutant cardiomyocyte contracti- 4Antonius Hospital, Sneek, Netherlands, 5Deventer Hospital, Deventer, Netherlands. le properties and calcium handling will provide further insights into domi- nant DCM genotype/phenotype pathophysiological relationships. Research supported by ICAN grant #R-AO13-EV, and EU-F
P7  Inheritance Background grant #241924. Truncating mutations in Titin (TTN) occur in 25% of dilated cardiomyopa- PM05.34 thy (DCM) cases, but also in 3% of healthy controls. We studied whether Next generation sequencing for the molecular genetic truncating TTN mutations cause a clinically distinguishable form of DCM . characterization of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy Methods J. Bernasovska1, I. Boronova1, J. Kmec2, V. Szabadosova1, P. Ferenc1, I. Bernasovsky3; We compared clinical data of probands and their relatives with either a 1Department of Biology, University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia, 2Cardiocentre, Faculty truncating TTN mutation or a pathogenic mutation in Lamin A/C (LMNA), Hospital of J.A. Reyman, Presov, Slovakia, 3Institute of Romany Studies, University of to probands with DCM who tested negative for both. Presov, Presov, Slovakia. Results We studied 240 subjects: TTN probands (n=47) and their relatives (n=73), LMNA probands (n=31) and their relatives (n=29), and probands negative Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is an important cause of heart failure and for both (TTN/LMNAneg DCM; n=60). Median follow-up was at least 2.5 the leading indication for cardiac transplantation worldwide. Genetic etiolo- years in each group. TTN mutation carriers presented at a significantly hig- gy plays an important role in disease pathogenesis. The aim of our study was her age with DCM than LMNA mutation carriers (48.6 vs 41.5 years, p=0.045 genetic testing of 49 patients with diagnosed DCM using next generation for probands; 59.7 vs 47.0 years, Log-Rank p=0.01 for relatives). TTN mu- sequencing technologies (SOLiD 5500xl). All probands underwent a clinical tation carriers less often developed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) examination. High blood pressure, coronary disease, chronic excess of alco- below 35% (HR=0.50, p=0.02 for probands), and had better outcome (less hol consumption and systemic disease were excluded prior to genetic analy- composite endpoints (HR=0.10, p<0.001 for probands; HR=0.21, p=0.02 sis. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes or buccal for relatives) compared to LMNA mutation carriers, and compared to TTN/ swab sampling according to standard protocols. Molecular-genetic analyses LMNAneg DCM patients (HR=0.33, p=0.05)). Strikingly, after initiation of included 50 different genes implicated in causing DCM. In the survey of standard heart failure treatment an LVEF increase of at least 10% occurred selected Slovak patients with dilated cardiomyopathy missense mutations in 50.0% of the TTN subjects, while this only occurred in 6.3% of LMNA sub- in GM2A, DHX57, NDUFV2, CO
L12 A1, EXD1, IBA57, LAD1, MORN2, KRT15 jects (p<0.001) and 22.2% of TTN/LMNAneg DCM subjects (p=0.03). genes were detected. In 33% of cases missense mutation - pathogenic mu- 118 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOCoTnLclAusNioDns, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG tation rs1805124 T/C in the gene SCN5A channel (responsible for the re-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index This study shows that truncating mutations in TTN induce a DCM that is less C- and N-termini or leading to haploinsufficiency have milder course of the severe at presentation and more amenable to standard therapy than either disease, and less prevalent diagnostic criteria. These findings may help refi- LMNA mutation induced DCM or TTN/LMNAneg DCM. ne diagnostic strategy, genetic counselling and clinical care. P
S05 .37 P
S05 .39 Assessment of the mechanical stability of the aorta in a mouse model Differential DNA methylation in individuals with a history of of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome vascular type (EDS IV) cardiovascular diseases J. Münger1, J. Meienberg1, J. Crabb2, A. Mauri2, C. Kaiser3, G. Barmettler3, C. Giunta4, U. D. Martinsson, M. Ahsan, U. Gyllensten, A. Lind-Thomsen, W. Ek, S. Enroth, Å. Johansson; Ziegler3, S. Zeisberger5, E. Mazza2, G. Matyas1,6; Uppsala university, Uppsala, Sweden. 1Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, c/o Foundation for People with Rare Diseases, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland, 2Institute of Mechanical Systems, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Center for Microscopy Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is among the leading causes of death world- and Image Analysis, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Division of Metabolism, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Swiss Centre for Regenerative wide. There are several known genetic and lifestyle risk factors, but asso- Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 6Zurich Center of Integrative Human ciation between epigenetics and CVD is poorly understood. In this study, we Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. investigate the link between DNA methylation and CVD. We performed an epigenome-wide association study in a population-based cohort (N=730). Participants were not ascertained upon disease background, but some had Introduction: EDS IV is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder a history of CVD (Table). DNA methylation was measured at 470789 auto- caused by mutations in the CO
L3 A1 gene and associated with an increased somal CpG-sites. Differentially methylated sites were identified for a subset risk for aortic rupture. So far, only disease management and treatment of of diseases (Table). Some sites were located in genes previously associated symptoms are available. Haploinsufficient mice of a recently described no- to CVD, e.g. BNI
P3  and GDF15. Enrichment analysis identified a number of vel mouse model of Col3a1 show reduced mechanical stability of the aorta molecular functions and biological processes, which are overrepresented and spontaneous death (~28% of cases) due to aortic rupture similar to the among the differentially methylated genes. For example, participants with a human EDS IV phenotype. Our goal was to characterize the mechanical sta- history of myocardial infarction had an enrichment (FDR q-value=0.00142, bility of the aorta in this mouse model compared to wild-type mice. Enrichment = 4.69) of differential methylation in genes associated with car- Methods: 1.5-mm-long sections of aortic arch as well as ascending and de- diac muscle tissue growth. The identified genes are good candidates for ad- scending aorta from Col3a1 mice were mounted on two 200-μm diameter ditional studies to further understand the genesis and progression of CVD, stainless steel wires on a TissuePuller (Danish Myo Technology) and stret- as well as for the development of therapies and treatments. ched radially until tissue damage, thereby continuously recording the stret- Table No. significant CpG ching force (in mN). CVD No. affected individuals (%males) (FDR q-value < 0.05) Results: Maximum force at tissue damage was significantly lower in hete- Cardiac Arrhythmia 5 (60%) 1 rozygous Col3a1 mice compared to age- and gender-matched wild-type High Blood Pressure 147 (40%) 0 Myocardial Infarction 48 (58%) 211 animals in both the ascending and descending parts of the aorta. For both Stroke 27 (56%) 0 genotypes, the mechanical stability of the aorta was decreasing, with incre- Thrombosis 22 (59%) 0 asing distance from the heart. Conclusions: We developed a protocol for the assessment of the mechanical P
S05 .41 stability of mice aorta, which is suitable to detect significant differences bet- Exome sequencing reveals novel functional mutation in APOB causing ween heterozygous and wild-type Col3a1 mice. Our results open the way to Familial Hypercholesterolaemia test pharmacological substances for their potential to increase the mechani- A. C. Alves1,2, A. M. Medeiros1,2, A. Extebarria3, C. Martin3, M. Bourbon1,2; cal stability of the aorta with the goal to find a targeted therapy for patients 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2BioISI – with EDS IV and related aortic disorders. Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Unidad de Biofísica (Centro Mixto CSIC, UPV/EHU) and PM05.38 Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidad del País Vasco, Bilbao, Spain. The type of variants at the CO
L3 A1 gene associates with the phenotype and severity of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome J. M. ALBUISSON1,2,3, M. FRANK1,2, B. RANQU
E4 ,5,3, L. GOLMARD1,3, J. MAZZELLA1, L. Introduction: APOB mutations are a rare cause of Familial Hypercholeste- BAL-THEOLEYR
E6 , A. FAURET1,3, T. MIRAULT1,3, N. DENARI
E1 , E. MOUSSEAUX7,3, P. rolaemia (FH) and routine genetic diagnosis only includes the study of two BOUTOUYRI
E8 ,2,3, J. FIESSINGER1,3, J. EMMERICH1,3, E. MESSA
S1 ,3, X. JEUNEMAITR
E1 ,2,3; 1AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Département de Génétique, Service small APOB fragments (exon 26 and 29). Recently functional mutations have de Médecine Vasculaire et Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares, been described in APOB fragments not routinely studied and our group cha- PARIS, France, 2INSERM, U970, Paris centre de Recherche Cardiovasculaire – PARCC, racterized 2/5 as causing FH. Paris, France, 3Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Médecine, The main aim of this project was to identify and characterize novel alterati- Paris, France, 4AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Médecine ons in APOB in order to identify the genetic cause of the hypercholesterole- Interne, PARIS, France, 5Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de mia in these patients. Médecine, P, Austria, 6AP-HM, Service de Médecine Vasculaire, Hôpital de la Timone, Methods: we performed whole-exome sequencing of 5 Portuguese clinical MARSEILLE, France, 7AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Radiologie Cardiovasculaire, PARIS, France, 8AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Service FH patients apparently mutation negative. All results found in APOB were de Pharmacologie, PARIS, France. analysed. For functional studies LDL from index patients and relatives was separated and marked with FITC-LDL for studies by flow cytometry in HepG2 and U937 growth assays. Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a rare and severe autosomal do- Results: We identified 2 alterations in exons 19 and 26 in 2 patients. In vitro minant disorder caused by CO
L3 A1 gene variants, with little evidence of ge- analysis of exon 26 alteration (p.Thr3826Met) carrier showed a decrease in notype-phenotype correlation. Clinical characteristics and course of disease binding and internalization of LDL and in U937 growth assays, showing a of 215 molecularly-proven patients (146 index-cases and 69 relatives), were similar effect as APO3527. As reported before, also in this family the pene- analysed. We found 126 distincts variants that were divided into five groups trance is also reduced. Alteration in exon 19 had a neutral effect. : 1) Glycine substitutions (71 variants in 127 patients), 2) splice-site and in- Conclusions: The spectrum of functional alterations in APOB outside the frame insertions-deletions (36 variants in 55 patients), 3) variants leading fragments routinely screened is growing. Screening of all 29 exons of APOB to haploinsufficiency (7 variants in 14 patients), 4) non glycine missense should be performed in routine diagnosis, now possible by NGS. It is expec- variants within the triple helix (4 variants in 7 patients), 5) non glycine mis- ted that a further 10% of clinical FH patients can have FH due to a novel sense variants or in-frame insertions-deletions, in the N- or C-terminal part APOB mutation. On this basis we are currently sequencing a panel of 95 ne- of the protein (8 variants in 12 patients). Overall, our cohort confirmed the gative patients. severity of the disease with a median age at first complication of 29 years PM05.42 [IQR 22 to 39], the most frequent being arterial (48%) and digestive (24%) LDLR functional in vitro assays: a step forward for the correct genetic ruptures. Groups 2 and 1 were significantly more severe than groups 3-5 diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolaemia with extreme median ages at first major complication of 23 to 47 years. Pa- S. Azevedo1, A. C. Alves1,2, A. M. Medeiros1, P. Barros1, C. Martín2, M. Bourbon1; tients of groups 3-5 had a less typical phenotype and remarkably absence of 1Unidade de I&D Grupo de Investigação Cardiovascular Departamento de Promoção digestive events. The glycine-replacing amino-acids were frequently desta- da Saúde e Prevenção de Doenças Não Transmissíveis Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge and BioISI – Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculdade de bilizing residues of the collagen assembly. Thus, the natural course of vEDS and the clinical phenotype of patiEeSntHs aGre 2 in0f1lu5en |c eGdL bAy tShGe tOypWe o, fS CCOO
L3 TA
L1 A ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 119 variant. This study also confirms that patients with variants located in theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Ciências, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Unidad de Biofísica (CSIC, UPV/EHU) and Departamento de München, Munich, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad del País Vasco, Bilbao, Spain. Munich, Germany. Aim: Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disor- Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an oligogenic disorder characterized der that confers an increased cardiovascular risk, dueL tDoL hRigh levels of cho- by markedly elevated low-density-lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol levels. De- lesterol in blood since birth. FH has a prevalence of 1:500, being estimated spite the knowledge of the FH candidate genes, it is largely under-diagnosed that >90% of these patients have mutations in the . Although more in European countries. Since FH increases the risk for coronary artery disea- than 1600 alterations have been identified, the majionr vitiytr oof them remain wi- se (CAD) and myocardial infarction (MI), it might be specifically overlooked thout functional studies. in the large number of such patients. The aim of this work is to construct vectors for the study of common Here, we systematically examined the frequency of potential FH-causing aMlteetrhaotidosn:s in Portuguese FH patieLnDtsL, Rcontributing for phenotype/genotype variants in LDLR, APOB, PCSK9 and STA
P1  by exome sequencing in 255 clarification. In silico German patients with premature MI and a positive family history for CAD. The 14 most common alterations to date without functio- We further performed co-segregation analyses in an average of 5.5 family nal assessment were selected. assessment was performed using de- members per MI patient. scribed tools. Site-directed mutagenesis was performed in a pcDNA3_LDLR In total, we identified eleven potential disease-causing variants that co- plasmid and functional assessment is being performed in CHO-ldlA7 cells segreg.ate within the families. Eight variants were previously reported as bRye sfulolwts :c Iynt soimliceot ry. Complementarily, protein expression and immunofluo- disease-causing and three are novel (LDLR.p.V271I, PCSK9.p.D204N and rescence studies will be performed. STA
P1 p.T47A). However, exome sequencing also revealed that some vari- prediction classified 7/14 alterations as benign (p.Met1Leu, ants, which have been reported to cause FH, do not co-segregate with the p.Gly20Arg, p.Gln92Glu, p.Asp221Tyr, p.Ile473Val, Ala606Ser and disease in respective families. p.Ile764Thr) and 7 as probably pathogenic (p.Cys184Tyr, p.Gly207_Ser213- The data reveals that 1 out of 20 patients with premature MI carries poten- del, p.His211Asp, p.Glu626Lys, p.Glu288Lys, p.Asp601Val, p.His656Asn). tial FH-causing mutations. Hence a large proportion of FH patients escapes 9/14 alterations were also reported in several other countries as mutation the diagnosis. Systematic molecular-genetic screening for FH may assist and causing disease. Among these constructs, 11 of the mutagenesis occurred unravel the diagnosis in a substantial number of cases and thereby allow a sCuocnccelsussfuiollnys a:nd the functional assessment is underway. The remaining are timely intensive or preventive treatment of FH. Interestingly, some of the beinLgD pLeRr,formed. previously reported disease-causing variants could not be validated in this Although more than 1600 variants have been described in study. Our results highlight the need for careful evaluation of each potential the there are still novel variants being found, proving its heterogenei- disease-causing variant prior to reporting. ty. It is imperative to functionally characterize these alterations to contribu- This Study was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft cluster te for the elucidation of the molecular basis of FH worldwide. An accurate of excellence ‚Inflammation at Interfaces‘. diagnosis and early personalized counseling/treatment, will improve FH P
S05 .45 patients prognosis. Anomalous retinal vasculature in MYH11-associated Familial P
S05 .43 Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Dissection (FTAAD) Familial Hypercholesterolaemia - An efficient genetic testing E. R. A. Thomas1, H. Brittain2, J. W. V. Marshall3, N. Chung1, S. Mathur4, P. Coucke5, L. laboratory service for multiple lipid centres using Next Generation Robert1; 1Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Great Ormond Street Sequencing and PASS Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells NHS Trust, A. Hills1, J. Honeychurch1, P. Dean1, L. Yarram-Smith1, G. Dennis1, G. Woodward1, M. Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells, United Kingdom, 4Evelina London Children‘s Hospital, Greenslade1, G. Bayly2, K. Haralambos3, M. Williams1, E. Watson1; London, United Kingdom, 5Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Royal Infirmary, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Background: Familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissection (FTAAD) is a NICE recommends comprehensive genetic testing in all patients clinical- heterogeneous autosomal dominant condition which compromises the wall ly diagnosed with FH, and genetic cascade testing of at-risk relatives. The of the thoracic aorta, and in some cases other vessels. MYH11 mutations Cardiovascular Disease Outcomes Strategy (2013) has improving case as- have been reported in families with FTAAD associated with patent ductus certainment for FH (12 to 50%) as a key target. British Heart Foundation arteriosus (PDA). are supporting implementation of a cascade testing programme for England Case report: We here report a three-generation family with a splice site through start-up funding bids, however, the cost of FH genetic testing can mutation in intron 27 of MYH11. The proband was a 29-year-old woman still remain a barrier to commissioning. who died 11 days post-partum due to two separate areas of dissection in the High throughput automated NGS genetic testing processes large numbers of thoracic and abdominal aorta. On family screening, her 12-year-old son was samples at re LdDucLeRd PcoCsStK u9sinAgP Oa BuniqueL pDaLtRieAnPt1 sequence bSaLrCcOo1dBe1 i dentifier. found to have a PDA, and her 56-year-old father was found to have dilatation Trhse2 3c0u6s2to8m3-desirgsn4e1d4 9ta0r5g6eted capture assay (HaloPlex, Agilent) sequences of the proximal ascending aorta (4.1cm), and a subsequent CT angiogram 4 FH genes; , , and and the variants identified tortuosity of the innominate artery. No clinical features suggestive ( and ) associated with statin-induced myopathy. Data of a wider disorder of connective tissue were found in the proband’s father analysis uses an open-source pipeline; alignment (bwa), variant calling or son, but both shared the MYH11 splice mutation. On ophthalmological (GATK), variant annotation (Geneticist Assistant, SoftGenetics), and copy examination, the proband’s father also had anomalous vascular loops iden- number analysis (CONTRA/bespoke CNV tool). tified in both eyes. Bristol Genetics LaborAaPtoOrBy (BGL) has testedL >D6
L0 R0 FH index cases by NGS Conclusions: The family reported here exhibits the range of phenotypes as- from >15 referral cenLDtrLeRs with a 35% positive detection rate, the most com- sociated with FTAAD caused by MYH11. In general, there is little genotype- mon mutations being c.10580G>A and c.313+1G>A. CNV analy- phenotype correlation in FTAAD, but the presence of PDA directs suspicion AsiPs OhBas detected 12 deletions and 1 duplication. 7% of patients have towards MYH11. In addition, one family member had retinal vascular tor- variants of uncertain significance (VUS) with the majority of these found in tuosity, possibly resulting from his generalised abnormality of the vascula- . 116 relatives have undergone cascade testing. ture. The prevalence of retinal vascular anomalies in FTAAD requires further BGL is trialing the online PASS database to link the genetic testing process investigation; if widely prevalent, ophthalmological examination would pro- directly to lipid clinics using workflow management tools. We report the ge- vide a valuable non-invasive test of extra-cardiac vascular status. netic test results on our cohort, and our service developments, highlighting PM05.46 the efficiencies of using an NGS testing approach and PASS. FBN1gene polymorphysms association with dilatative pathology of the PM05.44 ascending thoracic aorta (DPATA) Identification of familial hypercholesterolemia in patients with early Ž. Stanevičiūtė1, R. Šepetienė1, V. Patamsytė1, G. Zukovas2, R. Benetis1,2, V. Lesauskaitė1; 1Institute of Cardiology of the Medical Academy, Lithuanian University of Health onset MI by systematic molecular genetic analysis Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, I. Brænne1, M. Kleinecke1, B. Reiz1, E. Graf2, T. Strom2, T. Wieland2, M. Fischer3, C. Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania. Hengstenberg4, T. Keßler4, T. Meitinger5, J. Erdmann1, H. Schunkert4; 1Institute for Integrative and Experimental Genomics, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin II, Universitätsklinikum Regensburg, In most cases the causes leading to the aortic wall expansion and/or dissec- Regensburg, Germany, 4Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität tion remains unclear. Certainly, this pathology is caused by aortitis, athero- sclerosis or inherited as a single gene mutation. Evidence has shown that 120 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO FBT NL 1A mN uD ta, t iU onK s m| W ay W preW di. sE pS osH e G DP.O ATR AG in the absence of phenotypic cha-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index racteristics of Marfan syndrome and lately FBN1 polymorphisms drew more The finding was confirmed both by cDNA analysis and by the results of Mul- attention to cause sporadic DPATA. Based on LeMaire et al study in 2011, tiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification analysis which confirmed we investigated polymorphisms of the FBN1 gene (rs2118181, rs1036477, segregation of the deletion in the family. Serial PCR reactions using intronic rs10519177, rs755251, rs4774517) in a case-controlled study for DPATA primer sets, resulted in the amplification of a genomic fragment which con- from Lithuanians. tained the breakpoint. We studied 312 patients who had undergone aortic reconstructive surgery WDR16 protein was previously proposed to play a role in cilia-related signal for DPATA. Patients were subdivided into test groups according to the DPA- transduction processes; the rat Wdr16 protein was shown to be confined TA phenotypes: ascending aortic aneurysms, dissectionsandpost-stenotic- to cilia possessing tissues and severe hydrocephalus was observed in the dilatation. The control group (n=472) was obtained from a random sample wdr16 gene knockdown zebrafish. screened within epidemiological studies of the Lithuanian population. The The phenotype associated with the homozygous deletion in our patients FBN1 polymorphisms were investigated by real-time polymerase-chain-re- suggests a role for WDR16 in human laterality patterning. Exome analysis is action amplification. Fisher’s exact test, χ2 test and allelic association odds a valuable tool for molecular investigation even in cases of large deletions. ratio were used for statistics. The distribution of genotypes was conformab- P
S05 .49 le with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p>0.15). Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber We observed that minor alleles of all five FBN1 SNPs were significantly as- syndrome): first results of molecular genetic testing in the Czech sociated with aortic dissection with OR 2.13-2.59, p<0.001, and two SNPs: republic rs2118181 and rs1036477- with an increased risk of ascending aortic aneu- J. Necasova1, Z. Svestkova1, M. Penka2,3, R. Gaillyova1,3, I. Valaskova1,3; rysm with OR 1.67, CI 95% 1.61-2.40.There were no significant associations 1University Hospital Brno, Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, between all studied FBN1 SNPs and post-stenotic aortic dilatation. 2University Hospital Brno, Department of Clinical Hematology, Brno, Czech Republic, Minor alleles of all SNPs investigated might be considered as risk alleles for 3Masaryk University, Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic. aortic dissection and two of them (rs2118181, rs1036477) are increasing odds for aortic aneurysm formation. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an autosomal dominant PM05.48 disorder characterized by an aberrant vascular development. HHT affects Upregulation of Antigen Presentation Pathway under the treatment approximately 1 in 5000 people and is caused by pathogenic variants in a with neuropropeptide Semax in a rat model of brain focal ischemia S. A. Limborska1,2, E. V. Medvedeva1, N. F. Myasoedov1, L. V. Dergunova1,2; number of genes involved in the TGF-β signaling pathway. Endoglin (ENG) 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS Dept. of Molecular Bases of Human Genetics, and activin receptor-like kinase-1 (ALK1/ACVR
L1 ) encode proteins ex- Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Cerebrovascular Pathology and Stroke, pressed on vascular endothelial cells. These genes are casually related to Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. HHT. The clinical diagnosis of HHT is based on recurrent epistaxis due to telangiectases and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) which can occur in the pulmonary, cerebral and hepatic circulation leading to stroke, internal Neuroprotective synthetic oligopeptide Semax composed of a fragment of hemorrhage, and severe anaemia. We used classical sequencing approaches ACTH4-7 and C-terminal tripeptide Pro-Gly-Pro is used for therapy of acute to perform molecular characterization in 18 clinically affected unrelated stroke. The molecular mechanisms of its neuroprotective action have been probands with the suspected diagnosis of HHT, and detected a total of 7 hitherto unknown. The response of the transcriptome of ischemized rat different mutations in the two genes. Two mutations were identified in the brain cortex tissues to the action of Semax in the male Wistar rat brains was ENG gene, both deletions, one of which was novel, in exon 8 and exon 11. investigated. The intraperitoneal injection of peptide was done at 15 min, 1, There were tested also several family members of these probands and we 4 and 8h after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO). mRNA identified 5 and 2 mutation carriers, respectively. Three of five mutations expression change was analyzed in 24h groups versus 3h groups following identified in the ALK1/ACVR
L1  gene were novel and comprised missense pMCAO and “pMCAO + Semax”. The Illumina RatRef-12 Expression Bead- mutation in exon 6, deletion in exon 3 and small indel in exon 8. No mutati- Chip was used in our study. The action of Semax enhanced the expression ons were found in ENG⁄ACVR
L1  in 11 probands. Genetic testing can confirm of 17 genes (Ap1, B2m, Cd74, Hla-C, Hla-Dma, Hla-Dmb, Hla-Dqa1, Hla-Dra, the clinical diagnosis in individuals and identify presymptomatic mutation Hla-Drb1, Hla-E, Psmb8, Psmb9, Tapbp) belonged to the major histocom- carriers. Once a famililal mutation is identified, relatives at risk can be te- patibility complex (MHC). We identified significant overlap between 13 of sted. Individuals with a mutation are identified for intensive clinical surveil- these genes and the Antigen Presentation Pathway (p=4.4E-11). BioRank lance. We offer genetic counseling for at-risk relatives. Ingenuity ranking system assigns to this pathway the high scores that PM05.50 means that this set of changed expression genes hit a critical component of Sarcomeric gene mutations in Turkish families with hypertrophic the pathway in the Ingenuity Canonical Signaling Pathway library. Besides cardiomyopathy we observed changed levels of transcripts of 7 genes (Cd74, Hla-A, Hla-Dra, E. Komurcu-Bayrak1, F. Bayrak2, G. Kahveci3, F. Guclu-Geyik1, N. Erginel-Unaltuna1; Psmb8, Psmb9, Tap1, Tapbp) belonged to the MHC in the “ischemia” group 1Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Istanbul during one day after pMCAO. But for the Antigen Presentation Pathway this University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Cardiology, Acibadem University, Istanbul, set of genes was scored lower than in the case of neuropeptide treatment. Turkey, 3Department of Cardiology, Kartal Kosuyolu Heart and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. Our data assume that Semax affects the immune response during the active stage of ischemia. P
S05 .47 Background: There is little knowledge about familial hypertrophic cardio- A human laterality disorder associated with a homozygous WDR16 myopathy in Turkey. In this study, our aim was to determine a causing mu- deletion tation in three sarcomeric genes (MYH7, MYBP
C3  and TNNT2) in Turkish A. Ta-Shma1, Z. Perles1, B. Yaacov2, M. Werner2, A. Frumkin2, A. J. J. T. Rein1, O. Elpeleg2; 1Pediatric cardiology, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, families with HCM and high-risk for sudden cardiac death (SCD). 2Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah Hebrew Materials and methods: The study included twelve index cases of early onset University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. (<40 years) clinically diagnosed HCM patients with a positive family history for HCM and SCD. All participants were evaluated with a detailed history, physical examination, 12-lead electrocardiography and two-dimensional Visceral asymmetry is determined through embryonic ciliary motion. A fai- echocardiography. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and coding lure to generate the normal left-right (L-R) asymmetry during early stages regions and flanking intronic sequences of MYH7, MYBP
C3  and TNNT2 ge- of embryogenesis may result in severe anatomical abnormalities, including nes were screened using array-based re-sequencing. All novel variants and heterotaxy syndrome (HS) which consists of abnormal L-R axis arrangement known mutations were confirmed with Sanger sequencing. After the causal of the abdominal and thoracic viscera and situs inversus totalis (SIT) which mutation in family members was screened. manifests by mirror image asymmetry of the internal viscera. HS is at times Results: From 12 index cases, a known missense mutation was found in 6 in- accompanied by complex congenital cardiovascular anomalies whereas SIT dividuals and also novel missense mutation was found in 2 individuals. Four is frequently associated with Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD). The genetic different causal mutations in the cardiac-beta myosin heavy chain (MYH7) etiology of defects not associated with PCD is largely unknown. gene, one in the cardiac myosin binding protein C (MYBP
C3 ) gene and one in In this study we investigated the cause of situs anomalies, including HS and the cardiac troponin T (TNNT2) were found. In addition, two novel intronic SIT (PCD excluded), in a consanguineous family. variants in MYH7 and MYBP
C3  genes were found in 2 different index cases. Whole exome analysis including thorough coverage analysis, re- Detection of the novel missense mutations and intronic variants within the vealed a homozygous deleterious deletion in the WDR16 gene - chr17. family members and control population is ongoing. hg19:g.9481617_9489649del803E 3S .HG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAN CD on, cU luK si o| nW : OW urW pr. eE lS imH inG ar.O y rR esG ult provides a general view of the fam12ili1alABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with high-risk for SCD and highlights the im- were also adopted to explore the novel mechanism underlying the HCM phe- portance of mutation screening for these three genes in Turkey. notype. The results showed that various genes and gene sets related to cyto- P
S05 .51 skeleton, ATPase activity, dynein and calcium transport played critical roles Disease causing variation is differentially distributed in MYH7 but not in the pathogenesis of HCM, with a lot of other processes as well, implicating in MYBP
C3  in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy many processes involved in the HCM phenotype. We also found two novel J. R. Homburger, C. A. Caleshu, E. A. Ashley; OBSCN variants that co-segregated with the HCM patients in two HCM fami- Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States. lies. Additionally, we described the OBSCN role in HCM. Our study provides a way for exploring the pathogenesis of a less understood HCM cohort. PM05.54 Hypertrophic cardiomyoMpaYtHh7y (HCM M)Y iBs PaCn3 inheriMteYdH d7isordeMr YoBf PthCe3 heart Mutational spectrum of Filamin C (FLNC) in hypertrophic muscle. HCM has been linked to dominant genetic variantMs YinH s7arcomere ge- cardiomyopathy nes, most commonly in and . The and MgeYnBe- J. Gómez, J. R. Reguero, M. Martín, R. Lorca, E. Coto; pPrCo3d ucts interact but have distinctly different functions: encodes the Hospital Universitario Central Asturias (HUCA), Oviedo, Spain. myosin head, the molecular motor that binds and pulls actin, while FLNC is a regulatory protein that binds to both the myosin and actin. Despite FLNC theMseY Hfu7n ctionMalY dBifPfCer3ences, variants in both genes lead to a similar presen- Exome sequencing identified the Fi1lamin C ( ) as a hypertrophic car- tation of HCM. To investigate the differences between the variant profiles diomyFoLpNaCthy (HCM) candidate gene. The putative mutations segrega- of and , we combine published and unpubMlisYhHe7d data from ted with the disease in several families. We also deFmLoNnCstrated that patients three centers (Stanford University, the Mayo Clinic, Harvard University). The with mutations showed marked sarcomeric abnormalities in cardiac combined dataset included resMulYtBs PfrCo3m 4349 patients. In , 215 out of muscle, and functional stFuLdNieCs revealed that these variants resulted in 234 (91.9%) uniqueM dYaHm7a ging MvaYrBiaPnCt3s are missense, whil-e6 only 164 out of the formation of large filamin C aggregFaLteNsC. Our aim was to characterize the 343 (47.8%) are missense in (Fisher p=1.25x10 ). We compared mutational spectrum of in a large cohort of HCM patients. We perfor- variant locations in and from HCM patients with those from med a Next-generation sequencing of in 335 HCM patients, including 60,M70Y6H 7individuals in the Exome AggregMatYioBnP C
C3 o nsortium (ExAC). We find a 117 sarcomeric-mutation carriers. We identified a total of 25 HCM index significant difference in t-1h3e disMtrYiHbu7tion of HCM and ExAC variant locations cases who were heterozygous carriers of putatFivLeN mCutations, 21 in the 218 in (KS p=3.95x10 ), but not in (KS p=0.462). The peak of patients without sarcomere-mutation (10%) and 4 in the 117 sarcomere- differential variant density in covers the head, the lever arm, and the positive cases (3%; p<0.05). Only five of the 25 variants were reported begMinYnHin7g of thMeY taBiPl Co3f the myosin heavy chain molecule. Our results suggest in healthy subjects in the Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) database, but differing regional biophysical contributions to the pathogenicity of disease all of them at a frequency <0.001%. Three variants, p.A1247V, p.A1539T, for and . and p.A2340FVL, NwCere found in two index cases. In nine of the 14 families we PM05.52 had several affected members, and all weFrLeN mCutation carriers. Interestingly, Cardiac Ankyrin Repeat Protein (CARP/Ankrd1) gene variants in some of the mutations were linked to sudden cardiac death episodes. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy In conclusion, our work suggested that mutations were a significant J. Kusic-Tisma1, A. Divac Rankov1, L. Rakicevic1, A. Nestorovic1, J. Jasnic-Savovic1, M. cause of HCM. et al Tesic2,3, N. Antonijevic2,3, S. Kojic1, D. Radojkovic1; 1 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, Valdés-Mas R . Mutationsin filamin C cause a new form of familial hy- Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Clinic pertrophic cardiomyopathy. Nature communications. 2014;5:5326). for Cardiology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. P
S05 .55 The Clinical Utility of a Proton-Ion Ampliseq-based Cardiac Gene Panel CARP/Ankrd1 belongs to the muscle ankyrin repeat protein (MARP) family M. J. DASOUKI, N. P. Muiya, E. Andres, O. M. ALBEDAIRY, M. M. ABOUELHODA, N. involved in a mechano-signaling pathway that links myofibrillar stress re- Dzimiri; sponse to muscle gene expression. Also, CARP/Ankrd1 has an important King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. role in transcriptional regulation, myofibrillar assembly, cardiogenesis and myogenesis. Few studies supported a role of CARP gene variants in the etiology of hypertrophic (HCM) and dilated cardiomyopathy. We have Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) and whole genome sequen- performed screening for mutations/variants in Ankrd1 coding sequences in cing (WGS) are increasingly being used in clinical practice. However, these 50 familiar or idiopathic HCM patients. Two missense heterozygous CARP approaches continue to be expensive, time consuming and difficult to inter- variants in exon 2 (
P52 A and R66Q) were identified, each in one patient. pret. So far, clinical WES studies have yielded diagnostic results in ~ 25% Preliminary functional analysis of these variants on protein level were of cases. Hence, a complementary easier, equally sensitive method needs to performed in rat neonatal cardiomyocytes by Fluorescent Recovery After be developed. Photobleaching (FRAP) assay. The results of the FRAP experiments showed Method: A 406 cardiac related (cardiomyopathy, congenital heart disea- difference in mobility between wt and 
P52 A variant, while R66Q exerted si- se, arrhythmias, vascular aneurysms) gene panel (with 10490 amplicons) milar behavior as wt protein. Our findings point to possible disruption of the based on Ion Torrent AmpliSeq technology was developed. So far, 243 gDNA protein-protein interaction and disturbance of the normal cardiac signaling samples were sequenced using the Proton-Ion sequencing instrument. in cardiomyocytes caused by 
P52 A allele variant of CARP/Ankrd1. Results: In total, 4.13 Gb were mapped with 94% on target and base reads This work was supported by grant 173008 from the Ministry of Education, with 370 reads per amplicon and overall average base coverage depth of Science and Technological Development of Republic of Serbia. 325. In the 243 samples, a total of 51 variants (including 2 homozygous P
S05 .53 CACNA1C and SCN5A homozygous mutations) with an overall clinical sensi- Investigation of Pathogenic Genes in Chinese Hypertrophic tivity of 51/242 (21%) was found. Sub-panel diagnosis based clinical sensi- Cardiomyopathy Patients by Whole Exome Sequencing tivity was 32% for cardiomyopathy, 10% for congenital heart disease, 31% J. Xu1, J. Wu2, M. Dong1, X. Shi1, Y. Zhang1, X. Ren3, J. Li1, W. Xie1, Z. Sun4, X. Liu1, Q. Dai5; for arrhythmias and 29% for aortic aneurysms/Marfan syndrome. 1Southeast University, Nanjing, China, 2Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou, China, Conclusion: This custom made, comprehensive cardiac gene panel appears 3Nanjing General Hospital of Nanjing Military Command, Nanjing, China, 4Chinese to have a clinical sensitivity comparable to that of the current WES with the Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 5ZhongDa Hospital, Nanjing, China. advantage of faster turnaround time and far fewer variants to analyse. Only in 6% of the genes on this panel were relevant DNA sequence variants iden- tified. Hence, a tiered approach starting with a custom gene panel followed Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a cardiovascular disease with high by WES is probably a more efficient clinical approach. heterogeneity. The limited knowledge about ~40% patients suggests that PM05.56 it needs to be investigated to understand the pathogenesis of the disease. Homozygous, and compound heterozygous mutation in 3 Turkish A large number of variants were identified by whole exome sequencing in family with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen Syndrome seventy-four HCM patients passing Sanger method sequencing eight HCM S. G. TEME
L1 ,2, F. UYSA
L3 , G. TOKSOY4, O. M. BOSTAN3, E. EVK
E5 ,6, Z. O. UYGUNER4, H. causative genes. After filtering against multiple databases and functional fil- KAYSERILIOGLU4, E. Cil3; ter, 3228 SNPs and 475 InDels in 3046 genes were identified. TADA model 1University of Near East, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology & Embryology, was then applied using exome sequencing data of 2000 controls and 74 ca- Lefkosia, Cyprus, 2University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology ses and 99 genes gained priority, with DNAH11, OBSCN ranking the first and 122 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG second place, respectively. Associated analytical tools as DAVID and IntPathABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and Embryology, Bursa, Turkey, 3University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, BURSA, Turkey, 4University of Istanbul, Faculty of Medicine, AMPK Department of Medical Genetics, ISTANBUL, Turkey, 5University of Uludag, Faculty fects atherosclerotic changes through its important secoLnAdS-Sm5 e(sCseernSg5er role. of Medicine, Department of Histology & Embryology, BURSA, Turkey, 6Bursa Genetic In previous studies, the protective role of gene withA iMtsP Kregulated Diagnostic Center, Bursa, Turkey. genes in atherosclerosis and hypeLrAteSnSs5ion is shown. ) gene takes plLacAeS Sin5 ceramid synthesis and has an indirect effect on gene. In this study, our aim was to identify gene functionA inM aPtKhrerosclerosis. Long QT syndrome is one of the most common congenital cardiac ion chan- Briefly, gene specific siRNA mediated gene silencing AwMaPs Kperformed nel disorder that the morbidity and mortality rate can be decreased by an in HUVEC and subsequently the differencial expession regulated ge- early diagnosis and proper treatment. Cardiac repolarization abnormality nes were anAaMlyPzKed. Then, HUVEC cells were treated with inhibitor that is characterized by prolonged OT interval and propensity for ventri- or activator in order to exLaAmSiSn5e. the relation of chanAgMe PinK gene expression cular tachycardia of the torsades de pointes type are characteristics of the levels with activity changes. As aL AreSsSu5lt, we have identified a noval disease. This syndrome represents high risk for presyncope, syncope, car- physiological functiLoAnS So5f The treatment of inhibitor (Com- diac arrest and sudden death. Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) pound C) ligand significantlye iNnOcrSeasedK LF2 mRNA expression in HUVEC. is recessive form of long QT syndromes with additional finding of profound DownregulatLioAnS So5f was found to attenuate ceraKmLidF2e production, and sensorineural hearing loss. JLNS has been shown to occur due to homozy- increased the expression of and . In addition, we observed that gous and compound heterozygous mutations in KCNQ1 or KCN
E1 . Pathoge- presence of siRNA induLcAeSdS 5the expressioAnM PoKf genes, and that nic mutations in the KCNQ1 gene were detected in all our JLNS cases. Index this induction was partially e NprOeSv ente dK LbFy2 Compound C. On the contrary, we cases of 3 families were 2 month yr, 3.5 yr old female and 3-yr old male observed that co-presence of siRNA and L aAcStSiv5ator (AICAR) in- who visited the hospital due to intrauterine bradicardia, recurrent seizures/ creased the expressions of and . eNOS syncope, cardiac murmur, respectively and had all congenital sensorineu- IKnL sFu2mmary, this is the first study demonstrated that was involved in ral deafness. Their electrocardiograms revealed a markedly prolonged QT the negative regulation of atherosclerosis related genes, namely and interval. The sequence analysis of the probands revealed the presence of . These findings provide an insight into the molecular mechanism of compound heterozygous mutation ([(c.477+1G>A) + (c.520C>T, p.R174C)] atherosclerosis and also have importance for the development of potential and homozygous missence mutations (c.728 G>A, p. R243H), (1097G>A, therapeutic agents in the treatment of atherosclerosis. p.R366Q), respectively. Heterozygous mutation in KCNQ1 was identified on P
S05 .59 the maternal, paternal and sibling sides. Homozygous mutation was identi- Use of gene panels for the diagnosis of cardiac arrhythmia fied in 3-yr old male’s sister and cousin also. Interestingly even if her QT is C. N. S. Sarton, K. McGuire, A. Seller; long she had intact hearing. β-blocker therapy was initiated to all affected Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, Oxford, United Kingdom. ones. Asymptomatic heterozygous family members were taken to a clinical follow up. Clinical and moleular findings will be discussed to further enligh- ten the genotype-phenotype association. Cardiac arrhythmia occurs when the electrical impulses of the heart become P
S05 .57 disrupted. This can lead to a variety of syndromes including Catecholamin- A common variant associated with coronary artery disease increases ergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia (CPVT), Brugada Syndrome(BS), atheroma size within atherosclerotic plaques of patients with carotid and Long QT Syndrome(LQTS). These disorders are all genetically and clini- stenosis cally heterogeneous with significant phenotypic and genetic overlap. Incom- S. W. van der Laan, J. van Setten, H. M. den Ruijter, F. W. Asselbergs, P. I. W. de Bakker, G. plete penetrance and variable expressivity adds further complication. In ca- Pasterkamp; ses of sudden cardiac death where no record of the heart’s electrical activity UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. exists, it is extremely difficult to predict the correct molecular diagnosis. Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology allows the provision of clini- cally relevant and cost effective solutions for molecular diagnosis. We have Background developed and validated an NGS panel of 43 genes which includes four sub- To date, genome-wide association studies have identified 2 susceptibility panels for arrhythmic disorders CPVT, BS, LQTS and arrhythmia molecular loci for large artery ischemic stroke and 45 loci for coronary artery disease autopsy. The strategy used is Haloplex enrichment technology (Agilent Tech- (CAD). We investigated whether these SNPs affected atherosclerotic plaque nologies) followed by paired end sequencing on the MiSeq (Illumina) and an characteristics in the Athero-Express Biobank Study (AE, www.atheroex- in-house analysis pipeline, “HAPPy”. The pipeline is fully flexible, thus allo- press.nl) of patients with clinically significant carotid stenosis, from whom wing any combination of genes on the panel to be analysed together. plaque specimens have been histologically analyzed. The results of the first six months of this new service will be presented to Methods demonstrate the analytical and clinical sensitivity of our testing strategy. We genotyped 1,439 patients from the AE and imputed missing genotypes Emphasis will be placed on tChAe LiMnt1erpretation and clinical follow up of un- using HapMap. We tested the 47 SNPs for association to macrophages num- classified variants inC AthLeM d1iagnostic setting e.g. a non-synonymous poten- bers, smooth muscle cells (SMCs) numbers, neovascularization, intraplaque tially pathogenic variant in in a patient with young onset severe hemorrhage (IPH), atheroma size, calcification, and collagen content, using Brugada syndrome. pathogenic variants have previously only been linear or logistic regression, correcting for age, sex, year of surgery, array reported in LQTS and CPVT. type, and 10 principal components. We considered a significant association PM05.60 at p < 1.5 x 10-4 after Bonferroni correction for the number of variants and Loss of Y in blood and plaque is associated with atherosclerotic phenotypes tested. disease in men undergoing carotid endarterectomy Results S. Haitjema1, D. Kofink1, J. van Setten1, S. W. van der Laan1, S. C. A. de Jager1, P. I. W. de The most significant association was found for rs12539895 (coded allele fre- Bakker1, G. Pasterkamp1, F. W. Asselbergs1,2,3, H. M. den Ruijter1; quency = 0.75, odds ratio = 1.59 per C allele, p = 9.0 x 10-6) with percentage 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2University College London, of atheroma. This direction of effect was such that the same allele increases London, United Kingdom, 3ICIN-Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands. atheroma size and CAD risk. Other variants were nominally significantly as- sociated with macrophages (rs17609940, p = 0.0457), SMCs (rs11203042, p = 0.0478), IPH (rs11203042, p = 0.0020), and atheroma (rs2023938, p Introduction: = 0.0331; rs445925, p =0.0082), all with effect directions consistent with The Y chromosome has long been considered genomic wasteland with few their reported effect on CAD. genes only implicated in sex determination. However, recent studies found Conclusion an immunoregulatory role for Y and a relation between loss of Y (LOY) and Of 47 previously associated variants, one variant (rs12539895) was signi- a higher cancer risk and mortality. Given the involvement of immune cells in ficantly associated with atheroma size in patients with carotid atheroscle- atherosclerosis, we hypothesized that LOY is associated with cardiovascu- rosis. Further research is warranted to better understand underlying me- lar disease (CVD) phenotypes in men undergoing carotid endarterectomy chanisms. (CEA). PM05.58 Materials and Methods: Role of ceramide synthase 5 gene (LASS/CER
S5 ) in molecular LOY was quantified in blood and plaque from raw intensity genotyping data pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. in a cohort of 582 men in the Athero-Express Study. We tested LOY for asso- N. Coban, O. Yildirim, F. Geyik, B. Ozsait, N. Erginel-Unaltuna; ciation with CVD phenotypes, atherosclerotic plaque phenotypes and outco- Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Department of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. mes during 3-year follow-up. Results: ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANLDO,Y U inK 2 
|2  8W bWlooWd .aEnSd H13G5 .pOlaRqGue samples was negatively associated 1 w 2it 3h Ceramide, the backbone of sphingolipids, is the key component which af- age in both blood (beta=-0.03/10yr, p=3.34*10-5) and plaque (beta=-0ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index .02/10yr, p=0.001). Quartiles of LOY were associated with contralateral BN-Lx.SHR4(Pparg) (area under the glycemic curve rose by 17% compared arterial stenosis in blood (beta=-0.83,p=0.02) and peripheral arterial oc- to BN-Lx). We observed most striking shifts of TG and cholesterol concen- clusive disease (beta=0.17,p=0.03) and stroke history (beta=-0.20,p=0.3) in trations profile in strains BN-Lx.SHR4(A2m), BN-Lx.SHR4(CD 36) and BN- plaque. LOY was not associated with plaque phenotypes. Event-free survival Lx.SHR4(Pparg). In silico sequence comparison of differential segments in for major cardiovascular disease events was lowest in the quartile with the these strains revealed several genes harboring mutations in SHR. most Y-loss in blood (log-rank test p-value=0.03). Although LOY was corre- Conclusion: Using derivation of series of double congenic strains, we have lated between blood and plaque the variance was higher in blood suggestive validated several metabolic syndrome-related QTLs and identified potential for more Y instability in blood as compared to plaque. sequence variants underlying these loci. Conclusion: Supported by MSMT LK11217. LOY in blood and plaque is associated with hallmarks of atherosclerotic di- P
S05 .63 sease, but not with plaque phenotype in men undergoing CEA. Furthermo- Clinical diversity of MYH7- novel mutations and novel insights into re, men with LOY in blood had more major cardiovascular events during pathogenesis. follow-up. T. Hershkovitz1, N. Ekhilevitch1, A. Kurolap1, E. T. DeChene2, W. H. Tan3, H. N. Baris- P
S05 .61 Feldman1,4; 1The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 2Division of Genomic Losartan therapy in Marfan syndrome is only effective in patients Diagnostics, Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, with haploinsufficiency of FBN1 3Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s Hospital; Harvard Medical School, R. Franken1, A. den Hartog1, T. Radonic2, D. Micha2, A. Maugeri2, F. S. van Dijk2, H. E. Boston, MA, United States, 4Rappaport School of Medicine, Technion – Israel Institute of Meijers-Heijboer2, J. Timmermans3, A. J. Scholte4, M. P. van den Berg5, M. Groenink1, B. J. Technology, Haifa, Israel. M. Mulder1, A. H. Zwinderman1, V. de Waard1, G. Pals2; 1Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2VU University Introduction medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Radboud University Nijmegen Medical MYH7 Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 5University medical center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. Mutations in the myosin heavy chain 7, cardiac muscle, beta gene ( ) are an important cause of both primary caMrdYiHo7myopathy and skeleMtYalH myo- pathy. Previous data have established interesting correlations between va- Introduction: Patients with Marfan syndrome - caused by FBN1 mutations rCiaosues Spehreinesotypical features described in related disease ( -RD) - have an increased risk of life-threatening aortic complications. It has been and the specific site of the mutations within the gene. shown that losartan reduces aortic dilation rate in these patients. The re- sponse to losartan treatment, however, was highly variable between indi- Three pedigrees with cardiomyopathy were studied. Pedigree 1, a Jewish viduals. Here we investigate whether there is a difference in Losartan effec- Yemenite family, had 11 members with echoMcaYrHd7iographic evidence of non- tiveness in genetically classified subgroups. compaction cardiomyopathy and varying degrees of Epstein anomaly. This Methods: In this predefined sub-study of the COMPARE trial, we classified phenotype comprises approximately 4% of -RD. Pedigree 2 had a sin- FBN1 mutations into: 1) Dominant negative mutations leading to a mutated gle member suffering from congenital dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and fibrillin-1 protein incorporated in the extracellular matrix, 2) Haploinsuf- skeletal myopathy consistent with congenital fiber-type disproportion. The ficient mutations leading to decreased amount of normal fibrillin-1 protein. presentation of DCM and concomitant skeletal involvement congenitally is The response to losartan therapy based on aortic root dilatation rate was relatively uncommon. The third pedigree included 2 deceased siblings with compared between the two groups. DReCsMu latns da nthde Diri sdceucsesaisoend first cousin with reported restrictive cardiomyo- Results: Baseline characteristics between treatment groups were similar. pathy. MYH7 Overall, losartan significantly reduced aortic root dilatation rate. However, losartan only reduced aortic root dilatation rate in haploinsufficient pati- Direct sequencing of (NM_000257.3) in these pedigrees identified two ents and not in dominant negative patients. novel mutations; c.1859T>C (p.Leu620Pro) in pedigree 1 and c.5655+1G>A Conclusion: Marfan patients with haploinsufficient FBN1 mutations are in pedigree 2, prediMctYeHd to disrupt the donor splice site of exon 38. The- more responsive to losartan therapy with respect to inhibition of aortic root se mutations expand the known genotypic spectrum of these relatively dilatation rate compared to dominant negative patients. In order to predict rare phenotypes of -RD. Mutation analysis of the one available patient response on losartan therapy, mutation classification should be performed from pedigree 3 identified a compound heterozygous mutation c. 427C>T for all Marfan patients. More research for novel treatment strategies is nee- (p.Arg143Trp) and c. 4588C>T (p.Arg1530X). Interestingly, c. 427C>T was ded in Marfan patients with a dominant negative FBN1 mutation previously described as causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy via a domi- Aortic root dilatation in Marfan patients nant negative effect, yet the proband‘s healthy mother and aunt carried this Type of FBN1 mutation Aortic root dilatation in mm/3 years mutation. This may alter our view on disease pathogenesis, suggesting the No losartan + losartan p-value total 1.3 ± 1.5 (n=59) 0.8 ± 1.4 (n=58) 0.009 contribution of nonsense mutations in the resulting disease phenotype. dominant negative 1.2 ± 1.7 (n=38) 0.8 ± 1.3 (n=41) 0.197 PM05.64 haploinsufficient 1.8 ± 1.5 (n=21) 0.5 ± 0.8 (n=17) 0.001 Two novel MYLK nonsense mutations causing thoracic aortic aneurysms/dissections in patients without apparent family history PM05.62 I. Luyckx1, D. Proost1, J. Hendriks2, N. Peeters1, W. Wuyts1, I. Rodrigus3, L. Van Laer1, B. L. Dissecting metabolic syndrome-related QTLs on rat chromosome 4 Loeys4,5; via eleven new double congenic rat strains 1Department of Medical Genetics - Antwerp University, Edegem, Belgium, 2Department E. Skolnikova, F. Liska, L. Sedova, D. Krenova, V. Kren, O. Seda; of Cardiothoracic surgery - Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 3Department Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, of Cardiac surgery - Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 4Center for Medical Prague, Czech Republic. Genetics - Antwerp University, Edegem, Belgium, 5Department of Human Genetics - Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Introduction: Rat chromosome 4 comprises several regions frequently associated with metabolic syndrome features. In order to dissect the individual QTLs we de- Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection (TAAD) is a gene- rived 11 new double congenic strains by introgressing distinct segments of tically heterogeneous disorder representingM aY LfrKequent cause of morbidity rat chromosome 4 (RNO4) of spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) origin and mortality in the western world. To date, only two heterozygous loss-of- into BN-Lx (Brown Norway) genomic background. function mutations have been described in (myosin light chain kina- Methods: We defined the spans of respective differential segment using 79 se) causing famiMliaYlL aKortic disease with little to no aortic enlargement prior microsatellite markers. 16-week-old male rats (n=6/strain) were fed a stan- tMoe dthisosedcst aionnd. rHeesruel, tws:e have aimed to expand the phenotypical spectrum dard diet. We assessed comprehensively the morphometric and metabolic associated with mutations. profiles of all groups, including glucose tolerance tests, levels of insulin, adi- After the application of a next-geMnYeLraKt ion sequencing ponectin and concentrations of triglycerides and cholesterol in 20 lipopro- based TAAD gene panel in a cohort of 359 syndromic and non-syndromic tein fractions. One-way ANOVA with STRAIN and as major factor was used. TAAD patients, we identified two novel heterozygous mutations lea- Results: Fasting glucose (ANOVA p = 0.00014) was considerably lower in ding to a premature stop codon. Two female patients, with nonsense mu- BN-Lx.SHR4(A2m) (2.3 ± 0.24 mmol/l) and BN-Lx.SHR4(Il6 Lmbr Rat7 tations at amino acids p.Arg1458 and p.Arg1487, presented with type B (Rat248-Rat150)) (3.66 ± 0.20 mmol/l) compared to BN-Lx (4.8 ± 0.42 aortic dissection at ages 47 and 49 years, respectively. Both patients had a mmol/l). Glucose tolerance was improved in BN-Lx.SHR4(A2m) (area un- longstanding history of hypertension. Physical exam revealed unilateral iris d 1e 2r 4the glycemic curve fell by 42,1% compEarSeHd tGo B 2N0-
L1 x5) b |u Gt dLeAteSrioGrOateWd i,n S COfloTcLcuAliN inD o,n Ue, Kw h| eWreWas Wthe. EoSthHerG w.OomRaGn presented with several systemic connective tissue findings. Remarkably, none of the patients had a familyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P
S05 .67 Conclusions: MYLK Molecular screening of NKX2.5 in two Moroccan cohorts with atrial history of aortic aneurysms or dissections. septal defect (ASD) and tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) Two novel heterozygous loss-of-function mutations I. El Bouchikhi1,2, K. Belhassan1, F. Moufid1,2, M. Iraqui Houssaini2, S. Atmani3, L. hMaYvLeK b een identified. In addition to vascular findings, patients showed va- Bouguenouch1, I. Samri1, K. Ouldim1; riabMleY sLyKs temic features. The current report doubles the number of known 1Medical Genetics and Oncogenetics Unit, HASSAN II University Hospital, Fez, Morocco, mutations and significantly informs the further clinical delineation of 2Lab. Microbial Biotechnology, Faculty of Sciences & Technologies, Fez, Morocco, 3Medico-Chirurgical Unit of Cardio-pediatrics, HASSAN II University Hospital, Fez, the phenotypic spectrum. Morocco. P
S05 .65 Coincidence of ANKRD1, TMEM43 and PK
P2  mutations in patient with ARVD Congenital heart disease (CHD) is one of the most frequent disorders obser- J. Kadlecova1, D. Nikulenkov Grochova1, L. Durcova1, M. Hiemerova1, I. Grochova2,3, L. ved at birth, affecting more than 1/100 live births. Among all CHDs, Atrial Skutkova3, P. Vlašín2; Septal Defect (ASD) and Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) account for approximately 1Cytogenetic laboratory Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Center of prenatal diagnosis, Brno, Czech Republic, 3International Clinical Research Center, St. Anne´s University Hospital 10% and 7% respectively. The previous studies have shown that mutations Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. in NKX2.5 were associated with these two disorders. The aim of this study was to screen the NKX2.5 mutations in two series of Moroccan patients af- fected respectively by ASD and TOF. Background. Cardiomyopathy is characterized by mechanical or electrical Thirty four patients were recruited in HASSAN II university hospital of Fez; dysfunction of cardiac muscle and it is a known risk factor of sudden cardiac DNAs were extracted from Blood samples. Then, all samples have undergo- death. More than hundreds of variant in 84 genes have been associated with ne amplification by PCR and direct sequencing of NKX2.5 coding regions. inherited cardiomyopathy. A high number and variability of involved genes The obtained sequences were analysed by Bioinformatic alignment tools. complicate diagnosis of cardiomyopathy. New technology of targeted next We have detected 3 mutations in ASD cohort and 2 mutations in TOF cohort generation sequencing has a great potential in diagnostic settings of cardio- which represents respectively 10.5% and 15.3% of the studied cohorts. The- myopathies. It allows us to analyze several genes in parallel, which entails se prevalences are much higher than those reported in the previous studies, that several variants of potentially pathological or even unknown clinical which requires more studies in larger Moroccan cohorts. Moreover, we have significance are detected. found that the polymorphism c.63A>G is quite common in the Moroccan po- Methods. We applied next generation sequencing of 46 genes which have pulation with prevalence around 75%. previously been shown to be associated with different types of cardiomyo- Grant References: Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy of Fez – Hassan II Uni- pathies (TruSight Cardiomyopathy Panel, Illumina) on group of unrelated versity Hospital of Fez, Morocco. patients with DCM, ARVC and ventricular fibrillation. PM05.68 Results. The summary of the results of our analysis of the entire group of Novel desmoplakin splice site and TMEM43 missense variant patients will be presented. A case report is selected, in which we present a presenting with noncompaction cardiomyopathy (NCCM) patient with serious symptoms of Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dyspla- J. I. van Waning, R. A. Oldenburg, K. Caliskan, M. A. Slegtenhorst, D. F. Majoor-Krakauer; sia (ARVD), including ventricular tachycAaNrdKiRa Da1nd suTdMdeEnM c4a3r diac arrest, in Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. which we rePvKeaPl2ed three potentially pathological mutations in three diffe- rent genes. Two missense mutations in and gene and one mutation in , which causes aberrant splicing were detected. Noncompaction cardiomyopathy is a genetic cardiomyopathy associated Conclusions. We hypothesized that thAe NcoKmRDb1in ation of these three patholo- with defects in sarcomere genes, in particular MYH7 and Titin. NCCM is gical mutations could be the reason for the lethal course of the disease. Mo- characterized by distinct morphologic changes with hypertrabeculation and reover, we assume that mutations in gene, which were previously deep intertrabecular recesses of the left ventricular wall. In arrhytmogenic shown to be responsible for dilated cardiomyopathy and hypertrophic car- right ventricular cardiomyopathy loss of myocytes and fibro-fatty tissue re- diomyopathy, could be associated also with ARVD. placement are caused by mutations in genes affecting the function of the Supported by the European Regional Development Fund-Project FNUSA- desmosomal complex resulting in comprised cell-to-cell adhesion and dif- ICRC (No. CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0123). ferential signaling. Among the ARVC genes the DSP gene has shown to have PM05.66 a strong effect on left ventricular function, in contrary to TMEM43. Mutati- Rare variants residing in the ADAMT
S13  von Willebrand factor (VWF) ons in ARVC genes are rarely observed in NCCM. So far only two heterozy- binding domain contribute to pediatric stroke susceptibility gous truncating DSP variants (c.5208_5209delAG and c.1339C>T) and no M. Stoll1, F. Ruehle1, A. Witten1, A. Barysenka1, A. Arning1, C. Strauss1, U. Nowak-Göttl2; TMEM43 variants have been associated with NCCM. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Genetic Epidemiology, Muenster, Germany, 2Institute of We found a DSP splice site mutation (c.3084+1G>A) classified as pathoge- Clinical Chemistry, Hemostasiology, Kiel, Germany. nic, in a women who had 2 children, diagnosed with NCCM at age 33 years. She suffered from palpitations and repeated syncope, the ECG showed su- stained ventricle tachycardia with right bundle branch morphology. After Recently we reported a gene network of ADAMTS (A Disintegrin-like and cardioversion the resting ECG didn’t show inverted T-waves or epsilonwaves Metalloprotease with Thrombospondin motifs) genes as central component as expected in ARVC. of the genetic risk contributing to pediatric stroke. ADAMT
S13  is a prime Cardiac echo showed a dilated right ventricle without dyskinesia and a hy- example for such a key component as it cleaves VWF multimers, reduces pertrabeculated left ventricle fulfilling the Jenni criteria for NCCM. The car- platelet adhesion and aggregation and down-regulates thrombus forma- diac MRI showed a dilated right ventricle with hypertrabeculation, without tion and inflammation. Here we characterized the genetic architecture of dyskinesia. Left ventricle showed a decreased ejection fraction of 40% with ADAMT
S13  through targeted next generation sequencing of 48 affected noncompacted versus compacted ratio of 4,6. The patient met diagnostic children and their unaffected siblings. In total, we identified 226 variants criteria for NCCM, not for ARVC. These observations suggest genetic overlap in ADAMT
S13 , 36 of which are rare and resist filtering for unambiguous between ARVC and NCCM and further studies are needed to elucidate the allele calling. For genotyping in 270 trios, 21 common variants covering underlying shared pathophysiologic mechanism. the complete ADAMT
S13  gene were selected based on significance in the Funding: Jaap Schouten Foundation sib-ship disequilibrium test (p<0.05) or protein altering properties. Trans- P
S05 .69 mission disequilibrium testing was performed for affection status and Genetics in noncompaction cardiomyopathy(NCCM) ADAMT
S13  activity levels using PLINK and FBAT, respectively. 10 SNPs J. I. van Waning1, K. Caliskan1, M. Michels1, A. F. L. Schinkel1, Y. M. Hoedemaekers2, M. were significantly associated with pediatric stroke (p<0.05 to <0.001), two Wessels1, I. van de Laar1, M. A. Slegtenhorst1, D. F. Majoor-Krakauer1; of which (rs2285489, rs28793911) were also significantly associated with 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands. ADAMT
S13  levels (p=0.0004 and p=0.0092). The C-alpha collapsing test im- plemented in AssotesteR was used to assess significance across the set of 36 rare variants yielding a significant association (p=5.73x10-6). Haplotype Introduction: Noncompaction cardiomyopathy (NCCM) is a genetic cardio- association using a sliding window approach assigns this association to the myopathy, characterized by excessive trabeculations with deep recesses of ADAMT
S13  VWF-binding domain (p=1.2 x10-4). Our data provide a link bet- the left ventricular wall. We present the results of genetic analysis in a large ween the genetic architecture of ADAMT
S13 , ADAMT
S13  levels and stroke cohort of NCCM patients. risk. Altogether, these studies render ADAMT
S13  an attractive candidate for Method: The study included all NCCM index patients diagnosed and tested functional studies and a potential diagnostic kit that incorporates genetic from 2005 till 2015 in our medical center. Current molecular testing for variation as predictors for stroke risk. genetic defects is performed using novel next generation sequencing tech- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAN nD iq, u U esK o | f W a pW anW el . oE f S 4H 8 G ca. rO diR omG yopathy related genes. Genetic sequ1e2nc5eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index variants in the cardiomyopathy genes were classified for pathogenic effect 150 large Finnish dyslipidemia families, and were genotyped at ~550,000 according to the current five category diagnostic criteria. genetic variants using Illumina CoreExome beadchip array. Parental ori- Results: The study include 128 index NCCM patients. Pathogenic or likely gins of alleles were determined using long-range phasing and genealogy pathogenic variants (class 4 and 5) were identified in 40% (49/128) of the as implemented in Alphaphase 1.1. POE was assessed using mixed linear patients, including two or more (likely) variants mutations in 8 % (4/49). models (adjusted for age, sex and relatedness) evaluating (1) phenotypic MYH7 mutations were the most frequent, affecting 16% (21/128) of the pa- differences between reciprocal heterozygotes, and (2) effect of maternally tients. The titin gene appeared to be an important cause of NCCM since we aNndT NpGat1e, rCnEaLllFy4 i,n ChLeDriNte1d4 ,a CllDelKeNs 1seAp,aPrMaPte2l2y.-TEKT3, GPR56, EIF4E) P found truncating variants classified as likely pathogenic in 10% (7/67) of Analysis revealed potential POEs on cardio-metabolic traits in seven loci the tested patients. In two patients (2/67) the MIB1 gene, known to regu- ( -7 NTNG1 at value lated embryologic compaction of the ventricular wall, was involved. In 30% <1.0x10 . The strongest signal for parental origin specific association was (38/128) of the patients a variant of unknown clinical significance (class3) obtained at rs531284 near P for fasting glucose levels. The maternally was found. inherited minor allele at rs531284 shCoLwDeNd1 a4s-s8ociation with reduced fasting Conclusion: Extensive genetic testing detected a (likely) pathogenic variant glucose level [mat=-0.67 s.d. units, mat=7.8x10 ] whereas Ppaternal allele was in 40% of NCCM patients. The improving molecular diagnostics for cardio- not associated. At rs2249508 near , paternal specific asso-8ciation myopathies have a profound impact on counseling and screening of families was observed with LDL particle size [pat=-0.55 s.d. units, pat=9.8x10 ]. The- of NCCM patients. Further studies are needed to understand the contributi- se preliminary associations are now being tested for replication on further on of genetic factors to this disease. family studies. Funding: Jaap Schouten Foundation In conclusion, the study indicates POE of genetic variants on glucose and PM05.70 lFiupindd-rinelga:ted traits and suggests that this approach could help to identify Paediatric cardiomyopathy (PC); the utility of a 71 gene NGS new susceptibility genes for complex disorders. diagnostic panel to detect variants in rare cardiac genes. Study was supported by The U.S. National Institutes of Health M. J. Gable1, K. Smith1, J. M. Honeychurch1, H. Sawyer1, R. Newbury-Ecob2, C. Steward3, L. (grant no. H
L113315 ), Sigrid Juselius Foundation, and Finnish Foundation Robert4, T. Bueser5, C. Gardiner6, C. Bowen7, M. Williams1; for Cardiovascular Research. 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, BRISTOL, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics, St Michael‘s PM05.72 Hospital, BRISTOL, United Kingdom, 3Bristol Royal Infirmary, BRISTOL, United Kingdom, Association of R279Q and 
C1562 T polymorphisms of Matrix 4Clinical Genetics, Guy‘s and Thomas‘ Hospital, LONDON, United Kingdom, 5Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ Hospital, LONDON, United Kingdom, 6West of Scotland Regional Genetics metallopeptidase-9 (MM-9) gene and increased risk for myocardial Service, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 7Clinical Genetics and Pathology, Southern General infarction in patients with premature coronary artery disease among Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom. Iranian population M. Sheikhvatan; Tehran Heart Cneter, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. Paediatric cardiomyopathy (PC) can present in infancy with cardiac failure and sudden death. Considerable clinical and genetic heterogeneity exists within and between cardiomyopathy families hence cost effective gene pa- Background: The present study assessed the relationship between these two nel testing aids diagnosis and elucidates complex clinical presentations. A polymorphisms of the matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MM
P9 ) gene (R279Q 71 PC gene panel (Agilent SureSelect) has been validated (UKGTN appro- A/G polymorphism (rs17576) and 
C1562 T polymorphism (rs3918242)) ved) with coverage of 99.9% at 30X, and data analysis using an in-house bio- and occurrence of myocardial infarction in patients with premature coro- informatics pipeline based on the Broad Institute and Geneticist Assistant nary artery disease. (SoftGenetics). Methods: Our prospective study included 1000 patients with the final dia- To date 37 patients have been tested, including paediatric cases; patients gnosis of premature CAD and classified into two groups with history of MI negative for other genes and patients who have phenotypic incompatibility (n = 461) and without of MI (n = 539). The polymorphism variants were with their reported pathogeMnYicB vPaCr3iant where digenic inheritance is suspec- determined by PCR-RFLP and High Resolution Melting techniques. Among ted. 32/37 (86%) patie nNtsE BhaLve at least one potentially pathogenic variant. study samples, 640 were followed with a median follow-up time 59 months In one family with HCM, a variant c.1505G>A, p.(Arg502Gln) and for determining association of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) and a previously reported pathogenic variant c.180G>C, p.(Lys60Asn) polymorphisms. (nebulette protein) were detected in a severely affected male demonstra- Results: The prevalence of wild, heterozygous and mutant genotypes of ting that multiple variants can explain phenRoMtyBp2ic0 s(everity. The utility of R279Q polymorphism in MI group was 14.5%, 57.3%, and 28.2% and in non- testing rare genes is exemplified by: 1) A teenager with LV dilation and FH MI group was 36.9%, 38.4%, and 24.7%, respectively with a considerable of sudden death who was heterozygous for a RNA binding protein) difference (p < 0.001). There was a significant difference in the prevalence variant c.1907G>A, p.(Arg636His), previoMuYsHly6 r eported with severe familial of wild, heterozygous and mutant genotypes of 
C1562 T polymorphisms in DCM; 2) a patient with congenital heart block, LV dilation and FH wasT hTeN- MI group (12.4%, 41.2%, and 46.4%, respectively) and in non-MI group terozygous for a novel likely pathogenic (alpha heavy chain subunit) (46.8%, 38.6%, and 14.7%, respectively) (p < 0.001). After adjustment for variant c.3578CT>TTN, p.(Ala1193Val). Furthermore, a novel heterozygous covariates, significant differences were revealed in genotypes of R279Q and A-band frameshift variant was identified in an infantile DCM patient; recent 
C1562 T polymorphisms between MI and non-MI groups. No difference was data suggests frameshift variants have not been reported in infantile found in total-MACE free survival rate in MI patients and also in non-MI pati- cardiomyopathy. ents with different genotypes of R279Q and 
C1562 T polymorphisms. An audit of this patient cohort will be presented, illustrated by interesting Conclusion: 
C1562 T and R279Q polymorphisms of MMP-9 gene can be as- cases. sociated with the susceptibility to MI in premature CAD patients. However, P
S05 .71 these polymorphisms may not be able to predict long-term cardiac events Genome-wide analysis of parent-of-origin effects on cardio-metabolic in these patients. traits R. Tabassum1, S. Söderlund2, A. Sarin1, S. K. Service3, A. Palotie1,4, N. B. Freimer3, M. P
S05 .73 Taskinen2, S. Ripatti1,5,6; Pathogenic potential of FOX
C2  mutations identified in patients with 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Helsinki, primary lymphedema Diabetes and Obesity Research Program, and Helsinki University Hospital, Heart and D. Tavian1, S. Missaglia1, S. Michelini2, M. Ricci3, M. Bertelli4; Lung Centre, Department of Cardiology, Helsinki, Finland, 3University of California 1Univeristy, Milan, Italy, 2Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Hospital, Ancona, Italy, 4Onlus, Rovereto, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, and Italy. Massachusetts General Hospital, Cambridge, MA, United States, 5Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 6Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. Dominant mutations in the FOX
C2  gene cause a form of lymphedema that usually develops around puberty. In a large percentage of patients, lym- phedema is accompanied by distichiasis and varicose veins. Other clinical Parent-of-origin effect (POE) is an epigenetic phenomenon that makes two abnormalities, such as cardiac defects, epidural cysts, ptosis and cleft pa- alleles at a locus functionally non-equivalent and manifested as phenotypic late have also been reported but are less common. FOX
C2  is a member of differences between reciprocal heterozygotes. We performed parental ori- the forkhead/winged-helix family of transcription factors and plays essen- gin-specific genome-wide association analyses for cardio-metabolic traits to tial role in different developmental pathways and physiological processes. identify genetic variants exhibiting POE. T1h2e6 study included 617 individuals with aE t lS eaH stG o n2 e0 p1 ar5 e n| t G geL nA otS ypG eO d fW rom, S COMTosLt AofN FODX,C U2 Km u| tWatiWonsW de.EscSrHibeGd. sOo RfaGr either truncate the protein or are missense mutations in the forkhead domain causing a loss of function. TheABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index haplo-insufficiency is associated with generalized hyperplasia of lymphatic ristics of neuropsychiatric disorders in patients with CPVT. Methods: RYR2 system in mice as well as in humans. We previously described six unrelated families with primary lymphedema We includedall CPVT patients with a pathogenic mutation in which patients showed different FOX
C2  mutations. Of those, 4 were mis- and intellectual disability (ID) from 4 tertiary referral centers in the Nether- sense mutations, one a frame-shift mutation and the last one a stop muta- lands and Japan. ID was defined as significant impairment of cognitive and tion; all of them were located outside of the forkhead domain. To evaluate adaptive functions with onset before the age of 18. their pathogenic potential, we now have examined their subcellular locali- Results: RYR2 zation and performed a transactivation assay using a luciferase construct RYR2 A mong 250 CPVT patients carrying a mutation, we identi- with FOX
C1  response elements. All FOX
C2  mutated proteins are able to fied 18 patients with ID (7.2% compared to 1% of the general population). localize correctly into the nucleus. Alf of them present reduced while the The mutations (15 missense and 1 splice site) clustered in the known remaining increased transcriptional ability, ranging from a complete loss to hot-spodt er engoivoons. Two mutations have been previously described in patients a significant gain of function. Our data suggest that the unbalanced FOX
C2  without reported ID. In 9 out of 14 patients studied (64%) the mutation ap- activity causes a dramatic perturbation of lymphatic vessel formation lea- peared . The severity of ID ranged from mild to severe, and was often ding to lymphedema. accompanied by behavioral disorders including autism and attention deficit PM05.74 hyperactivity disorder. Of note, the majority of patients displayed marked Molecular and functional characterization of BMPR2 gene in supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias, with a high incidence (39%) Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension of serious arrhythmic events during follow-up including 3 fatal events. G. Pousada1,2, V. Lupo3, S. Cástro-Sánchez1,2, A. Baloira4, C. Espinós3, D. Valverde1,2; Conclusions: RYR2 1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Vigo (IBIV), Vigo, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 4Complejo ID is more prevalent among positive CPVT patients than Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain. in the general population, and is associated with a malignant cardiac phe- notype. Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH; OMIM 178600, ORPHA 422) is an Funding: 2014T007 Dutch Heart Foundation autosomal dominant disease characterized by pulmonary vascular resi- stance increase, vascular remodelling and right heart failure. Symptoms of PM05.76 PAH include fatigue, shortness of breath and syncope. Several genes have MSVA - mutation and sequence variation analysis software been related to HAP, the most implicated gene is BMPR2 with more than J. Geryk1, R. Blatny1, L. Homolova1, V. Philimonenko2, L. Vojtova1, I. Nováková1, J. Vasak1, 300 mutations described, 80% in Familial HAP and 20-40% in Idiopatic L. Jarolimova2, P. Hozak2, V. Krivjansky1, M. Krivjanska1; HAP. However, some of the functional implications for these mutations are 1KRD Ltd., Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Molecular Genetics, Czech Academy of unknown. The aim was to characterize the pathological mechanism of se- Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic. veral mutations in BMPR2 and correlate them with the clinical spectrum of the disease. Variants were selected from an in silico analysis. mRNA expression studies In order to assist the integration of patient data on rare diseases with tools were performed using pSP
L3  vector to confirm splicing alterations, studies for statistical analysis, we created advanced form of a patient/variation/ of subcellular localization were performed using pEGFP-N1 vector and lu- symptom database for the use on desktop computers and particularly for ciferase assay were performed using pG
L3 -Bassic vector. Correlation geno- installation on a web server. The secured web form of the database is con- type-phenotype was performed using Spss v.19 software. trolled via assignment of individual logins and passwords and security of Nine out of 24 analyzed changes affect mRNA processing (p.
S52 Sfs*2, the data is achieved by fine layering of data access/editing permissions and, p.
C84 F, p.
P138 A, p.R211R, p.Y218*, p.V278V, p.W298*, p.
P327 P, p.K467R) at the same time, is adjusted to enable sharing of the data which is a crucial and 4 out of 18 variants affects the subcellular localization (p.
S52 Sfs*2, function of the database. p.
C84 F, p.Y218*, W298*). Five changes were identified at 5´UTR region and Structure of the underlining MySQL database is designed in the way that four of them produced a gene expression decrease of >50%. Patients with each gene is represented by a separate table with patients/variations (rows) these pathogenic mutations showed an early age of diagnosis (p=0.047) and and their symptoms (columns), and the content of the tables is called by greater sPaP (p=0.042). built-in statistical functions to perform inference. Database administrator is Molecular and functional studies have allowed us to check the real impli- able to add new genes (tables) while the users of the database create new cation of the mutation and to correlate the role in the phisiopathological records (rows) of patients/variations and fill in their symptoms. We will pathway of the disease. Likewise, these mutations predispose individuals to present current structure of the user interface of the software and details a more severe phenotype and this group shown a early age at diagnosis. of the included statistical tools which enable to test hypotheses on subsets P
S05 .75 of patients and subsets of their variations and symptoms. The current ver- Extending the phenotypic spectrum of RYR2 mutations: mind the sion contains tables for genes with structural functions in the cytoskeleton brain! and nucleoskeleton and patient data including symptoms of diseases like J. M. A. Verhagen1, K. V. V. Lieve2, C. van der Werf2, F. van den Heuvel3, I. M. E. Frohn- dystrophy, cardiomyopathy, lipodystrophy etc. This work is supported by Mulder4, G. M. S. Mancini1, W. Shimizu5, T. Aiba6, A. Nogami7, H. Horigome8, H. J. G. Crijns9, the Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade (MPO FR TI 3 588) and the Czech A. C. Blank10, A. C. P. Wiesfeld11, N. A. Blom2,12, N. Sumitomo13, I. M. B. H. van de Laar1, A. A. Ministry of Education (COST MSMT LD12063). M. Wilde2; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, P
S05 .77 2Heart Center, Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical MCEM
P1  expression as a biomarkers of stroke diagnosis and Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Beatrix Children’s prognosis Hospital, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, K. Raman1, M. O’Donnel1,2, G. Pare1; Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, 1Population Health Research Institute, Hamilton Health Sciences and McMaster Netherlands, 5Department of Cardiology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan, University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 2National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland. 6National Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan, 7Department of Cardiology, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan, 8Department of Pediatrics, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan, 9Department of Cardiology, Heart Failure Clinic, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 10Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Wilhelmina Introduction: Stroke is a leading cause of death and functional disability. A Children‘s Hospital, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 11Department of limitation in the current evaluation and treatment of patients with suspec- Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, ted stroke is the lack of a rapid diagnostic test. A blood-based biomarker Netherlands, 12Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, of acute stroke may expedite stroke diagnosis and prognosis. As such we Leiden, Netherlands, 13Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Saitama Medical University, sought to identify genes expressed in peripheral blood that are associated International Medical Center, Saitama, Japan. with (1) stroke, (2) primary stroke type, ischemic or hemorrhagic, and (3) Introduction: stroke prognosis. Methods: Stroke cases and controls were recruited from a subset of centers Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia involved in the international INTERSTROKE study. Patients were consecu- (CPVT) is a rare inherited cardiac disorder characterized by adrenergically- tively assigned to the biomarker discovery cohort (N=302) or validation co- mReYdRi2ated ventricular arrhythmias. The most common autosomal dominant hort (N=62). In the discovery cohort transcriptome-wide peripheral blood form of CPVT is caused by mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene expression was assessed using the Illumina HumanRef-8 v4 bead chip. ( ) gene. Apart from the my Eoc Sa Hrd Giu m 2, 0 t 1hi 5s c |a Glci Lu Am S r Gele Oas We ,c h Sa Cn One Tl Lis A NSDig,n UifiKca n| tW geWneWs w.EerSe HvaGlid.OateRdG using qPCR in the validation cohort. 127 highly expressed in the brain. Here we studied the prevalence and characte-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results: Expression of a single gene, MCEM
P1 , was sufficient to distin- We acknowledge the support from the “Netherlands CardioVascular Re- guish between stroke cases and controls (FC=2.4, P-value = 8.2 x 10-22, search Initiative”: the Dutch Heart Foundation, Dutch Federation of Univer- AUC=0.812). MCEM
P1  expression also differentiated between ischemic and sity Medical Centres, the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and hemorrhagic stroke cases (AUC=0.783). Furthermore, MCEM
P1  expression Development and the Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences (PREDICT was significantly associated with one-month outcome, measured as Modi- project). fied Rankin Score (MRS), after adjustment for available risk factors, primary PM05.80 stroke type and baseline MRS (FC=1.29, P-value = 1.09 x 10-5). Finally the Family follow up and genetic testing in sudden cardiac death with a associations between MCEM
P1  and stroke and one-month MRS were inde- structurally normal heart pendently confirmed in the validation cohort. R. mcintyre1, I. findlay2, C. Brown3, V. Murday2; Conclusion: Peripheral blood expression of MCEM
P1  may have utility as a 1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, diagnostic test for acute stroke, in distinguishing ischemic stroke from intra- Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. cerebral hemorrhage and a prognostic biomarker of outcome. PM05.78 NOTCH3 mutations and risk of young stroke in INTERSTROKE Aims: M. Chong1, M. O‘Donnell1,2, V. Thijs3, S. Yusuf1, G. Paré1; To assess the efficiency of the Familial Arrhythmic Network Scotland (FANS) 1Population Health Research Institute, Hamilton Health Sciences, and McMaster in following up the families, and to assess the effectiveness of genetic testing, University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 2National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland, in those who died of sudden cardiac death with a structurally normal heart. 3Leuven University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium. Methods: We performed an audit of those whose post-mortem reported a cause of death ‘SADS’ or ‘unascertained’. Cases of ‘SIDS’ were excluded in this study. Introduction: CADASIL is a rare Mendelian stroke syndrome due to mutati- Results: ons in the NOTCH3 gene. CADASIL syndrome is characterized by ischemic In 27 cases of sudden cardiac deaths since the 01/01/11, there were 125 stroke, migraine, and cognitive impairment in young patients with a family first-degree relatives. Of these 73 (58%) received an ECG and 53 (42%) re- history of stroke. Whether mutations in NOTCH3 or other Mendelian stroke ceived an echo. 21/27 tissues were genetically tested using the routine test genes are risk factors in young patients unselected for syndromic features panel of KCNQ1, KCNH2, KCN
E1 , KCN
E2 , SCN5A and RYR2. Pathogenic mu- is unknown. tations were found in 2/21 of cases (SCN5A and RYR2 genes). In the majori- Methods: Using exome sequencing, 10 Mendelian small-vessel stroke genes ty of families where no gene mutation was identified, no diagnostic findings were analyzed in young unrelated stroke cases (mean age: 47.6 years), com- were found on clinical investigations. In addition, when these findings were prising 100 intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) and 85 small-vessel ischemic combined with an earlier audit, we also found that in 22/56 (39%) cases, stroke (SVIS), and 185 matched controls from INTERSTROKE, a large inter- there was evidence in the post-mortem report of non-toxic levels of alcohol national case-control study of stroke. consumption around the time of death. Results: Canonical CADASIL mutations were exclusive to cases and asso- Conclusion: ciated with risk of all stroke (P=0.02), explaining 3.2%, 3%, and 3.5% of The yield of pathogenic mutation (10%) was lower than reported literature all stroke, ICH, and SVIS, respectively. We estimated that CADASIL mutati- (15-33%). This may be due to restriction of genes tested. Family follow up of on carriers are at high risk of ICH (OR=9.36; P=0.02) and that the popula- those with a sudden cardiac death was adequate, although could be impro- tion prevalence of CADASIL is 340 per 100,000 individuals. Non-CADASIL ved. This audit also highlights the prevalence of recent exposure to alcohol/ NOTCH3 mutations were also associated with risk of ICH (OR=2.66; P=0.03) non-toxic levels of alcohol at time of death in this group, and the role of alco- and were present in 19% of ICH cases and 8% of controls. Secondary fea- hol in sudden death may merit further investigation. tures of CADASIL (migraine, depression, psychiatric disturbances, subclini- P
S05 .81 cal infarcts, parental history of stroke) were not more frequent in NOTCH3 Low yield of genetic testing for cardiac channelopathy in sudden mutation carriers as compared to non-carriers. No significant associations unexplained infant death were observed for the other 9 genes. P. Constantinou1, D. O‘Sullivan2, S. Tennant2, J. H. K. Grieve3, P. Brown3, V. Murday4, A. M. Conclusion: NOTCH3 mutations are important risk factors for ICH in young Ross1, J. C. S. Dean1; people. CADASIL mutations pose high risk to ICH and their prevalence may 1North of Scotland Regional Genetic Service, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, be underestimated. Genetic screening of NOTCH3 should be considered in 2Molecular Genetics Department, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United young stroke patients. Kingdom, 3Pathology Department, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 4West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Glasgow, United Kingdom. P
S05 .79 Sudden cardiac arrest and rare genetic variants in the community E. M. Lodder1, M. T. Blom1, A. Milano1, D. A. van Hoeijen1, J. Barc1, T. T. Koopmann1, L. Beekman1, E. van der Schoot2, P. Lichtner3, C. R. Bezzina1, H. L. Tan1; Introduction: Sudden unexplained infant death (SUDI, death under 12 1Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, months without cause on autopsy) accounts for 12.8% of infant deaths in Netherlands, 3Helmholtz Zentrum, Technische Universität München, München, Germany. Scotland. Cardiac channelopathy (CC) accounts for an estimated 5% of SUDI. Genetic variant identification in SUDI may have implications for recurrence risk and cascade screening. We present our experiences of genetic testing Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) ranks among the most common causes of death for CC in SUDI. worldwide. SCA incidence in the community varies between 0.6 and >1.4 Methods: Retrospective analysis of gene testing for CC in SUDI at a single per 1,000 individuals. Because SCA mostly occurs in individuals without centre over 10 years. Six genes (SCN5A, KCN
E1 , KCN
E2 , KCNH2, KCNQ1, previously known cardiac disease, the identification of patients at risk for RYR2) were screened in all cases. SCA could save many lives. In unselected SCA victims from the community, Results: In total, 24 cases of SUDI were referred; 3 were excluded due to common genetic variants (which are not disease-causing per se, but may alternative causes of death. Variants were detected in 7 (33.3%); none were increase susceptibility to VF) have recently also been associated with in- conclusively pathogenic. Potential pathogenicity was assigned in two cases, creased SCA risk. However, whether rare genetic variants contribute to SCA though these variants are present in over 0.1% of 6,500 “normal” individu- risk in the community is largely unexplored. als in the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project dataset. First-degree relatives We here investigated the involvement of rare genetic variants in SCA risk were screened in both cases and no cardiac abnormalities were identified. at the population level, by studying the prevalence of six founder genetic Discussion: In this small series, genetic testing did not uncover CC as a cause variants present in the Dutch population (PLN-p.Arg14del, MYBP
C3 -p. of SUDI. In contrast, 2/17 cases of sudden unexplained death in 1-5 year Trp792fsX17, MYBP
C3 -p.Arg943X and MYBP
C3 -p.Pro955fsX95, PK
P2 -p. olds tested at our centre had pathogenic variants. There are clear difficul- Arg79X and the Chr7q36 IVF risk-haplotype) in a cohort of 1440 unselected ties interpreting variants due to conflicting literature evidence and minimal Dutch SCA victims included in the AmsteRdam REsuscitation Study (AR- phenotypic data in most SUDI cases. CC is likely a rare cause of SUDI. Next REST). The six studied founder mutations were found to be more prevalent, generation sequencing panels may further increase interpretation comple- 1.1% carried one of the mutations, in our cohort of SCA patients than in xity where variants are detected in little-studied genes. Cardiological inve- a locally matched reference cohort (0.4%, n=1379, p<0.05) and in publicly stigation of first-degree relatives is essential when counselling families, par- available reference variant databases (e.g. the Genome of the Netherlands ticularly where variants of unknown significance are identified. cohort, GoNL, 0%, n= 500 p<0.02). This finding provides proof-of-concept fAocrk nthoew nleodtgioenm tehnatts rare genetic variants contribute to SCA risk in the com- munity. 128 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM05.82 Telomere length and coronary heart disease: a bi-directional Mendelian randomization study Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFA) is a proinflammatory cytokine produ- Y. Zhan1, R. Karlsson1, A. Tillander1, I. Karlsson1, C. A. Reynolds2, N. L. Pedersen1, S. Hägg1; ced from activated macrophages and has been shown to be associated with 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2University California Riverside, Riverside, CA, altered lipid metabolism. Dietary fat plays an important role in inflammatory United States. response, with the level of TNFA reported to be increased following the inge- Objective: stion of a high-fat meal. However, not aTlNl sFtAudies have found an association between TNFA and postprandial triacylglycerol concentration (TAG), which To assess the bi-directionalM caeuthsaold rse:lationships between leuko- could be due to the variations in the gene or meal fat composition. cyte telomere length (TL) and coronary heart disease (CHDe)t u asli,ng a Men- The present study investigated the effect of a common promoter polymor- delian randomization (MR) approach. Using a genetic risk score phism, -308G→A (rs1800629), on circulating lipid metabolites, glucose and (GRS) of seven genetic variants associated with TL (Codd 2013) as insulin concentrations over 8 h fol2lowing sequential high-fat meals in 207 instrumental variable, we tested whether TL may be causally associated participants (BMI: 25.9±0.2 kg/m; age: 52±1 years). Biochemical measu- with CHD in two Swedish and one US cohort and, moreover, in summarized rements were determined at baseline and hourly intervPal following the test genome-wide association study (GWAS) data. Likewise, we examineRde isf uClHtsD: breakfast. At the baseline, the GG homozygotes were associated with higher may be causally associated with TL using a CHD GRS comprising forty-five fasting glucose concentration than A-allele carriers ( <0.001). Following variants (CARDIoGRAMplus
C4 D, 2013) as instrumental variable. the mixed breakfast (49 g fat) and lunch (29 g fatP), a significant association In observational analysis in our cohorts, we found shorter TL associated was observed between genotype and the incremental area under the time with higher risk of CHD incidence [hazard ratio (HR):1.20, 95% confidence response curve (iAUC) for the postprandial TAG ( =0.03) with a 41% higher interval (CI):1.04, 1.37] and a past CHD event associated with shorter TL (β:- TAG iAUC in the GG homozygotes (n=139) (69% of this population) than A 0.07, 95% CI:-0.02, -0.12). TL GRS was associated with TL (β:-0.05, 95%CI:- allele cParriers (n=63), where the genotype explained 18% of such variation. 0.02,-0.08), although its association with ever CHD was not significant [odds HowTeNvFeAr, the impact of genotype on postprandial TAG was evident only in ratio (OR):1.01, 95% CI: 0.96, 1.06], nor was the MR analysis (OR: 1.29, men ( =0.04). Our findings confirm previous associations and suggest that 95%CI: 0.49, 3.42). However, the MR estimate from summarized GWAS data the -308G→A promoter polymorphism could be an important genetic indicated causality (OR: 1.26, 95%CI: 1.12, 1.42). CWone cfluursthioenr sc:onfirmed a factor predisposing to the increased level of triglyceride. causal effect of a past CHD on TL from summarized GWAS data (β:-0.04, P
S05 .85 95%CI: -0.003,-0.08), but not in our own cohorts. Significant Next generation sequencing for congenital vascular malformations bi-directional associations between TL and CHD were observed in three co- A. Bruson1, R. E. Mattassi2, A. Porcella3, S. Benedetti1, S. Cecchin1, M. Bertelli1; horts of European ancestry. We further provided evidence for a causal effect 1Magi’s Lab Human Medical Genetics Institute, Rovereto (TN), Italy, 2Center for Vascular of shorter TL on higher risk of CHD and for CHD event on shorter TL from Malformations, Castellanza (VA), Italy, 3Laboratory of clinical Analysis; Clinical Institute summarized GWAS data. Humanitas, Castellanza (VA), Italy. P
S05 .83 Genetic determinants of the platelet glycoproteins. Results from the Next generation sequencing (NGS) is shedding light on the genetic causes GAIT 2 Project. M. Vázquez-Santiago1, A. Ziyatdinov2, N. Pujol-Moix1,3, J. Úbeda4, J. Nomdedéu4, J. of vascular anomalies and making it possible to combine tests for similar Fontcuberta1, J. Soria2, J. Souto1; but distinct diseases. Vascular malformations (VMs) are a heterogeneous 1Unit of Haemostasis and Thrombosis, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, group of congenital circulatory malformations, characterized by morpho- Spain, 2Unit of Genomics and Complex Diseases, IIB-Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, structural and/or functional defects of various nature, severity and extent. 3Deparment of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, They may occur in any part of the body and any type of vessel (arteries, Spain, 4Department of Laboratory Haematology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, capillaries, veins and lymphatic vessels). Although most VMs are sporadic Barcelona, Spain. (simple or combined), syndromic and familial forms also exist with substan- tial clinical overlap between lesions, and each can mimic the others. We designed a 25-gene NGS panel for VMs with Mendelian inheritance (au- Introduction: Platelets play a key role in arterial and venous thrombosis. tosomal recessive, autosomal dominant or paradominant). Analysing 128 The glycoproteins (GP) on the platelet surface are involved in the adhesion patients with sporadic congenital VMs, we identified 40 variations in 33 process, by GP Ib-V-IX complex (CD42a and CD42b) and GP IV (CD36). They patients (25%). To estimate their pathogenicity, we looked up variations in are also involved in the aggregation processl,o bciy GP IIb-IIIa complex (CD41 dbSN
P137 , compared their frequency using data from the Exome Variant and CD61). Therefore, their involvement in thrombosis is very important. Server, evaluated the effect of protein amino acid substitution by in silico Previous studies have identified the genetic that code for the GP, but the analysis, and also investigated the family if possible. Our results show that phenotypic variance among individuals due to genetic differences have not many genes can cause a wide variety of syndromic and non-syndromic dis- been defined. orders, confirming that genetic testing by NGS is useful and effective even in Materials and Methods: 935 individuals were studied from 35 large Spanish sporadic cases. Since the etiopathogenesis of many vascular lesions seems families recruited in the second phase of the GAIT (Genetic Analysis of Idio- similar to that of tumours, we are screening tissue samples for mutations. pathic Thrombophilia) Project. The GP were obtained using platelet-specific Identification of causative genes and the possibility of tracing somatic mu- immunolabelling and flow cytometry. The fluorescence mean (F) and counts tations in tissues could provide important information about disease-free of the positive GP events percentatge (CT) were determined for the CD36, areas, useful for planning surgery to reduce the possibility of relapses. CD41, CD61, CD42a and CD42b. A variance component analysis based on P
S06 .01 maximal likelihood was applied to quantify the covariates effect, shared en- Clinical spectrum of ACAD9 mutations vir2onment and genetic factors. Genetic effects were defined as heritability M. Rio1, M. Collet1, Z. Assouline1, D. Bonnet2, F. Iserin2, D. Sidi2, A. Goldenberg3, M. (h) which estimates the proportion of the total variability due to genetic Metodiev1, A. Munnich1, A. Rotig1; factors. 2 1Département de Génétique, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Results: All of the GP parameters had high h (ra-1n6ge 0.37-0-31.71) with strong IMAGINE UMR_
S1163 , Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France., paris, France, statistical significance (2p-value range 4.48·10 -7.44·10 ). CD36CT and 2Département de cardiologie, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut CD36F had the highest h (0.71 and 0.61 respectively). IMAGINE UMR_
S1163 , Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France., paris, France, Conclusions: The high heritability of these traits means that genes play a 3Département de Génétique, CHU Rouen, hôpital Charles Nicolle, rouen, France. pivotal role in determining the GP density on the platelet surface. Thus, it should be possible to identify specific genes that affect these platelet traits. Spanish Grants: FIS PI12/00612 and Red Investigación Cardiovascular Acyl-Co dehydrogenase family, member 9 (ACAD9) mutations are a fre- RD12/0042/0032. quent, usually fatal cause of early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I deficiency in early childhood PM05.84 Here, we report 7 unrelated patients with mutations in ACAD9. Heart failu- A common polymorphism in the promoter of the Tumor Necrosis re or cardiovascular collapsus were the consistent presenting symptom in Factor-α (TNFA) gene mediates postprandial triacylglycerol following 7/7 probands. Age at onset ranged from the neonatal period to the first few sequential meal ingestion Y. LI1, A. Minihane2, J. A. LOVEGROV
E1 , C. M. WILLIAM
S1 , K. G. JACKSON1, K. S. months-years of life and echocardiography consistently revealed severe hy- VIMALESWARAN1; pertrophic cardiomyopathy. At the time of diagnosis, one patient presented 1UNIVERSITY OF READING, LONDON, United Kingdom, 2UNIVERSITY OF EAST ANGLIA, with neonatal encephalopathy with white matter anomalies on brain MRI, NORWICH, United Kingdom. whereas no extra cardiac involvement was clinically present in 6 patients. The variability in the severity of the disorder was wide. Three patients had ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANsDev,e UreK a n|d W raWpidWly .pErSogHreGss.iOveR eGvolution and died before 2 years of age1. O2n9eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index patient recovered spontaneously. 3 patients were proposed for heart trans- her than the control cohort (GDF-15 median: 423 pg/mL; 1st-99th%-iles: plantation as they had no other organ involvement at the time of diagnosis. 230-1560 pg/mL and FGF21 median: 394 pg/mL;1st-99th%-iles: 88-1658 Among them, two survived. Most importantly, the 3 living patients latter de- pg/mL). Receiver operator characteristic curves of GDF-15 and FGF21 de- veloped delayed-onset neurologic and muscular symptoms, namely cogniti- monstrated that GDF-15 specificity was 88% while FGF21 was only 41%. In ve impairment, seizures, muscle weakness and exercise intolerance. Other addition, participants with MELAS showed higher GDF-15 levels (median: organ involvement included proximal tubulopathy, renal failure, secondary 3290 pg/mL) than any other mitochondrial disease diagnosis (GDF-15 me- ovarian failure or optic atrophy. Yet, while 2 patients enjoyed an almost nor- dian: 921 pg/mL). mal personal and professional adult life, one patient experienced some lear- Conclusions: Among two promising biomarkers touting utility for mitochon- ning difficulties and required special schooling. This is to our knowledge the drial disease, GDF-15 demonstrated better specificity and sensitivity than first example of successful heart transplantation in ACAD9 mutation. Yet, FGF21. Moreover, the elevations of GDF-15 highlights a putative integrative the decision to carry out organ transplantation remains difficult as delayed role for this signal transducer in the pathology of mitochondrial disease. neurological symptoms may occur and worsen despite their absence before PM06.04 transplantation. Gene duplication in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) PM06.02 complicates genetic counselling Novel mutations in mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes S. J. Kenwrick1, I. Berry2, C. Taylor1, S. Park1; and their phenotypic expression 1Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Leeds Genetics Laboratory, E. Ciara1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, E. Jurkiewicz1, M. Bekiesińska-Figatowska2, H. Leeds, United Kingdom. Mierzewska2, D. Rokicki1, J. Trubicka1, P. Halat1, M. Pronicki1, M. Litwin1, L. Ziółkowska1, K. Chrzanowska1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, R. Płoski3, E. Pronicka1; 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Mother and Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is an autosomal recessive condition Child, Warsaw, Poland, 3Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. with an incidence of about 1 in 12,000 individuals. Over 90% of cases are due to mutations in the gene for 21-hydroxylase (CY
P21 A2) and ten mu- tations account for the majority of those known. The presentation of CAH, Mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases encoded by nuclear aaR
S2  genes classical, simple virilising or non-classical, is related to mutation type. are essential enzymes in the translation of genetic information from mito- In recent years it has been recognised that carrier detection can be com- chondrial DNA to the oxidative phosphorylation system complexes. Recently plicated by rare haplotypes that contain duplicated copes of CY
P21 A2. Our reported pathological mutations identified in 15 of the aaR
S2  genes have Italian patient was tested as his partner had already been identified as a car- been associated with diverse clinical presentations, usually characterized rier for a mutation primarily associated with non-classical CAH. His result by early-onset and autosomal recessive transmission. Encephalopathy is the showed that he is heterozygous for a classical CAH mutation, p.(Gln319Ter) most common manifestation. Other clinical features include myopathy with but also that he has at least 3 copies of the CY
P21 A2 gene. Gln319Ter is anaemia, cardiomyopathy, tubulopathy and hearing loss. A relatively tight a common CAH mutation associated with a classical to non-classical phe- genotype-phenotype correlation has been reported for most of these cases. notype depending on mutation combination. However, a rare European ha- We report 10 patients, from five unrelated families, with infantile-onset mi- plotype has been described with Gln319Ter in the context of a duplication. tochondrial disorder (Nijmegen score >4) and two mutant alleles for EAR
S2  Individuals who have this haplotype are therefore not carriers as there is a (p.R55H/p.G109R and p.R55H/p.
P419 L), FAR
S2  (p.V345A/p.R419C), functional gene in cis. This rare haplotype is in linkage disequilibrium with PAR
S2  (p.I80T/p.
P364 R), and RAR
S2  (p.Q208*/p.M342I) genes identified rare variants, in intron 2 and the 3’ untranslated region of CY
P21 A2, as well by whole-exome sequencing. Among the nine various substitutions, only as HLA-B50-Cw06 subtype, and has been reported in the Italian population. p.R55H was reported previously. Eight novel mutations segregated with the Accurate preconception, and extended family counselling, requires distin- disease within the families. Moreover, their pathogenic role was determined guishing between Gln319Ter in the context of a single CY
P21 A2 gene or the by using five different prediction algorithms. The characteristic “neurologi- duplication haplotype, using family studies and additional markers, where cal” phenotype, reported previously, was associated with EAR
S2 , PAR
S2  and possible. RAR
S2  defects, however, facial dysmorphism, failure to thrive and icterus P
S06 .05 revealed in one compound heterozygote for EAR
S2  mutations (p.R55H/p. A very common inborn error of carnitine biosynthesis about which 
P419 L). In addition, our patient with Alpers syndrome due to PAR
S2  muta- little is known tions confirms genotype-phenotype correlation observed so far in only one A. L. Beaudet, R. Kochel, M. Ziats, Y. Yang, S. Elsea, Q. Sun, J. Lupski, A. Patel, T. Gambin, child. In the family with heterozygous variants in FAR
S2  a completely new C. Shaw, C. Schaaf, P. Stankiewicz; phenotype, including cardiomyopathy and renal hyperkaliemic acidosis was Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, observed. United States. In conclusion, novel mutations in four aaR
S2  genes expand the list of aaR
S2 - TMLHE associated diseases, including new phenotypes potentially related to muta- tions in FAR
S2  and EAR
S2  genes. Introduction: deficiency is a very common inborn error of carnitine This work was supported by the projects: CMHI-134/13, -136/13, -216/12. biosynthesTiMs. LTHhEe gene is X-linked, and about 1 in 350 healthy males of Eu- P
S06 .03 ropean descent have a deletion of exon 2 resulting in inability to synthesize A Comparative Assessment of Plasma Peptides, GDF-15 and FGF21, as carnitine. deficiency likely is a risk factor for autism, but the pene- Biomarkers for Mitochondrial Disease Among Two Biobank Cohorts trance for autism is less than 5%, and replication studies are needed. K. Nickander, W. Highsmith, R. Gavrilova, D. Gavrilov, K. Raymond, P. Rinaldo, S. Materials and Methods: The frequency of exon 2 deletion was determined Tortorelli, D. Matern, D. Oglesbee; in 10,678 male samples undergoing array CGH for evaluation of heTteMroLgHeE- Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. neous disabilities and in 2124 male samples from the Baylor Mendelian Ge- nome Center exome project. A caTsMeL eHvEaluation was performed on a deficient male with autism and two episodes of regression. Background: Recent studies have proposed that transforming growth Results: Deletion of exon 2 of was found in 50 of 10,678 males factor-β superfamily member, GDF-15, and fibroblast growth factor 21, undergoing array CGH (0.46%) compared to 7 in 2245 males undeTrMgoLiHnEg FGF21, might be useful biomarkers for mitochondrial disease. We hypo- exome sequencing in the Mendelian studies (0.31%). The phenotypic data thesized that we could verify the sensitivity and specificity of GDF-15 and for the deficient males are being tabulated. Carnitine deficiency in a FGF21 as plasma biomarkers from our Mitochondrial Disease Biobank of case suggests that deficits in carnitine biosynthesis may be responsible for over 300 individuals with a clinical diagnosis or suspicion of mitochondrial some cases of regression in individuals with autism. disease as determined by clinical, molecular, enzymatic, and/or histological Conclusions: Deletion of exon 2 is confirmed to be very common in vTaMriLoHuEs findings. clinical samples. A case study suggests that carTnMitLinHeE supplementation may Methods: Thirty-three participants with confirmed primary mitochondrial be useful in treating regressive autism episodes in patients with disease (MELAS, MERRF, NARP, CPEO,and others) provided EDTA plasma deficiency. It is unknown if infant males with deficiency shoTuMldL HreE- specimens. Age-matched, control plasma for reference ranges were obtai- ceive any dietary modification. It is unknown if there are genetic, dietary, ned from 120 Mayo Clinic Biobank donors, who did not have a clinical hi- or microbiome factors that influence the development of autism in story of diabetes, cardiac, renal, or liver disease. Plasma GDF-15 and FGF21 deficient males. were measured by ELISA and compared across cohorts. Results: Mitochondrial disease participants demonstrated plasma GDF-15 (median: 1163 pg/mL; 1st-99th%-iles: 491-6817 pg/mL) and FGF21 (me- 130 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG dian: 486 pg/mL; 1st-99th%-iles: 211-2816 pg/mL) levels that were hig-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM06.06 A novel nonsense mutation of the ABHD5 gene causes the early onset of Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome 80% of all defects in the CY
P21 A2 gene coding the 21-hydroxylase enzyme S. Missaglia1, N. Gupta2, S. Gothwal2, A. K. Satpathy2, T. Dipsal2, M. Kabra2, D. Tavian1; that deficiency is present in 90-95% of all cases with congenital adrenal hy- 1Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy, 2All India Institute of Medical perplasia (CAH). It can present as severe salt wasting (SW) or simple virili- Sciences, New Delhi, India. zing (SV) form, or the milder late onset form (LO). Methods: Using the PCR/ACRS method, we have studied nine CY
P21 A2 point mutations in 66 Macedonian patients with clinical and laboratory signs of Chanarin-Dorfman Syndrome (CDS), also known as Neutral Lipid Storage CAH evaluated at Department of Endocrinology and Genetics, University Disease with Ichthyosis (NLSD-I), is a rare autosomal recessive lipid storage Children’s Clinic, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia. Of the CAH patients 25 had disease. This syndrome is characterized by non-bullous congenital ichthyo- SW form, 17 the SV and 24 the LO form of the disease. siform eryhthroderma (NCIE), hepatomegaly and liver steatosis. Additional Results: Six different mutations were detected in 72.7% alleles of the Mace- clinical features include muscle weakness, ataxia and sometimes neurosen- donian patients. The most prevalent mutation was IV
S2 , present in 44 al- sory hearing loss, subcapsular cataracts, nystagmus, strabismus and mental leles (33.3%), followed by the 
P30 L in 26 (19.7%), Q318X in 15 (11.4%), retardation. Patients are often born as collodion babies. ABHD5 gene mu- I172N in 6 (4.5%), V281L in 5 (3.8%) and R356W in 3 alleles (2.3%). Del tations have been identified as the cause of CDS. This gene codifies for the 8ntG110, cluster exon 6 and InsT307 were not found. Mutations were detec- α/β-hydrolase domain-containing protein 5 (ABHD5), a co-activator of the ted in 86% of the SW, 85.3% SV and 50% LO alleles. In 60.6% (40/66) of the patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein 2 (PNPLA2). PNPLA2 Macedonian patients complete genotype was revealed (31 homozygous and is a lipase, associated to the lipid droplets surface, that catalyzes the initial 9 compound heterozygous) with good correlation with phenotype. The most step of triacylglycerols lipolysis. Until now, about 40 different mutations of common genotype was IV
S2 /IV
S2  (33.9%). Sixteen (24.2%) patients were ABHD5 gene are associated with CDS onset and 15 of them result in trun- heterozygotes and 10 (15.2%) harboured none of the tested mutations. cated proteins. Conclusion: We observed high 
P30 L and Q318X frequencies and low I172N In a 29-month-old Indian girl we have identified a homozygous nonsense frequency in our population compared to the most of the other European mutation (c.297C>A) of ABHD5 gene, causing the production of a short trun- countries. cated protein (p.
C99 X). The little CDS patient presented NCIE, hepatomega- PM06.10 ly, diffuse hepatic steatosis and splenomegaly. After the molecular confirma- Subjects treated with migalastat demonstrate stable renal function, tion of CDS diagnosis, she was put on a low fat diet. reduced left ventricular mass and gastrointestinal symptom Our results show that the early onset of CDS (in Indian patient) is probably improvement in Phase 3 and a long-term extension study of Fabry due to the production of an ABHD5 protein which loses the putative inter- Disease acting domain required for PNPLA2 activation. Moreover, an early initiation D. P. Germain1, D. G. Bichet2, R. Giugliani3, D. A. Hughes4, R. Schiffmann5, W. Wilcox6, E. R. of a diet poor in long chain fatty acids might improve the liver condition and Benjamin7, J. P. Castelli7, J. Kirk7, N. Skuban7, J. Yu7, J. Barth on behalf of the FACETS study prevent severe systemic damages. investigators7; 1University of Versailles - St Quentin en Yvelines, Dept. of Medical Genetics, 78180 PM06.08 Montigny, France, 2Université de Montréal Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de, Montréal 5400, New genetic insights into the spectrum of disorders of glycosylation: a boul, QC, Canada, 3Dept. Medical Genetics Service, HCPA/UFRGS, Porto Allegre, Brazil, patient with multiple congenital anomalies 4Royal Free Campus, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Baylor M. M. Oud1, N. van Vlies2,3, A. M. de Bruin2,3, R. J. A. Wanders4, S. T. Pals2,3, H. G. Brunner1, J. Research Institute, Dallas, TX, United States, 6Department of Human Genetics, Emory Cobben5, R. Roepman1, H. Arts1,6, T. W. Kuijpers5; University, Decatur, GA, United States, 7Amicus Therapeutics, Cranbury, NJ, United States. 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Academic Medical Objectives Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Academic Medical Center University Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. : Migalastat (1-deoxygalactonojirimycin, AT1001) is an orally- administered investigational pharmacological chaperone for Fabry disease that selectively binds and stabilizes α-Gal A, leading to increased lysosomal Introduction:Glycosylation is essential for human development. More than activity. Study 011 (AT1001-011, NCT00925301) included a 6-month doub- 100 clinically diverse inherited disorders are known to result from glyco- le-blind placebo-controlled period (Stage 1) and an 18 month open-label ex- sylation defects. One subtype of the congenital disorders of glycosylation tMenesthioond. sSixty-seven subjects were randomized; 48 subjects completed the (CDG) is caused by defects in glycosaminoglycan (GAG) synthesis. Here, we study and continued in long term extension Study AT1001-041. describe an infant from a consanguineous family with a GAG-CDG. Pheno- : Estimated GFR (eGFR) was assessed every 3-6 months using the typic featu res include respiratory insufficiency, discrete skeletal anomalies, CKD-EPI and MDRD equations. Left ventricular mass index (LVMi) was as- renal insufficiency, and T-cell depletion. sessed by echocardiography every 6-12 months by a blinded central labo- Methods: We performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) on patient leu- ratory. Gastrointestinal symptoms were assessed every 6 months using the cocyte DNA to identify the causative mutation. Immunocytochemistry was GastrointeGstLiAnal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS). p-values are unadjusted for conducted to characterize the identified mutations functionally in patient- mReuslutilptlse comparisons. Efficacy results are reported for the 50 subjects with derived and control fibroblasts. Different GAG levels were measured in fi- amenable mutations. broblasts and urine from the patient and several controls. : eGFR remained stable in subjects treated up to 48 months, with Results: Through WES we detected two homozygous missense mutations mean annualized eGFR changes (±2SEM) of -0.80±0.60 (CKD-EPI) and in highly conserved regions of two glycosylation genes regulating GAG syn- +0.70±0.80 (MDRD) mL/min/1.73m/yr. LVMi wa2s significantly reduced in thesis and modification. It remains unclear whether mutations in one or subjects treated up to 48 months (-8.0 ±5.5 g/m); the largest reductions both of the genes contribute to the clinical phenotype. We found that one we2re observed in subjects with abnormal LVMi at baseline (-17.2±16.5 g/ of the mutated proteins that normally localizes to the Golgi apparatus was m). Improvement was observed in the diarrhea domain of GSRS during the absent in this organelle in patient cells. Immunocytochemical analysis of the 6C-omnoclnutshi odnousble-blind period (-0.3 migalastat, +0.2 placebo, p=0.03), and in other mutated protein failed. Finally, heparan sulphate GAG levels were si- diarrhea, indigestion and reflux domains during the open-label extension. gnificantly reduced in patient-derived fibroblasts, though within the normal : Treatment with migalastat for up to 48 months was asso- range in urine. ciated with stable renal function, reduced LVMi and improved gastrointe- Conclusion: We describe an infant with multiple congenital anomalies. WES stinal symptoms in patients with Fabry disease who have amenable GLA analysis revealed two mutations in two glycosylation genes. One of the mu- mutations. tated proteins mislocalizes in patient-derived fibroblasts. Our data indicate P
S06 .11 that this patient has a GAG-CDG. DNA analysis of familial hypercholesterolemia in Slovakia Grants: C
P11 .18, Dutch Kidney Foundation; Veni-91613008, Netherlands D. Balaziova1, B. Vohnout2, M. Huckova1, D. Stanikova1,3, J. Stanik1,3, I. Klimes1, K. Organisation for Scientific Research. Raslova2, D. Gasperikova1; 1Diabgene and Laboratory of Diabetes and Metabolic Disorders, Institute of P
S06 .09 Experimental Endocrinology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2National Distribution of nine most common CY
P21 A2 point mutations in Reference Center for Familial Hyperlipoproteinemias, Slovak Medical University, Macedonian patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia Bratislava, Slovakia, 3First Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Comenius V. Anastasovska, M. Kocova; University, Bratislava, Slovakia. Genetic Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology and Genetics,University Children’s Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. Introduction: The clinical phenotype of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is associated with mutations in genes encoding LDL receptor, apolipopro- Background: Nine pseudogene-dE erS ivH edG p 2 oi0 n1 t 5 m u| tG atiL oA nsS aG ccO ouW nt, fS oC r aO bT ouL tA N tD ein, U B K an | d W PCW SKW 9. . TE hS e H geG ne.O ralR pG revalence of FH in most countries is 11 :53 01 0,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index that accounts for approximately 10 000 patienAtsP OinB S, lLoDvLakRi a. HoPwCeSvKe9r , spec- the pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying the clinical manifestations are trum of mutations in Slovak patients has not been published previously. The the subject of ongoing study. The prevalence of both diseases is currently aim was to analyze spectrum of mutations in APaOnBd genes unknown and awareness of them is limited due to their rarity; both are li- in patients with clinical suspicion of FH.LDLR PCSK9 kely underdiagnosed. Materials and Methods: The p.Arg3527Gln mutation inL DLR gene was te- We have collected data on over 20 living Farber patients, the largest cohort sted by real-time PCR. The mutations in and genes were analy- to date, including data on biochemical and immunologic phenotypes. Our zed by Sanger sequencing. The large rearrangements in were assessed findings reinforce the validity of the characteristic symptoms of Farber di- by MLPAA PaOnaBlysis. sease: early-onset polyarticular arthritis, subcutaneous nodules and dys- Results: Out of 136 probands and 103 relatives, we have confirmed the pres- phonia. However, it also reveals that there are patients who present with ence of mutaLtDioLnR p.Arg3527Gln in 9 probands and 2 relatives, respec- only one or two of these symptoms, and that the spectrum of disease inclu- tively. In remaining 127 probands and 101 relatives, the presencLeD oLfR p atho- des remarkably attenuated forms with relatively little associated disability. genic mutation in was confirmed in 58in p sriolibcoands and 49 relatives. All We feel there is an indication for diligent screening of certain pediatric (and together, we have identified 41 mutations and 9 new variants in PCSK9gene. even young adult) polyarticular arthritis patients for Farber disease, and Their potential pathogenicity predicted by analysis was confirmed certain therapy-resistant epilepsy patients for SMA-PME. Such screening is by cosegregation analysis in given families. Direct sequencing of gene being initiated and natural history studies are planned in both diseases. revealed no pathogenic mutation. Recombinant human acid ceramidase enzyme therapy is currently under Conclusions: By DNA diagnostics, the clinical diagnosis of FH was confirmed development and is expected to enter clinical trials in 2016. in 49.3% probands and 49.5% of relatives. The high incidence of mutations PM06.14 in the genes analysed in our study emphasise the importance of genetic te- Development of a cell-based approach to identify small molecules as sting for targeted treatment and prevention in families with FH in Slovakia. regulators of FGF23 signalling Supported by TRANSENDOGEN/26240220051 S. Diener1, K. Schorpp2, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, K. Hadian2, T. M. Strom1,3; PM06.12 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of Human Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Helmholtz Zentrum München, Mutation spectrum in German patients with familial German Research Center for Environmental Health,Institute of Molecular Toxicology hypercholesterolemia and Pharmacology, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Klinikum Rechts der Isar der Technischen T. Grenkowitz1, U. Kassner1, W. März2,3,4, P. Binner2, E. Steinhagen-Thiessen1,5, I. Universität München, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. Demuth5,6; 1Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Lipid Clinic, Berlin, Germany, 2Synlab Center of Laboratory Diagnostics, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Medical Clinic V (Nephrology, Hypertensiology, Endocrinology, Diabetolgy, and Rheumatology), Mannheim Medical Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is a key regulator of phosphate homeo- Faculty, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 4Clinical Institute of Medical stasis. It plays a critical role in hereditary and acquired hypo- and hyperphos- and Chemical Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 5The phatemic disorders. Moreover, FGF23 has emerged as a promising biomar- Berlin Aging Study II; Research Group on Geriatrics; Charité – Universitätsmedizin ker for the prediction of adverse clinical outcomes in patients with chronic Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité – kidney disease (CKD), since it might be related to mortality, cardiovascular Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. abnormalities and disease progression. FGF23 is a bone-derived endocrine factor that regulates renal tubular phosphate reabsorption and vitamin D metabolism by activating FGF receptor (FGFR)/Klotho complexes in the kid- Autosomal-dominant familial hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is characterized ney. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is employed as a ma- by elevated plasma levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) jor signalling pathway. To investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying and a dramatically increased risk to develop cardiovascular disease (CVD). FGF23 actions in more detail, we established a cell model of FGF23-inducible The prevalence of ADH is about 1:500, with a higher frequency because of cells stably expressing Klotho (HEK293-KL cells). The FGF23-mediated in- founder effects in some populations. Mutations in three major genes have duction of HEK293-KL cells was shown by detecting the activation of MAPK been associated with ADH: LDL receptor gene (LDLR), apolipoprotein B pathway, which could be reduced by the use of two known small-molecule gene (APOB) and proproteinconvertase subtilisin/kexin 9 gene (PCSK9). inhibitors of this pathway: SU5402 and U0126. Based on our established cell We investigated the mutation spectrum in 120 patients (51% females) cli- model, reporter assays suited for high-throughput screening (HTS) were de- nically diagnosed with possible or probable ADH. We sequenced the coding veloped to identify novel small-molecule compounds that modulate FGF23 region of the LDLR gene followed by sequencing the site of the major disease signalling. In a pilot screen, robustness and appropriateness of the method causing mutation in the APOB gene, c.10580G>A (p.Arg3527Gln) and, final- could be verified. The discovery of candidate hits would provide the basis to ly, sequencing of the PCSK9 coding region,. manipulate FGF23 signalling and would potentially validate this pathway as Pathogenic mutations were identified in 53 patients (44%) in one of the druggable in disorders caused by altered actions of FGF23. analysed genes. As expected, most of the mutations were identified within the LDLR gene (about 90%). Heterozygous missense mutations in the APOB P
S06 .15 gene were detected five patients and no mutation in the PCSK9 gene was Four cases of gangliosidosis GM1 with prenatal onset in a found. consanguineous family In 48 patients we detected a total of 51 LDLR mutations. 33 of the patients E. GORDUZA1, C. Rusu1, L. Butnariu1, E. Braha1, M. Stamatin1, A. Petrariu2, V. Martiniuc2, A. Bivoleanu2; showed missense mutations. In addition we identified 6 small deletions 1UNIVERSITY OF MEDICINE AND PHARMACY IASI, 6600 IASI, Romania, 2“Cuza Vodă“ (≤20 nucleotides), 5 slice-site mutations and 7 nonsense mutations. Three Maternity Iasi, 6600 IASI, Romania. of the 48 patients were probable compound heterozygous. Six of the mutati- ons identified have not been described before. The results of the mutation screening will be presented together with phe- We present four cases of gangliosidosis GM1 in a consanguineous family notypic data and will be discussed with respect to previous data on German from gipsy minority. The first case is a 6 months girl (born in 2007) with ADH mutations and phenotype-genotype correlations. coarse facies, periorbital oedema, broad nasal bridge, bulbous nose, short P
S06 .13 neck, hepatosplenomegaly, muscular hypotonia, psycho-motor disability. Acid ceramidase deficiency: clinical implications of an emerging The girl died at 11 months. Second case (I degree cousin with first case) spectrum and potential therapies is a 3 weeks girl (born in 2008) with delayed weight and height develop- A. Solyom1,2, C. Simonaro3, X. He3, E. Schuchman3; ment, coarse facies, periorbital oedema, broad nasal bridge, bulbous nose, 1University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary, 3Icahn School macroglosia, retrognathia, low set years, short neck, sacral dimple, thymus of Medicine at Mt. Sinai, New York, NY, United States. hypertrophy, cardiomegaly, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, muscular hypoto- nia and psycho-motor disability. This girl died at 10 months. The last couple have a normal girl and other two affected children a boy born in 2012 and Mutations in the ASAH1 gene lead to acid ceramidase deficiency, the resul- girl born in 2015. Both were diagnosed in neonatal period, after pregnancies tant accumulation of the lipid ceramide, and a distinct variety of disease with ascites and hepatomegaly. Both presented: coarse facies, generalised phenotypes, culminating in two recognized diseases: Farber disease and oedema, broad nasal bridge, bulbous nose, macroglosia, retrognathia, low Spinal Muscular Atrophy with Progressive Myoclonic Epilepsy (SMA-PME). set years, short neck, cardiomegaly, hepatosplenomegtahly, muscular hypoto- Farber disease represents a broad clinical spectrum presenting from infan- nia. The boy presented a huge scrotal oedema. In the 4 child of couple were cy through late childhood, associated with the pro-inflammatory and pro- found corpuscles Alder-Reilley and a 0,004 nmol/spot level of -galactasida- apoptotic characteristics of ceramide. SMA-PME, a late childhood onset, sis. The baby died at age of 8 months. In all cases the genetic analysis was p1r3im2arily neurologic disease, has been leEssS wHeGll c 2ha0r1ac5te |r iGzeLdA toS dGatOe,W an,d S COimTpLoAssNiblDe., W UeK m |a dWe tWheW ge.nEeStiHc cGou.OnsRelGling, but for religious and low levelABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Niu7, F. Xia7, A. Bruel2,4, J. Saint-Onge2,3,4, Y. Duffourd3,4, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,3,4, J. Rivière2,3,4, L. Faivre1,3,4; of education reasons, the couple don’t take in account the risk. We consider 1Centre de Génétique et Centre de référence «Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes that in this family could be useful to identify the mutation in the last affected Malformatifs», Hôpital d’Enfants, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Plateau Technique de Biologie, Centre child and search the same mutation in other risk’s individuals. Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire PM06.16 Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies du Développement (FHU TRANSLAD), Delineation of a poorly studied type of bone crisis in patients with Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon et Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, type 1 Gaucher disease: bone crises of the small bones of the hands Dijon, France, 4Equipe d’Accueil 4271, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, and feet Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 5Division of Laboratory Genetics, Department H. Baris Feldman1, M. Weisz Hubshman2,3,4; of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, 1The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 2Schneider United States, 6Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Children‘s Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel, 32The Raphael Recanati Genetics Medicine, Rochester, MN, United States, 7Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Institute, Rabin Medical Centre, Petah Tikva, Israel, 4Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 8Human Genome Sequencing University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 9Service de Génétique médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bordeaux-GH Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France. Background : Type 1 Gaucher disease is the most common form of Gaucher Introduction: A family with 2 affected sibs presenting with congenital ca- disease, an inherited lysosomal storage disorder affecting around one in taract, progressive muscular hypotonia, hypotrophy, and psychomotor delay every 40,000-60,000 people in the general population and approximately followed by severe neurological regression associated with seizures was fol- one in every 800 people of Ashkenazi Jewish origin. Bone crises in type 1 lowed up for several years. The oldest sibling died at age 21 years, and her GMaeutchhoedr disease are reported in long bones, in weight bearing bones and brother displays severe encephalopathy with cachexia. Along this diagno- other bones, but rarely in the small bones of the hands and feet. stic odyssey, a mitochondrial condition was suspected after morphological : We retrospectively examined the incidence of bone crises, inclu- anaGlFyEsiRs of a muscle biopsy, exhibiting rare COX-negative fibers. Whole exo- ding small bone crises, in patients followed at the Rabin Medical Centre, Pe- me sequencing (WES) detected autosomal recessive truncating mutations tRaehs Tuilktsva, Israel, before and following the initiation of imiglucerase enzyme in . This gene has already been assigned in human pathologGyF iEnR three replacement therapy (ERT). siblings born to healthy consanguineous Moroccan parents (Di Fonzo et al., : Of 100 type I Gaucher disease patients, 30% experienced one or 2009). The siblings carried a homozygous missense mutation in , and more bone crises. Small bone crises represented 31.5% of all bone crises presented a very similar phenotype including congenital cataract, progres- and were preceded by crises in other bones. While the incidence of long sive muscular hypotonia, sensorineural hearing loss, developmental delay, bone crises decreased after the initiation of ERT, the incidence of small bone scattered COX-negative muscle fibres with moderate reduction of complex crises increased. Almost 60% of all patients with bone crises were of the IV activity. N370S/84GG (representing only 30% of the cohort) suggesting a greater Material and Methods: Through an international data sharing, another fa- susceptibility of N370S/84GG patients to severe bone complications. These mily with two siblings has also been identified, also presenting with bila- patients also underwent the greatest number of splenectomies (70.6% of all teral cataracts, global developmental delay, lactic acidosis, and increased splenectomised patients) coCnosnicsltuensito wnith a more severe disease phenotype. mitochondrial DNA copy number. Similarly, the diagnostic approach in this Patients who underwent splenectomy showed a trend towards increased family was WES. bone crises after surgery. : Physicians should be aware of the Results: These 7 cases issued from 3 families strongly support the existence possibility of bone crises in the hands and feet and should consider imaging of a new recognizGaFbEleR mitochondrial disorder associating progressive ence- studies to investigate unexplained pain in the hands and feet. phalo-myopathy with congenital cataract secundary to autosomal recessive P
S06 .17 mutations in the gene. Association of PTPN22 gene functional variant 
C1858 T, HLA-DQ Conclusions: This report highlights the clinical utility of WES in rare diseases alleles and autoantibodies with Type-1 Diabetes Mellitus in Kuwaiti and underlines the importance of a broad data sharing for an accurate inter- children pretation of previously unrecognised clinical entities. M. Z. Haider1, M. A. Rasoul1,2, S. A. Mathews1, H. Al-Kandari3, M. Al-Mahdi4, J. Sukumaran1, G. S. Dhaunsi1; P
S06 .19 1Kuwait University, Safat, Kuwait, 2Mubarak Al-Kabeer Hospital, Jabriya, Kuwait, Molecular Investigation of Glutaric Aciduria Type1 in Iran 3Farwania Hospital, Farwania, Kuwait, 4Adan Hospital, Adan, Kuwait. B. Shokrolah nasab, M. Houshmand, O. Aryani, Z. Pirzadeh, F. Ghasemi, S. Salehpour; National Research Center forGenetic &Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. An interplay between susceptibility genes, immune mediators and environ- mental factors predispose susceptible individuals to T1DM. We have deter- Glutaric Acidemia, Type I (GA I), was first described in 1975. The disease is mined the prevalence of PTPN22 gene 
C1858 T functional variant, HLA-DQ caused by a genetic deficiency of the enzyme, Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase alleles and three autoantibodies in Kuwaiti children with T1DM. This study (GCD), which leads to the buildup of Glutaric acid in the tissues and its excre- included 191 Kuwaiti children with TIDM and 101 controls (healthy, eth- tion in the urine of affected patients. GA I is one of the most common organic nically matched). The diagnosis of T1DM was based on the ISPAD criteria. acidemias and has an estimated incidence of about 1 in 50,000 live births. The genotypes for PTPN22 gene variant 
C1858 T (R620W) were identified Because of the initial slow progression of clinical symptoms, GA I is frequent- by PCR-RFLP. HLA-DQ alleles were determined by sequence-specific PCR in ly undiagnosed until an acute metabolic crisis occurs A total of 25 unrelated 178 patients. The presence of autoantibodies (ICA, INS and GAD) were de- patients suspected to GA1 were investigated in our study. Genomic DNA was termined by radioimmunoassay. The variant genotype of the PTPN22 gene extracted from peripheral blood cells of the 25 probands whom were bio- was detected in homozygous/heterozygous combination in 39% patients chemically and/or clinically and/or neuro-radiologically suspected to GA1. compared to 27% in controls. The homozygous TT-genotype was detected 15 of them had elevated glutaric acid in the urine organic acid test. PCR and in 8% patients compared to 0.99% in controls (p <0.001). Nine different direct sequencing of all 11 exons and their flanking region of the GCDH gene combinations of HLA-DQ alleles were detected in patients. In 55% patients, were examined.Some of them were investigated for known mutation in the the genotype was either homozygous for DQ2 or in combination with a DQ8 other therir family members..Fifteen patients had homozygous mutations allele. In 36% patients, the genotype was homozygous DQ8 or with other and 10 patients were normal for GCDH gene. Our Results Showed:• 60% alleles. Collectively, 91% of the patients had either DQ2 or DQ8 alleles. In Known mutation were found in our 15 patients• 80% can be detected by patients with TT-genotype of PTPN22 gene, 93% had at least one DQ2 allele 4 exons sequencing so for molecular investigatins exon 6, 7, 8, 10 are good and 60% carried either a DQ2 or a DQ8 allele. In T1DM patients with TT-ge- choice for beginning of analysis• 33% was mutation in exon 7, so because notype, GAD autoantibody was detected in 83%, INS-Ab in 67% and ICA-Ab of the cost of genetic diagnosis we suggest that investigation begin with this in 54% cases respectively. Our data demonstrate that the variant T-allele of exon.• Pro 348 Leu was most detected 20%.• 40% are new mutations wich PTPN22 gene and HLA-DQ2/DQ8 alleles constitute significant determinants will be investigated for phenotype Genotype Correlations of genetic predisposition to T1DM in Kuwaiti Arabs. PM06.20 PM06.18 GENETIC ANALYSIS OF GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISORDERS BY MASSIVE International datasharing of Exome sequencing results for the clinical PARALLEL SEQUENCING delineation of extremely rare disorders: example of autosomal C. Medrano, A. Vega, R. Navarrete, F. Leal, L. Desviat, P. Rodríguez-Pombo, M. Ugarte, C. recessive mutations in GFER Perez-Cerda, B. Pérez; Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares. CIBERER. IdiPAz., Madrid, Spain. S. Nambot1,2, J. Thevenon1,3,4, D. Gavrilov5,6, A. Beaudet7, M. Bainbridge8, C. Goizet9, N. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 133ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Glycogen storage disease (GSD) is a group of genetic disorders resulting from ments further revealed that expression of HSD10 is necessary for normal an abnormal metabolism of glycogen. Currently 22 different types of GSD MRP
P1  expression. Mutation p.Q165H shows equal amounts of HSD10 and are known. The nonspecific clinical picture and the lack of specific biomar- MRP
P1  protein than controls. Transcript analysis demonstrated that redu- kers hamper diagnosis being DNA methods the gold standard for successful ced HSD10/MRP
P1  expression resulted in an accumulation of precursor diagnosis. Nevertheless the cost and time consuming gene by gene Sanger transcripts of mitochondrial heavy strand RNA. Furthermore, in fibroblasts sequencing has made difficult to achieve successful diagnosis and many GSD with mutation p.Q165H mitochondrial RNA processing was equal than in patients in our country remain without definitive diagnosis. Here, we report controls. This finding correlates well with the observed phenotype in pati- the genetic analysis in a cohort of 31 Spanish patients referred to our labo- ents with mutation p.Q165H who exhibit normal development. Interestin- ratory. We have diagnosed 12 patients by conventional Sanger sequencing of gly, processing of light strand transcripts was not affected in patient cells. genes associated with the clinical history and in the last year, 15 by massive Conclusion: Our results indicate that HSD10 plays a crucial role in the parallel sequencing with a customized panel or clinical exome sequencing. HSD10/MRP
P1  complex formation, and loss of HSD10 results in impaired Overall GSD type III (AGL gene) and GSD IXa (PHKA2 gene) were the most mitochondrial tRNA processing of heavy strand transcripts. The findings frequent GSD deficiencies accounting for close to 75% of the GSD patients. provide a novel explanation for mitochondrial dysfunction observed in The mutational spectrum includes 29 different mutations, 14 novel, most of HSD10 disease. them loss-of-function mutations. By clinical exome sequencing analysis we P
S06 .23 have diagnosed four further patient with mutations, ALDOB, LIPA, NKX2-5 Pharmacogenetics in channelopathies causing congenital and CPT2, not related to GSD but with shared phenotypic characteristics hyperinsulinism in Slovakia such as liver, muscular and cardiac dysfunction. This study shows that next L. Valentínová1, J. Staník2,1, M. Hučková1, M. Škopková1, M. Rosoľanková3, D. Staníková2,1, generation sequencing is an accurate high throughput method for the gene- L. Tichá2, Slovak Congenital Hyperinsulinism Study Group, D. Gašperíková1, I. Klimeš1; tic diagnosis of Glycogen Storage Disease and other related clinical diseases 1Diabgene & Diabetes Laboratory, Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Slovak of genetic origin enabling appropriate therapeutic and genetic counselling. Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2First Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Intensive Care in P
S06 .21 Neonatology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. Homozygosity mapping using SNP microarray as a useful diagnostic tool in consanguineous populations L. Cohen1, N. Orenstein2, M. Weisz- Hubshman2, I. Maya1, D. Behar1, S. Kahana1, T. Tene1, Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is the most common cause of the persi- M. Feingold-Zadok1,3, M. Shohat1,4, L. Basel-Vanagaite1,4; 1The Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, stent hypoglycaemia in children. Mutations in KCNJ11 and ABC
C8  genes Petah-Tikva, Israel, 2Genetics Unit, Schneider Children Medical Center, Petah-Tikva, coding potassium channel subunits are major cause of CHI development in Israel, 3Genetics Institute, Assaf Harofeh Medical Cente, Zerifin, Israel, 4Sackler School of newborns. The type of B-cell hyperplasia (focal or diffuse) depends on the Medicine,Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. type of mutation and determines diagnostics, treatment and further pro- gnosis. This study aimed to evaluate genetic cause of severe hypoglycaemia and recommend an appropriate therapeutic approach in particular cases. Introduction: Consanguinity increases the coefficient of inbreeding and the Patients and Methods: For genetic testing 14 unrelated probands with con- likelihood of the presence of pathogenic mutations in homozygotic state. genital hyperinsulinism were reffered over the ten years (2005 - 2014) An SNP-based microarray is a useful tool not only for studying copy num- throughout Slovakia. For molecular diagnosis of the disease, direct sequen- ber variants but also for the detection of uniparental disomy and regions cing of ABC
C8  and KCNJ11 genes was carried out. of homozygosity (ROH) throughout the genome. Evaluation of ROH can gui- Results: We found mutations in ABC
C8  or KCNJ11 in 36% (5/14) of pati- de medical geneticists to focus on a single specific gene in order to achieve ents. We identified two paternaly inherited ABC
C8  mutations (Q444H and molecular diagnosis in families with common parental ethnic background c.2694+1G>C) in two diazoxide-unresponsive patients with focal form of or consanguinity. In addition, ROH analysis can eliminate genes as possible CHI. Subsequently, both patients underwent pancreatic surgery to reduce candidates in highly heterogeneous recessive conditions. B-cell mass. Another two paternaly inherited mutations were found in two Methods: We describe six cases in which analysis of SNP-based microarrays diazoxide sensitive patients, one novel in KCNJ11 (T180N) and another (Illumina HumanOmniExpress-24 v1.0 BeadChip) has assisted us reaching known in ABC
C8  gene (V17A). Compound heterozygote KCNJ11 mutations molecular diagnosis in consanguineous families by sequencing a single can- (Q52*, R30G) were identified in a 4-months old boy with severe diazoxide- didate gene that was localized within homozygosity region. unresponsive hypoglycaemia. Based on this results treatment with octreoti- Results: We identified a disease-causing mutation in all the families. All the de was started. Finally, the combination of octreotid with frequent feedings genes are related to metabolic or neurological disorders and include: CRLF1 through a gastrostomy led to normalization of glycaemia. (Crisponi syndrome/CIS
S1  syndrome), PHKG2 (Glycogen storage disease Conclusion: Taken together, we have resolved etiology in 36% CHI cases, IXc) NP
C1  (Niemann-Pick C disease), MPV17 (hepatocerebral mitochondrial which helped to choose the most appropriate therapeutic procedure. DNA depletion), MAN2B1 (Alpha-mannosidosis), and MOC
S2  (Molybdenum Supported by: APVV-0107-12. cofactor deficiency). PM06.24 Conclusions: These examples demonstrate the great diagnostic value of SNP Dual genome investigation in Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy microarray in deciphering molecular defect in consanguineous families by C. Ribeiro1, J. Pratas1, M. J. Santos1, M. Simões1, C. Mendes1, M. C. Macário2, L. Diogo2, P. minimizing the need for massive parallel sequencing and reducing the cost Garcia2, P. Fonseca2, E. Silva3, L. J. Wong4, M. Grazina3,1; of the molecular work-up. 1CNC - Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2CHUC - Coimbra Hospital and Universitary Centre, Coimbra, Portugal, PM06.22 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Department of Impaired mitochondrial RNA processing in HSD10 disease Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. A. J. Deutschmann1, A. Amberger1, J. A. Mayr2, S. Oerum3, W. W. Yue3, J. Zschocke1; 1Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 3University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally inherited mi- tochondrial disorder characterized by retinal ganglion cell degeneration leading to acute bilateral loss of central vision, particularly affecting young HSD17B10 adult males. LHON has a negative detrimental impact for the quality of life Introduction: Missense mutations in the 17ß-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogena- and it is by far the most common mitochondrial genetic OXPHOS disease. se type 10 gene ( ) result in HSD10 disease, a rare X-chromosomal According to literature, the majority of LHON patients with mitochondrial childhood disorder mainly characterized by psychomotor regression and DNA (mtDNA) mutations harbor one of three primary point mutations (90- cardiomyopathy. HSD1H0S iDs 1p7aBr1t 0o f the mitochondrial RNase P enzyme com- 95%): m.3460G>A, m.11778G>A and m.14484T>C. plex required for 5`-end cleavage of mitochondrial precursor tRNA´s. Here, A sample of 10 patients suspected of LHON, followed at the Ophthalmology we analyzed whether mutations are linked to RNase P deficien- and Neurology Departments of CHUC, was studied (2 females and 8 males: cy. age mean±SD: 35±15 years). Total DNA was extracted from peripheral blood Methods: Expression of RNase P proteins was analyzed by Western blots. and muscle. Analysis of mtDNA and 513 nuclear genes related to mitochon- Real-time RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis were performed to quan- drial disorders was performed by next generation sequencing (NGS). tify mt-tRNA processing in HSD10 knock-down cells, patient (R130C and The typical LHON mtDNA mutations were found in 5 patients: 3 with Q165H) and control fibroblasts. m.11778G>A, 1 having m.14484T>C and 1 with m.3460G>A. Results: HSD10 protein expression was strongly reduced in fibroblasts with The nuclear DNA (nDNA) analysis revealed that 8 samples have alterations, mutation p.R130C which was associated with low expression of MRP
P1  pro- t1ei3n4, an essential component of the RNasE e S P H coG m p2 le0 x1 . K5 n | o G ckL -dA owS nG eO xpW er, i -SCOalTl hLeAteNroDzy,g UouKs, w| WithW a pWre.dEicStHabGle .fOunRctGional impact, according to in silicoABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index SL
C19 A1 analysis; the majority of these alterations (9) are novel. All affected genes content 4-fold lower than in the wild type-cells. Furthermore, the lack of are related to mitochondria network reinforcing the communication bet- functional significantly altered the expression of critical genes ween the two genomes, but this issue must be further investigated. leading to spontaneous lipid droplet accumulation within cells. Lipidomic This study was financed by Foundation for Science and Technology (PTDC/ analyses showed that the most abundant stocked lipids were TAG and cho- DTP-EPI/0929/2012 and PEst-C/SAU/LA0001/2013-2014). lesteryl-ester species (the main known components of inStrLaCc1e9llAu1lar lipid P
S06 .25 droplets) as well as polyunsaturated fatty acids. LHON/MELAS overlap syndrome in a girl with complex I deficiency We can conclude, for the first time, that genetic variants of are as- caused by very rare mtDNA mutation m.13046T>C sociated with NAFLD, and that the failure of this gene dysregulates critical H. Kolarova1, M. Tesarova1, H. Hansikova1, P. Liskova2, O. Ulmanova3, M. Forgac3, J. genes for normal liver function, causing low intracellular folate levels and Zeman1, T. Honzik1; increased lipid accumulation. 1Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine and P
S06 .27 General University Hospital at Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, Identification and characterisation of novel GLA mutations in Fabry 2Laboratory of the Biology and Pathology of the Eye, Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorder, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University disease Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Neurology and Centre J. Lukas1, S. Scalia2, A. Pockrandt1, S. Eichler3, A. Giese1, G. Duro4, A. Rolfs1; of Clinical Neuroscience, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and 1Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Rostock, Germany, 2Institute of General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology “A. Monroy” (IBIM), Palermo, Italy, 3Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 4Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology “A. Monroy” (IBIM), Palermo, Germany. LHON and MELAS syndrome are mitochondrially-inherited diseases charac- terized by subacute visual failure and variable multisystemic presentation, Fabry disease (FD) is a rare, progressive, metabolic disorder of glycosphin- respectively. We present a unique case of LHON/MELAS overlap syndrome golipid storage and is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the lysoso- in a 13-year-old girl with genetic background previously described in one mal hydrolase α-galactosidase A (GLA). In males, the disease usually leads patient with MELAS/Leigh syndrome. to a classic spectrum of symptoms including cardiomyopathy, nephropathy, Results: A firstborn girl of healthy, unrelated Caucasian parents was born acroparaesthesia, cornea verticillata and gastrointestinal problems and, after uneventful pregnancy and delivery. Patient´s mother and two younger eventually, myocardial infarction, renal failure or stroke. Certain circum- brothers are clinically healthy, but the mother suffered from two misscarria- stances complicate the diagnosis of the disease. (1) The X-linked inheritance ges. The disease manifested at the age of 12 years with an abrupt, painless mode causes female heterozygotic mutation carriers to develop symptoms and simultaneous loss of vision with a subsequent stabilization two months that are commonly milder and do not comprise the whole spectrum. (2) Mu- later. The ophtalmologic examination documented visual acuity of 0.6/20 tations that do not completely abolish α-galactosidase A (AGAL) function (O.S.) and 4/20 (O.D); the perimetry objectified a bilateral caecocentral sco- usually manifest with milder disease. tomas. Over the next months, the girl developed a moderate sensorineural In collaboration with Centogene AG/Rostock we frequently detect new vari- hearing loss, vertigo, headache, anhedonia and thyroiditis. There was no ants where the clinical significance is unclear (VUS). We utilize cell culture- Leigh syndrome or postictal changes on brain MRI. Initial genetic analyses based over-expression of the mutant cDNAs in order to objectify the disease excluded all three LHON prevalent mutations in mtDNA. Extensive meta- potential of the variants by their in vitro enzyme activity. bolic workup documented elevated CSF lactate of 4.25 mmol/l (C in ND5 We introduce outline data for 25 patients harbouring novel GLA mutations subunit (urine 71%, muscle 70%, hair follicles 44%, fibroblasts 40%, buccal (age of diagnosis, symptomatic spectrum) and oppose the data for in vitro smear 34% and blood 27%). Surprisingly, the mutation was not detected enzyme activity and responsiveness to the pharmacological chaperone (PC) neither in patient´s mother nor her two younger brothers. 1-Deoxygalactonojirimycine (DGJ), an alternate treatment for misfolding- Discussion: We report the second known patient with m.13046T>C muta- prone AGAL variants. tion. Based on a combination of clinical symptoms, we concluded the con- We show increased prevalence of patients with GLA gene variants with an dition as LHON/MELAS overlap syndrome. Institutional support was pro- enzyme activity of >20%. Since these cases can lead to symptom onset later vided by IGA NT 14156/3, IGA NT 13114/4, RVO-VFN 64165/2012, GAUK in life, a close clinical check-up is demanded. The in vitro enzyme activity sy- 38515/2015. stem supports prediction of the pathologic progress of a given mutation and PM06.26 impacts decision-making on time and type of therapeutic intervention. Solute carrier family 19 (folate transporter) member-1 defeat leads to PM06.28 lipid accumulation in hepatocytes Clinical picture in Estonian patients with heteroplasmic m.3243A>G M. Vazquez-Chantada1, J. Conde-Vancells1, A. Cano2, A. Gonzalez-Lahera3,4, D. Mosen- Ansorena3, F. J. Blanco3,5, K. Clement6,7,8, J. Tordjman7,8, A. Tran9, P. Gual9, C. Garcia- mutation in MT-T
L1  gene Monzon10,4, J. Caballeria11,4, A. Castro2, M. L. Martinez-Chantar3,4, J. M. Mato3,4, H. Zhu1, R. E. Kurvinen1, R. Zordania1, S. Ütt2, P. Rudenko3, K. Anton4, K. Joost1,4; H. Finnell1, A. M. Aransay3,4; 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tallinn, 1Department of Nutritional Sciences. Dell Pediatric Research Institute. The University Estonia, 2Neurology Clinic, West Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 3Internal of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, United States, 2OWL Metabolomics, Derio, Spain, 3CIC Medicine Clinic, North Estonian Medical Centre, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Asper Biotech Ltd, bioGUNE, Derio, Spain, 4CIBERehd, Barcelona, Spain, 5Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation Tartu, Estonia. for Science, Bilbao, Spain, 6INSERM, U872, Nutriomique; Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France, 7ICAN Institut Cardiométabolisme et Nutrition, Paris, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 8CRNH- Ile de France, Paris, France, 9INSERM U895, Team 8 „hepatic complications of obesity“, The m.3243A>G mutation is known as the MELAS ( mitochondrial myopa- University of Nice, Nice University hospital, Nice, France, 10Liver Research Unit, Hospital thy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke -like episoodes) mutation. Universitario Santa Cristina, Madrid, Spain, 11Liver Unit, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, However many clinical phenotypes associated with this mutation have been Spain. described including maternally inherited diabetes and deafness (MIDD). TRhees ualitms of the study was to describe clinical picture of Estonian patients with heteroplasmic m.3243A>G mutation referred to genetic councelling. The etiology of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) remains poorly : the common m.3243A>G point mutation was detected in eight pa- understood. Several molecular mechanisms have been proposed to explain tients from three families. In all of them (8/8) progressive hearing loss was how steatosis progresses to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and hepatocellular detected, followed by diabetes mellitus (7/8), migraine (6/8), psychiatric carcinoma. One of them is altered methionine metabolism, which is coupled disorders (3/8), brain atrophy(3/8) and hypertrofic left cardiomyopathy to the folate biosynthetic pathway. (2/8). Most of our patients (7/8) had thin build and short stature. Herein, we report a multicenter association sstouludtye ocaf r7ri5e6r fbaimopilsyy 1-9p r(ofovlean- CCloinnicclaulslyio MnEsLAS syndrome was diagnosed in four patients from two fami- tNeA tFraLnDs ppoarttieern)t sm aenmdb ecro 1ntrSoLlCs,1 w9Ah1ich together with various functional ap- lies and MIDD in four patients from one family. proaches allowed us to describe the role of the SL
C19 A1 : Our results confirm the clinical heterogeneity of the ( ) gene in the development of NAFLD. m.3243A>G mutation. Progressive hearing loss is a first and universally pre- Two (one missense) out of the -t3hree studied SNPs within showed sented feature in our small cohort. Therefore m.3243A>G mutation should a significant association (p<10 ) with NAFLD for the single-marker allelic be considered in patients with (progressive) hearing loss. There are some test. In addition, minor homozygous genotypes were related to NAFLD cli- evidence that m.3243A>G mutation causes similar clinical pictures within nical features such as boSdLCy-1m9Aas1s-index and serinu mvi tlerovels of triacylglycerol the family. But as our cohort is small this conclusion need further wider cli- (TAG) and transaminases. nical investigation. The functional role of was studied using shRNA-gene- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 135 knockdown technologies in THL
E2 -cells, which caused intracellular folateABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P
S06 .29 University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech amamutdb.no: A relational database for MAN2B1 allelic variants Republic. which compiles genotypes, clinical phenotypes, and biochemical and structural data of mutant MAN2B1 in α-mannosidosis. H. F. Riise Stensland1, G. Frantzen2, E. Kuokkanen3, E. K. Buvang4, H. B. Klenow1, P. A homozygous mutation c.460A>G in ACBD3 gene was found by whole- Heikinheimo3, D. Malm5, Ø. Nilssen4; exome sequencing in patient with mitochondrial encephalomyopathy and 1University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2Jupiter System Partner AS, combined deficiency of respiratory-chain complexes. ACBD3 encodes a 60 Tromsø, Norway, 3University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 4University of Tromsø The Arctic kDa acyl-coenzyme A binding domain containing 3 protein (also known as University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 5The Tromsø Internal medicine Specialist center, PA
P7  or GC
P60 ) localized in the Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum, Tromsø, Norway. and mitochondria. ACBD3 protein plays an important role in many cellular processes (lipid metabolism, membrane transport, neuronal division, em- MAN2B1 bryogenesis, steroidogenesis, keeping the structure of the Golgi apparatus, α-Mannosidosis (MIM# 248500) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal sto- apoptosis, iron homeostasis). rage disorder caused by mutations in the gene, encoding the lyso- In mitochondria, ACBD3 protein is a part of the complex (140-200kDa) somal α-mannosidase. The disorder is characterized by a range of clinical mediating cholesterol transport into the organelle. An integral part of this phenotypes of which the major manifestations are mental impairment, hea- complex is VDAC protein (Porin) which forms freely permeable pores in the ring impairment, skeletal changes and immunodeficiency. Here we report outer mitochondrial membrane and further associates with ANT protein aMnA αN-2mBa1nnosidosis mutation database, amamutdb.no, which has been con- (adenine nucleotide transporter) in the inner mitochondrial membrane. structed asM a ApNub2Blic1ly accessible online resource for recording and analyzing ANT is an ADP/ATP carrier that controls a pool of mitochondrial adenine variants. Our aim has been to offer structured and relational infor- nucleotides required for mtDNA maintenance. mation on mutations and genotypes along with associated clinical The aim of the study is characterize the consequences of stably down-regula- phenotypes. Classifying missense mutations, as pathogenic or benign, is a ted expression of ACBD3 protein on the biogenesis and functions of OXPHOS challenge. Therefore, they have been given special attention as we have com- complexes in HEK293 to elucidate its role in the pathogenesis of the patient´s piled all available data that relate to their biochemical, functional and struc- phenotype. The first results show that deficit of ACBD3 protein leads to the tural properties. The α-mannosidosis mutation database is comprehensive decrease of amount and activity of complex IV and decrease of selected sub- and relational in the sense that information can be retrieved and compiled units of complex IV. Supported by research projects IGA NT/13114-4, GAČR across datasets; hence, it will facilitate diagnostics and increase our under- 14-36804G, RVO-VFN64165/2012, and GAUK 1308214. standing of the clinical and molecular aspects of α-mannosidosis. We believe that the amamutdb.no structure and architecture will be applicable for the PM06.32 development of databases for any monogenic disorder. Identification of causal mutations in three Czech patients with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and haematological disturbances A. Vondráčková1, H. Kratochvílová1, V. Dvořáková1, V. Stránecký2, K. Beránková1, E. PM06.30 Rozsypalová1, D. Dočekalová Zajícová1, T. Honzík1, H. Hansíková1, J. Zeman1, M. Tesařová1; Gut microbiome composition is linked to metabolic improvements 1First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital induced by dietary changes in Korean adoptees in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders in E. Kim1, R. Chae1, G. Jeong2, G. Ko3,4, J. Sung1,4, J. Lee5, S. Jin6; The First Faculty of Medicine at Charles University in Prague and General University 1Complex Disease and Genome Epidemiology Branch, Department of Epidemiology, Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, Prague 2, Czech Republic. Graduate School of Public Health, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Laboratory of Immunology, School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3Department of Environmental Health, Graduate School of Publich Health, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 4Institute of Health Introduction: Anaemia represents a heterogeneous group of hematologic di- and Environment, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, seases, which can be induced by plenty of genetic and risk factors. Although 5Department of Food and Nutrition, Sookmyung Women‘s University, Seoul, Korea, the association of mitochondrial dysfunction and hematologic pathology is Republic of, 6Department of Traditional Dietary Life Food, Graduate School, Sookmyung generally known, the underlying pathologic factors with regard to evolving Women‘s University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. anaemias are poorly characterized. In this study, we report on three pati- ents, who manifested profound cytochrome c oxidase deficiency combined with anaemia. Introduction: A growing body of evidence suggests that healthy diet is one Methods: Genetic causes of patients‘ defective OXPHOS system were found of the major factors associated with metabolic health and changes in gut with the use of sequencing targeted to mitochondrial exome, application of microbiota. Here we conducted a low-salt, high-fiber diet intervention trial SNP microarray chip and performance of protein studies in affected patient on Korean adoptees, to assess alterations in gut microbiome composition tissues. in response to changes in diet and the associations with metabolic impro- Results: The presence of pathologic mutations was excluded iPnU pSa1tients‘ vement. mitochondrial DNA. A rarely occurring pathological 6-kbp homozygous Materials and methods: We developed a modified version of traditional Ko- deletion was identified in two unrelated patients affecting the gene, rean diet (K-DASH), a high-fiber, low-fat, and low-salt diet with a sufficient wCOhXic1h0 remarkably leads to different disease-phenotypes in both patients. supply of fruits and nuts. 19 Korean adoptees (mean age: 29.4 years, male: Two previously characterized deleterious missense sequence variations of 44.4 %) whose diets are mainly western style were recruited. 16S riboso- gene (p.Asn204Lys; p.Pro225Leu) were identified in the third pati- mal RNA genes were extracted from stool samples at both pre- and post- ent, however, their combination has not been reported yet, which may imply intervention trial. The V4 region was amplified by PCR and sequenced using the variant patient disePaUsSe1-phenCoOtyXp1e0. Illumina MiSeq platform. QIIME v.1.9.0 was used to estimate taxa from the Conclusions: Based on our results and current knowledge, we suggest the sequenced reads. infantile deficiency of and to be classified as the early fatal and Results: The metabolic profiles, including weight, waist circumference, sy- slow progressive forms. To conclude, mitochondrial disorders manifest poor stolic blood pressure, high-density lipids, and triglyceride levels, showed an phenotype-genotype correlation even in the patient with the same causal improvement, except for fast blood sugar level. The gut microbiome profiles mutations. at the phylum level, Firmicutes were decreased, while Bacteroidetes were This study was supported by grants RVO-VFN64165/2012, IGA NT13114- increased in abundance. The operational taxonomic unit that showed the 4/2012, UNCE 204011 and GAČR 14-36804G. most significant increase in abundance belonged to the family Leuconosto- P
S06 .33 caceae, which is known to produce acetate and lactate (FDR-corrected p = Evaluation of results from a large NGS nuclear mitochondrial panel 0.0028). The change of triglyceride levels correlated with that of abundance supports the use of NGS panels in cases of mitochondrial-like clinical of Actinobacteria (Pearson’s correlation coefficient: 0.61, p=0.005). features or non-specific presentations Conclusions: Our findings suggest that metabolic improvements induced by J. Bevilacqua, D. Patel, H. Reddi; a short-term changes of diet are mediated through their effects on the gut Transgenomic, Inc, New Haven, CT, United States. microbiome. P
S06 .31 Role of ACBD3 protein in the mitochondrial energy metabolism Next-generation sequencing (NGS) panels have expanded the number of M. Tesařová1, H. Kratochvílová1, M. Rodinová1, V. Stránecký2, H. Hartmannová2, A. genes that can be simultaneously investigated and are an attractive option Vondráčková1, J. Spáčilová1, H. Hansíková1, J. Zeman1; because of their increased efficiency and reduced cost. Design of the 448 1Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles gene nuclear mitochondrial NGS panel included genes that are involved in University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech various mitochondrial functions ranging from oxidative phosphorylation, Republic, 2Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles transcription/ translation, mtDNA synthesis/biogenesis, and mitochondrial 136 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG regulation. These genes also include those associated with conditions thatABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index may mimic mitochondrial disease. We evaluated 43 Nuclear Mitome NGS terozygous state in the parents and the asymptomatic sister. This patient‘s cases to determine the most commonly reported and phenotypically infor- complex phenotype reflects a complex genetic etiology in which no single mative genes. We reported Sanger confirmed variants in 372 of 448 genes. gene explained the complete clinical presentation, but rather more than one Overall about 65% of variants could be categorized into one of three mito- mutant locus is involved. This study demonstrates the benefit of WES in pro- chondrial disease associated subtypes: oxidative phosphorylation subunits, viding the molecular diagnosis to patients with complex clinical presentati- mitochondrial regulatory function, or conditions mimicking mitochondrial ons and in revealing a possible secondary MRC defect. disease. About 43% of reported variants were in genes that cause similar PM06.36 clinical phenotypReYs,R 210, %W wFSe1r,e P inO LgGen, SeCs Nth1aAt, cModTeF MfoTr, oTxTidBaKt2iv, eA pBhCoDs1p,h MorYyHla7-, Unraveling the genetic cause of mitochondrial disorders by whole tAiToMn ,s ubu nAiTtsX, Nan7d 9.8% were related to regulatory function. The ten most exome sequencing reported genes ( D. Hellebrekers1, T. Theunissen2, S. Sallevelt1, M. Gerards2, R. Szklarczyk2, B. de Koning1, and ) accounted for over 15% of all reported variants. Six of R. Kamps1, M. Nguyen2, W. Gottschalk1, A. Hendrickx1, T. Slangen1, G. Schoonderwoerd3, J. these ten genes are associated with conditions that may mimic mitochon- Vanoevelen1, I. de Coo4, H. Smeets2; drial disease. They may not be directly related to mitochondrial function but 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics & Research Institute GROW, Maastricht these patients’ phenotypes prompted suspicion for mitochondrial disease University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, demonstrating the importance of using NGS testing early in the diagnostic Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatric Neurology, Erasmus process for economic and efficiency purposes. Our results support the use of MC-Sophia Children‘s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands. NGS panels to identify a potential diagnosis in cases of non-specific clinical features or mitochondrial disease-like symptoms. PM06.34 Mitochondrial disorders are often fatal multisystem disorders. Due to ex- Mitochondrial DNA mutation testing: how low can you go? treme clinical and genetic heterogeneity of these diseases, establishing a F. Khawaja1, E. L. Blakely2, C. Fratter3, R. W. Taylor2, Z. Deans1; genetic diagnosis is challenging. Mitochondrial disorders can be caused by 1UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations, accounting for ~15% of cases, or Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research and NHS Highly, by nuclear genetic defects. To date, mutations have been found in ~200 nu- Specialised Mitochondrial Diagnostic Laboratory, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, clear genes in mitochondrial patients but many disease genes still have to Oxford, United Kingdom. be discovered. Development of whole exome sequencing (WES) has revolutionized our ap- proach to uncover disease-causing mutations in known and novel mitochon- The UK National External Quality Assessment Service (UK NEQAS) for Mole- drial disease genes. We performed WES analysis on ~50 (consanguinous or cular Genetics has provided external quality assessment (EQA) for genetic non-consanguinous) patients with suspected mitochondrial disease and no testing laboratories since 1991. The Scheme challenged participants of the mtDNA or POLG1 mutations, filtering the exome data based on the presu- 2014 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) EQA runM bTyT Ld1is tributing a validated med genetic model (mostly autosomal recessive). So far, in ~35% of these sample with a very low level of mtDNA heteroplasmy (3% mutated mtDNA patients a clear (~25%) or probable (~10%) genetic cause has been iden- in circulating lymphocytes) of the m.3243A>G mutation, resulting in tified; most (~2/3) of these are mutations in known mitochondrial genes a third of all participants reporting a critical genotyping error. while ~1/3 are not previously linked to mitochondrial disease. Thirty six percent of laboratories were either unable to identify the Therefore, WES has now been implemented in our laboratory as a diagnostic m.3243A>G mutation present at this low level or failed to state the sensiti- test for patients with suspected mitochondrial disease, starting with a mito- vity of their quantitative assay to determine mtDNA heteroplasmy in their chondrial gene panel of ~450 genes for initial filtering. In case the causal ge- report. Various testing methods were used for analysis and erroneous re- netic defect is not found, filtering the complete exome data (‘Open Exome’) sults were even reported by laboratories claiming to have test sensitivity based on the presumed genetic model can be performed as a second step. as low as 1%. For most novel candidate genes and mutations, however, functional testing The results of the EQA scheme highlighted that when reporting quantitati- is required to prove pathogenicity or, alternatively, identification of similar ve assessment of mtDNA mutation loads it is crucial that test sensitivity is gene mutations in patients with comparable phenotypes, demonstrating the included on reports to enable the reader to correctly interpret the result. value of data sharing. Furthermore, if a diagnostic laboratory is using a test for the heteroplas- P
S06 .37 mic m.3243A>G mutation which cannot reliably detect <10% mutant load Particularities of mitochondrial DNA connected with manifestation of then it is recommended that an alternative, more sensitive, testing strategy muscle tissue hypoxia in congenital myopathies. is employed or that an alternative, non-invasive DNA sample (e.g. urinary A. Voronkova, N. Litvinova, T. Baranich, V. Sukhorukov, D. Kharlamov; sediment) in which this mutation is known to segregate to higher levels, is Moscow Clinical Institute of Pediatrics, Moscow, Russian Federation. routinely screened in patients referred for m.3243A>G testing. P
S06 .35 Introduction Exome sequencing in a patient with suspected mitochondrial disease: The confirmation or exclusion of mitochondrial diseases remains a challen- the truth unveiled. S. Ait-El-Mkadem1, A. Chaussenot1, C. Rouzier1, K. Fragaki1, S. Bannwarth1, A. Cano2, B. ge in clinical practice, especially for pediatric cases, which show enormous Chabrol2, V. Paquis-Flucklinger1; variation in clinical presentations. Demonstrative example are infant myo- 1Nice Hospital - Medical Genetics - IRCAN, Nice, France, 2Marseille Hospital - La Timone - pathies. Different manifestations of congenital myopathy may mask mtDNA Pediatric Neurology, Marseille, France. alterations. Oftimes mitochondrial disorders are not suspected and mani- fest unexpectedly. In this regard, molecular mtDNA testing is getting increa- singly important as a stage of diagnostics. As the recognition of mitochondrial diseases has increased, the spectrum Materials and methods of clinical manifestations has expanded to include organ systems such as We researched unexplained infant myopathy cases with manifestation of gastrointestinal tract, kidney and liver. Here, we report our efforts to iden- muscle hypoxia. First, we analyzed mitochondrial distribution in the tissue. tify the pathogenetic cause for a patient, born to healthy consanguineous Then, we explored distribution of Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1 alpha (HIF1a) parents, who presented since the neonatal period a constellation of sym- to evaluate hypoxia. For this stage, we used polyclonal rabbit antibodies to ptoms suggestive of a mitochondrial disorder: chronic diarrhea, failure to HIF1a and secondary antibodies AlexaFluor555 goat anti-rabbit IgG. The- thrive, tubulopathy, hepatic cytolysis with a complex IV deficiency of the reafter we made complete mtDNA sequence with Sanger method and capil- mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) in liver. Mutations in mitochondri- lary electrophoresis. al DNA and nuclear candidate genes have been excluded. Whole-Exome Results Sequencing (WES) of the patient identified a homozygous missense vari- Histological research of muscle tissue revealed ragged red fibers. More ant c.347G>A (p.Cys116Tyr) in the EPCAM gene, which is known to cause interestingly, we found loci with both HIF1a high concentration sites and Congenital Tufting Enteropathy (CTE), a rare autosomal recessive diar- increased mitochondrial clusters. In the light of these findings, we analy- rheal disorder. Additionally a homozygous missense mutation c.1870A>G zed complete mtDNA sequence in order to find pathological mutations. We (p.Thr624Ala) was identified in the SL
C3 A1 gene, which causes cystinuria, found no confirmed disease-associated mutations. Yet in the full mtDNA an autosomal inherited disorder characterized by impaired epithelial cell sequence we found several novel variants in each patient: A191T, T199C, transport of cystine and dibasic amino acids in the proximal renal tubule T961C, T3197C, A4769G, T7080C, G8251A, A8860G, T11770C, A15218G, and gastrointestinal tract. The two variants are novel, occur in highly con- A15326G, A16080G, T16209C, 
C16294 T, 
C16256 T, T16519C (no connection served amino-acids, are predictedE tSoH beG d a2m0a1g5in g| aGnLd AarSe GprOesWent, iSnC thOe TheL-ANwDit,h U hKap |lo WgroWupW)..ESHG.ORG 137ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM06.40 A new MRM-MS assay for the diagnosis of mucopolycaccharidosis type Conclusions IVA (Morquio A disease) in dry blood spots We expect novel individual mtDNA variants to be connected with mitochon- C. Cozma1, S. Eichler1, G. Wittmann1, A. Flores Bonet1, G. J. Kramp1, A. Giese2, A. Rolfs1; drial disorders and local manifestations of muscle tissue hypoxia. We sup- 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Albrecht-Kossel-Intitute for Neuroregeneration AKos, pose it is crucial not only to check mtDNA “hot points” but also to make University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany. complete mtDNA sequencing to evaluate novel genetic variants in cases of unexplained infant myopathies. PM06.38 Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA (MPS IVA; Morquio A disease) is an autosomal Association between seminal protein oxidation and mitochondrial recessive disease caused and characterized by an impaired activity of galac- membrane potential of human spermatozoa from infertile men tosamine-(N-acetyl)-6-sulfate-sulfatase (GALNS), resulting in keratan sulfa- S. Daoud1, J. Auger2, J. P. Wolf2, E. Dulioust2; te and chondroitin-6-sulfate accumulation in tissues and secondary organ 1Biology of Reproduction Department, Faculty of medicine of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Biology damage. Enzyme replacement therapy, currently in clinical trials, renders of Reproduction Department, Cochin Hospital, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France. the identification of MPS IVa patients in a rapid and facile manner of out- most importance. We propose a newly developed assay for the stabile and reproducible detection of GALNS deficiency in dry blood spots (DBS). Blood Introduction: Sperm mitochondria are one of the major sources and targets samples were taken from 57 healthy individuals and 18 randomly selected of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Furthermore, mitochondrial dysfunction is MPS IVA patients. The patients were presenting the MPS IV A phenotype reported to be an early indicator of sperm damage. The aim of this study was and the genetic test revealed GALNS gene mutations, ten of which previous- to evaluate the influence of oxidative stress, as assessed by seminal oxidati- ly not described in literature. The material extracted from DBS was incuba- on protein level, on mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) of sperm. ted with a 4-methylumbelliferyl-β-D-galactopyranoside-6-sulfate as a spe- Materials and Methods: Study population included 25 male partners of in- cific synthetic substrate. Final enzymatic product, 4-methylumbelliferone, fertile couples. Were excluded men with known male factor of infertility obtained after adding exogenous beta-galactosidase, was quantified by LC/ and/or low ejaculate volume (<1.5 mL) and/or low sperm count (< 15 Mil- MRM-MS (liquid-chromatography/multiple-reaction-monitoring mass- lion/mL), evaluated according to WHO 2010 recommendations. MMP was spectrometry). 4-propyl-5-hydroxy-7-methyl-2h-chromen-2-one was used determined by flow cytometry using 3,3’-dihexyloxacarbocyanine iodide as internal standard, a compound with a very similar molecular structure (DiO
C6 ) as probe. Seminal plasma level of advanced oxidation protein pro- and fragmentation pattern in negative ion mode as 4-methylumbelliferone ducts (AOPP), a marker of oxidative stress, was assessed by spectrophoto- (the enzymatic product in the present assay ). The cut-off was established at metry. The relationship between semen parameters, sperm MMP and AOPP 4.8 µmol/L/h. The enzymatic assay yielded a positive and negative predic- levels were analyzed (Spearman’s Rank correlation test). tive value of 1.0 for genetically confirmed MPS IVa patients (with a GALNS Results: Nearly one-third of the participants (n=8) had normal semen pa- activity of 0.35 ± 0.21 µmol/L/h) compared with controls (normal GALNS rameters. Among the remaining participants, 70 % had a single parameter activity 23.1 ± 5.3 µmol/L /h). Results show a pathologically reduced GALNS below WHO reference values. Sperm progressive motility was significantly activity in all MPS IVa patients, while the control enzymes show always nor- correlated with MMP (r=+0.44; p=0.02). We found a negative correlation mal activity. between AOPP seminal level and sperm concentration (r= -0.40; p=0.04). P
S06 .41 There was no association between AOPP level and MMP (p=0.9). Mutation analysis of the MRA
P2  gene in Prader Willi like patients and Conclusion: In accordance with previous studies, sperm MMP was a sensiti- obese children and adolescents. ve indicator of functional integrity of the spermatozoa. The lack of associa- E. Geets1, D. Zegers1, S. Beckers1, A. Verrijken2, G. Massa3, K. Van Hoorenbeeck4, S. tion between MMP and AOPP level could be related to the relatively good Verhulst4, L. Van Gaal2, W. Van Hul1; semen quality of the participants in this study. Indeed, semen vulnerability 1Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of Endocrinology, to oxidative damage is strongly linked to semen quality and its antioxidant Diabetology and Metabolic Diseases, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Pediatrics, Hasselt, Belgium, 4Department of Pediatrics, Antwerp, Belgium. capacity. Background: P
S06 .39 Molecular diagnosis of monogenic diabetes by targeted next- In general, there is increasin Ign rveictorognition that accessory pro- generation sequencing in Slovak MODY patients teins can modulate G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) trafficking, ligand M. Škopková1, L. Valentínová1, J. Staník2,1, M. Hučková1, D. Daniš1, I. Klimeš1, D. binding and signaling to the cell surface. studies showed that me- Gašperíková1; 1Diabgene & Diabetes Laboratory, Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Slovak lanocortin receptor 2 accessory protein 2 (MRA
P2 ) cManR AiPn2teract with the Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2First Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of melanocortin 3 (M
C3 R) and 4 receptor (M
C4 R), two GPCRs which play an Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. important role in the leptin-melanocortin signaling. ise lto acla.ted on chromosome 6q14.2, a region which is associated with a Prader Willi like (PWL) phenotype, a syndromic form of obesity. In addition, Asai identi- Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) is genetically heterogeneous fied four rare heterozygous variants in four unrelated, nonsyndromic, seve- disorder. Generally, only few genes with most prevalent mutations are se- rMeelyt hoobdes:e individuals. Therefore we decided to perform mutation analysis quenced according to patient phenotype. In this study, we used targeted in both a PWL and obese cMohRoArPt.2 NGS sequencing of a panel of MODY genes in patients, where no mutation We screened 122 PWL patients and 404 obese children and ado- had been found in one or two most probable genes by Sanger sequencing. lescents for mutations in using high-resolution melting curve ana- Patients and Methods: We designed a custom targeted sequencing panel lRyesissu. lStasn agnerd sceoqnucelnucsiniogn ws:as performed for samples with melting patterns focusing on 13 known MODY genes (HNF4A, GCK, HNF1A, PDX1, HNF1B, deviating from wild-type.MRA
P2  NEUROD1, KLF11, CEL, PAX4, INS, BLK, ABC
C8 , KCNJ11). The target regi- Mutation analysis of all coding exons and in- ons (exons with 50bp padding, UTRs and promoters) were sequenced using tron-exon boundaries of resulted in the identification of one rare PGM IonTorrent platform. Missing and low coverage fragments, as well as non-synonInym sioliucos heterozygous variant A40S (c.118G>T) in one PWL pati- candidate variants, were sequenced by Sanger. We have analyzed 21 pati- ent. Screening of the 404 obese individuals didn’t lead to any variants in ents with MODY phenotype negative for most probable genes. the gene. analysis showed a probably damaging effect of the A40S Results: Designed panel covered 93.7% of target sequences and, out of the- variant on the protein structure of MMRARAP
P22 . Further functional analysis is se, 98.1% were covered more than 20x. Analysis of data revealed 3 known necessary to investigate the influence of the variant on the MRA
P2  function. mutations: in GCK, ABC
C8  and HNF1B genes, and 2 novel likely pathoge- This would indicate a possible role of in the pathogenesis of Prader nic mutations in ABC
C8  and HNF4A genes. We have also found additional Willi like phenotype, albeit in a limited number of patients. 3 variants in HNF1B, PAX4 and BLK genes with unknown significance. Co- PM06.42 segregation analysis with diabetes in the families did not support their pa- ‘Early treatment with Elaprase: Can it be effective in neuropathic form thogenicity. of MPS II?’ Conclusions: Our first results from targeted NGS data showed an effective K. Orchel-Szastak, M. Bik-Multanowski; usage of this method in the routine DNA diagnostics of MODY in Slovakia. Department of Medical Genetics, Jagiellonian University, Medical College, Krakow, We have solved 5 out of 21 cases (25 %) of patients, who would not be dia- Poland. gnosed by classical approach due to their atypical phenotype. Supported by APVV-0187-12, ITM
S26240220087 . Introduction: Enzyme replacement therapy (Elaprase) has been used for treatment of patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II) for the 138 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO laT stL eA ighN t D ye, a U rsK . D u| rW ingW thW is . tE imS eH oG nl. yO feR wG early-diagnosed infants have beenABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2Department of Medical Genetics and Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute treated. Therefore, data on treatment effectiveness in this age group is very for Child and Maternal Health, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, limited. Calgary, AB, Canada, 3Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4McGill University and Genome, Quebec Innovation Centre, Montréal, Quebec, Case presentation: We present unexpected therapeutic findings in one of Canada, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5University of Sydney, ANZAC Research Institute, Concord two affected siblings. In the older patient first symptoms of MPS II were no- Hospital, Sydney, Australia. ticed at the age of three years and diagnosis was established two years later. At the age of seven years, typical dysmorphism, restriction of joint move- ments, heart involvement, hepatomegaly and severe intellectual delay could Multiple symmetric lipomatosis (MSL) is a mitochondrial disorder with im- be observed. In the younger patient diagnosis of MPS II was made in the first paired brown fat metabolism that has been associated with MERFF mutati- month of life. Treatment with Elaprase was introduced in the third month ons in some, but not all patients. We studied a sibling pair and an unrelated of life. At the age of seven years the patient remains clinically symptom-free individual who presented with multiple symmetric lipomatosis (MSL) and (including normal intellectual development) despite presence of typical neuropathy to determine the genetic etiology of this disorder in patients biochemical abnormalities. In both patients activity of iduronate 2-sulfatase who did not carry the MSL-associated MERFF mutation. The siblings presen- in leukocytes was below norm and a missense mutation of the iduronate ted with striking cervico-thoracic lipomatosis in their 40’s, with tongue hy- 2-sulfatase gene (p.Tyr523Cys) was detected. pertrophy and impaired swMaFlNlo2wing, diabetes, and a peripheral neuropathy. Conclusion: Although hampering of some symptoms could be explained Whole exome sequencing was performed on the siblings and a rare, shared with beneficial effects of Elaprase, normal intellectual development in the homozygous mutation in (c.2119C>T: p.R707W) was identified. The younger patient is unexpected. One possible explanation could be decreased mutation was not present in their healthy siblings. In silico programs pre- disease penetration. However, similar extent of biochemical abnormalities dict it to be pathogenic and heterozygous carriers of the MFN2 p.R707W in both patients suggests similar disease severity. Therefore, in our opinion substitution are known to have Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). A third, possibility of significant attenuation of disease course should be considered unrelated, patient with multiple symmetrical lipomatosis and neuropathy as a result of early introduction of enzyme replacement therapy. also harbored the same homozygous mutation and had been previously dia- P
S06 .43 gnosed with CMT. Functional studies in patient fibroblasts demonstrate that Severe TK2 enzyme activity deficiency in patients with mild forms of the p.R707W substitution impairs homotypic (MFN2-MFN2) protein inter- myopathy. actions requireMdF fNo2r normal activity, and renders mitochondria prone to Y. Camara1,2, L. Carreño-Gago1,2, M. A. Martin3,2, M. J. Melia1,2, A. Blazquez3,2, A. Delmiro3,2, perinuclear aggregation. These findings show that homozygous mutations G. Garrabou4,2, C. Moren4,2, J. Diaz-Manera5,2, E. Gallardo5,2, B. Bornstein6,2, E. Lopez- at p.R707W in are a novel cause of multiple symmetrical lipomatosis. Gallardo7,2, A. Hernandez-Lain8, B. San Millan9, E. Cancho10, J. S. Rodriguez-Vico11, R. Marti1,2, E. Garcia-Arumi12,2,1; P
S06 .45 1Research Group on Neuromuscular and Mitochondrial Disorders, Vall d’Hebron Institut A homozygous p.Trp22Arg NDUFB3 mutation is a recurrent cause of de Recerca, Barcelona, Spain, 2Biomedical Network Research Centre on Rare Diseases mitochondrial complex I deficiency associated with Irish ancestry, a (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 3Laboratorio de Enfermedades characteristic facial appearance and good prognosis Mitocondriales, Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre (i+12), Madrid, C. L. Alston1, L. He1, R. McFarland1, J. P. H. Shield2, P. G. Murray3, A. A. M. Morris3, P. E. Spain, 4Muscle Research and Mitochondrial Function Laboratory, Cellex-IDIBAPS, Clayton3, E. Crushell4, J. Hughes4, R. W. Taylor1; Faculty of Medicine-University of Barcelona, Internal Medicine Department-Hospital 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Servei de Neurologia, Laboratori de Neurologia Kingdom, 2University of Bristol and Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Experimental, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau i Institut de Recerca de HSCSP, Kingdom, 3Institute of Human Development, Faculty of Medical & Human Sciences, Barcelona, Spain, 6Biochemistry Unit, “Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro”, Madrid, University of Manchester and Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital, Manchester, United Spain, 7Departamento de Bioquímica, Biologia Molecular y Celular, Universidad de Kingdom, 4National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Temple Street Children‘s Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 8Sección de Neuropatología. Instituto Investigación Hospital University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. 12 de Octubre (i+12), Madrid, Spain, 9Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 10Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Don Benito Villanueva, Badajoz, Spain, 11Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario de Burgos, Burgos, Spain, 12Area de Genética Clínica y Molecular. Hospital Universitario Vall Isolated complex I deficiency is the most common paediatric mitochondrial d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. disease presentation and the prognosis is often poor with high mortality. Complex I comprises 44 structural subunits with at least 10 ancillary pro- teins involved in its assembly; mutations in at least 25 of these have been Thymidine kinase 2 (TK2) is a mitochondrial enzyme participating in the reported as causal. There are limited genotype-phenotype correlations to salvage of deoxyribonucleotides needed as substrates for mitochondrial guide clinicians to the correct genetic diagnosis, although next-generation DNA (mtDNA) replication. TK2 mutations were typically associated with a sequencing strategies including exome sequencing have proven extremely severe myopathic form of mtDNA depletion syndrome that manifests du- useful in a research setting. In a diagnostic setting, it is crucial to provide ring infancy and leads to the early death of most patients. Recently, several a genetic diagnosis in a rapid and cost-effective manner and we apply a va- patients (n=7) have been diagnosed with a late-onset and milder myopathy lidated, targeted next-generation sequencing strategy to sequence the ge- with multiple mtDNA deletions. Here we describe seven patients diagnosed nes encoding all structural subunits and ancillary proteins in clinically- and in their adulthood (16-55 years old), with different forms of mitochondrial biochemically-characterised paediatric patients. This strategy has uncove- myopathy associated with multiple mtDNA deletions and no depletion in red a clinically-distinctive cohort of children of small stature, with persi- skeletal muscle, in contrast to what is observed in typical infantile patients. stent growthN rDeUtaFrBd3a tion and mild dysmorphic facial features (n=7 patients Phenotypic presentation varied from mild myopathic signatures, such as from 6 families) who are all homozygous for a previously reported c.64T>C, ptosis and myalgia, to progressive muscle weakness and respiratory dys- p.Trp22Arg NDUFB3 mutation. Two further children from a seventh fami- function. After genetic analysis, previously reported pathogenic mutations ly were referred after exome sequencing identified the same homozygous in TK2 were identified in all patients (p.K202del and p.T108M that seem p.Trp22Arg mutation; these children presented with primordial particularly frequent in the Spanish population, and p.R192K). Fibroblasts short stature without obvious metabolic dysfunction. The p.Trp22Arg mu- were obtained from two of these patients and TK2 activity was measured tation has prevNioDuUslFyB b3e en associated with severe metabolic presentations showing a drastic reduction that resembled that found in typical paedia- and poor prognosis. Our cohort highlights that the long-term prognosis tric patients (3% and 6% residual activity as compared with age-matched related to this mutation can be very good, and recognition of the healthy controls). This observation suggests that redundant or complemen- distinctive facial features should suggest screening for this specific mutati- tary biochemical mechanisms can bypass the biochemical defect in some on to provide a genetic diagnosis, circumventing the requirement of muscle individuals, preventing mtDNA depletion, and ameliorating the course of the biopsy to direct molecular genetic investigations. disease. Therefore, TK2 mutations should be investigated in patients with PM06.46 myopathy associated with either mtDNA depletion or multiple deletions, Newborn screening for fatty acid oxidation disorders: effects on independently of their age at onset or clinical severity. population frequency and clinical outcome in the Czech Republic Supported by FIS PI12/02149, PI12/0 1683, PI12/00322, and AFMTelethon P. Chrastina1, M. Pavlíková1, P. Ješina1, E. Hrubá1, H. Vlášková1, T. Honzík1,2, J. Sokolová1, A. Ddt1 2013. Hnízda1, V. Smolka3, D. Friedecký4, T. Adam4, V. Kožich1; 1Institute of Inher Metab Dis, Charles Univ-1st Fac Med and General Univ Hospit, Prague, PM06.44 Czech Republic, 2Dept Pediatrics, Charles Univ-1st Fac Med and General Univ Hospital, Homozygous mutations in MFN2 are a novel cause of multiple Prague, Czech Republic, 3Dept Pediatrics, University Hospital Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech symmetric lipomatosis in patients without a MERFF mutation Republic, 4Dept Clin Bioch, Faculty Hospital Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. S. L. Sawyer1, A. C. H. Ng1, A. M. Innes2, J. D. Wagner1, D. A. Dyment1, M. Tetreault3,4, Care4Rare Canada Consortium, J. Majewski3,4, K. M. Boycott1, R. Screaton1, G. Nicholson5; ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANIDnt,r oUdKuc t|i Won:W NeWwb.EoSrnH scGre.OenRinGg (NBS) program in the Czech Republi1c w3a9sABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index expanded from three to 13 disorders in October 2009 and tests also for the ring an invasive skin biopsy. A more sensitive and specific LC-MS/MS me- medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCADD) and long chain 3-hydro- thod for quantifying cholesterol oxidation products, shown to be increased xyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (LCHADD). In this study we examined in the plasma of NPC patients is now available in Manchester as a new first the effect of five years of NBS on detection rate and clinical outcome compa- line test, allowing less invasive, rapid screening of this previously under- red to the pre-NBS period. diagnosed disease. NP
C1  Patients and Methods: In the pre-NBS cohort 21 MCADD and 12 LCHADD CurrNenPtCly2, molecular analysis of NPC following abnormal biochemical scree- patients were ascertained on clinical basis and followed for 236 and 73 ning results, involves direct Sanger sequencing of all 30 exons of the patient-years, respectively. In the NBS cohort 29 MCADD and 10 LCHADD and genes combined. However, a more robust efficient approach was patients were detected among 661,000 newborns with a follow-up of 74 and required to meetN tPhCe1 potenNtiPalC i2ncrease in demand for NPC genetic testing. 26 patient-years, respectively. A severity scoring index (SSI) was developed We have developed a more comprehensive sensitive mutation screening to assess the clinical outcome. Statistical analyses were carried out using service for both and using a combination of MLPA and Next Ge- statistical environment R. neration Sequencing (NGS). The latter is based on enrichment by long-range Results: The NBS increased significantly the frequency of ascertained pa- PCR, amplicon normalisation, equimolar pooling and dilution, fragmentati- tients with MCADD from 1:211,300 to 1:22,800 and with LCHADD from on and tagging using Nextera XT followed by MiSeq NGS, with a minimum 1:141,300 to 1:66,100. A total of 12 and 8 variants in the ACADM and coverage of 100x reads. Analysis using a custom bioinformatics pipeline al- HADHA genes were detected and a different spectrum of mutations was lows a range of point variants and small insertion/deletion mutations to be observed between the NBS and clinically ascertained cohorts. The age-adju- accurately identified. sted clinical SSI in the pre-NBS cohort of MCADD patients (median 0.8 ver- In addition, the cholesterol oxidation levels from a number of patients were sus 0.0, p=0.009, Wilcoxon test) and LCHADD patients (median 3.5 versus compared to their genotypes and good concordance between the two tests 0.4, p=0.011, Wilcoxon test) were significantly higher compared to the NBS was revealed. cohort. P
S06 .49 Conclusions: Five years of newborn screening for MCADD and LCHADD in Lyso-Sphingomyelin-509 as sensitive and specific biomarker for the Czech Republic significantly increased detection rate and improved cli- Niemann-Pick Type C Disease nical outcome in patients. A. Giese1, H. Mascher2, J. Lukas1, C. Cozma3, G. Kramp3, G. Wittmann3, U. Grittner4, A. Study was supported by project MH-CZ-DRO-VFN64165. Rolfs1; 1Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Medical University of Rostock, Rostock, P
S06 .47 Germany, 2Pharm-Analyt GmbH, Baden, Austria, 3Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, NGS BASED IDENTIFICATION OF HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA RELATED 4Institute for Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, Charite-University Medicine, MUTATIONS IN SUBJECTS WITH INCREASED LDL-C LEVELS Berlin, Germany. I. Radovica1, D. Silava1, I. Silamikelis1, D. Fridmanis1, K. Ventins2, G. Ozola3, G. Latkovskis3,4,5, A. Erglis3,4,5, J. Klovins1; 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Vidzemes Hospital, Valmiera, Latvia, 3Latvian Center of Cardiology, Riga, Latvia, 4Faculty of Medicine, Introduction: Biomarkers are a relevant factor in diagnosing and monitoring University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia, 5Research Institute of Cardiology, University of Latvia, many different diseases. The ideal biomarker detects the presence, extent Riga, Latvia. and outcome of a specific disease and is reliably quantifiable in a clinically easily accessible sample. For Niemann-Pick Type C (NP-C), an autosomal-re- cessive disease caused by mutations in either the NP
C1  gene (95% of all pa- Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is one of the most common monogenic tients) or NP
C2  gene (5% of all patients) biomarkers have been established disorders mostly inherited as autosomal dominant trait and when untreated in the past, which facilitate either early diagnosis (cholestane-3β,5α,6β- results in early coronary heart disease. Identification and early treatment triol; Jiang et al. 2011) or long-term follow-up (Lysotracker Assay measu- of affected individuals remains a challenge worldwide. Majority of FH cases ring relative acidic compartment volume; TeVruchte et al., 2014). However, are caused by mutations in four genes (APOB, LDLR, PCSK9 and LDLRA
P1 ). early diagnosis and monitoring of treatment in patients is still difficult and The spectrum of disease causing mutations is very diverse and mutation pa- the existing markers are not really reflecting the disease burden. nels commonly used in diagnostics cover only a minority of disease causing Material and Methods: Based on a new LC/MRM-MS (liquid-chromatogra- genetic variants. In FH patients not expressing the physical symptoms and phy/multiple-reaction-monitoring mass-spectrometry) assay we developed with unknown family history DNA based tests may provide the route to FH and validated a novel biomarker, lyso-Sphingomyelin-509. Primary detec- diagnosis. Here, we evaluate the use of targeted next generation sequencing tion of the biomarker was performed in 10 NP-C patients and 10 controls. (NGS) as a potential method to identify cases of FH in the cohort of coronary Further validation of the biomarker was performed in 242 subjects inclu- artery disease (CAD) patients and individuals with abnormal low density ding NP-C patients, NP-C carriers, healthy controls and patients with other lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels. LSDs. We used targeted amplification of LDLR, APOB, PCSK9 and LDLRA
P1  coding Results: In total, 242 subjects were investigated, including 110 NP-C patients regions followed by NGS in 42 CAD patients (LDL-C 4.1-7.2 mmol/L) and 50 (lyso-Sphingomyelin-509: 6.7ng/ml (IQR: 3.4-10.3ng/ml)), 63 NP-C carriers individuals from population based cohort (LDL-C 5.1-9.7 mmol/L). In total and 43 healthy controls. With a sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 91% a 22 synonymous, 31 non-synonymous variants, eight variants in close pro- cut-off of 1.4ng/ml was established. Neither NP-C carriers nor healthy con- ximity (10 bp) of intron-exon boundaries and 50 other variants were found. trols displayed elevated measurements of lyso-Sphingomyelin-509. We identified 4 pathogenic mutations (Arg3527Gln in APOB gene, Gly20Arg, Conclusion: Lyso-Sphingomyelin-509 has been established as a sensitive and Arg350X and IV
S11  -10 (G>A) in LDLR gene) in seven patients (7.6 %). In specific biomarker for NP-C. Tracking the disease progression and response addition 3 possible pathogenic variants were also found in four patients. to treatment by this surrogate biomarker is currently under investigation. This work was supported by European Regional Development Fund ,,Re- PM06.50 search and development of novel diagnostic methods for genetic and im- Recurrence of Niemann-Pick Type C in extended families with no munologic testing” no 2013/0042/2DP/2.1.1.1.0/13/APIA/VIAA/002 and consanguinity State Research Project “BIOMEDICINE”. J. Imrie1, S. Jones2, P. Gissen3; PM06.48 1NPUK, Bolton, United Kingdom, 2CMFT, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3GOSH, London, United Kingdom. Development of an improved diagnostic service for Niemann Pick type C C. L. Hartley1, L. Heptinstall1, H. Schlecht1, T. Hoi-Yee Wu2, J. Cooper2, H. Church2, S. C. Ramsden1; Niemann-Pick Disease Type C(NPC) is a rare neurodegenerative lysosomal 1Genomic Diagnostics Laboratory, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, storage disorder with an incidence of about 1:120,00. Inheritance is auto- United Kingdom, 2Willink Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Manchester Centre for somal recessive. There are less than 90 cases in the United Kingdom. This Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom. abstract presents 3 families with no consanguinity. In 2 families first cou- sins had affected children and in a third 2 sisters had an affected child. Gi- ven the published low incidence of this disorder possible explanations for Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal these events will be explored. Given that families with NPC are supported storage disorder, resulting from abnormal cholesterol trafficking. NPC has a by a very good charity (NP UK) and also that networks amongst affected heterogeneous clinical presentation, but is typically characterised by a ran- families, particularly of late with the ever increasing use of social media, are ge of progressive neurological problems. very strong, knowledge of these recurrences in extended families are known Traditionally, a biochemical laboratory diagnosis is made by demonstrating about which impacts markedly when offering genetic counselling. i1m4p0aired cholesterol trafficking via filipinE stSaHineGd 2fib0r1ob5la |s tG cLulAtuSreGs,O reWqu,i -SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P
S06 .51 Introduction: The next-generation of the Niemann-Pick Type C Disease Gene Variation Database (NPCdb) Some forms of obesity are monogenic. We investigated the M. Stampfer1,2, H. Runz2,3; pMreetvhaolednsc:e of monogenic obesity in super obese adults, and examined their 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, weight loss trajectories after bariatric surgery. Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2 A cohort of patients (n=282) with a body mass index (BMI) of >50 3Merck Research Labs, Dep. Genetics & Pharmacogenomics (GpGx), Boston, MA, United kg/m were2 screened for M
C4 R deficiency. 48 patients (BMI range: 50.2- States. 103.8 kg/m) were selected for further whole exome sequencing (WES) to screen for other pathogenic mutations in known obesity genes. Copy num- bReers uvlatrsi:ation analysis was carried out by read depth analyMsiCs4, Rand Sanger Niemann-Pick Type C Disease (NP-C) is a rare, autosomal-recessive lysoso- sequencing or real-time PCR was used to confirm findings. mal storage disease. Two causative genes, NP
C1  and NP
C2 , have been identi- Screening identified one patient carrying a rare mutation fied with mutations in NP
C1  contributing to the large majority of cases. (
E42 K) predicted to be patNhToRgKen2ic. Five out of 48 patientsIG (
S1 F01.4%) inve- In 2007 we established a locus-specific gene variation database that listed stigated by WES carSrHie2dB a1 likelyN mTRoKn2ogenic cause of their obesity: 16p11.2 variants and associated haplotypes in NP
C1  and NP
C2  genes and related se- deletion; a deletion within ; a nonsense mutation in ; and mis- quence to basic clinical information. Since then our knowledge has grown sense mutations in and . In addition, in a furLtEhPerR six patients, and next-generation sequencing studies of larger patient and control co- novel or rare (pNoTpRuKla2tioSnH f2rBe1quenMcyA <G0E.
L0205 ) missense mutations, reported horts have provided us with further insights into the genetic architecture as pathogenic by multiple prediction tools, were found in (compound of NP
C1  and NP
C2 , enabling a much better understanding of which genetic heterozygote), , or (three). Weight loss seen in the variation within these genes is truly disease-relevant. mCountacltuiosnio cna:r MrieCr4sR was not different one year after bariatric surgery from Using a variety of sources, we have now assembled over 1400 exonic and patients with a similar starting BMI. intronic variants at the NP
C1  and around 50 variants at the NP
C2  locus and screening and WES data revealed a markedly higher dia- provide information on their functional consequences. Additionally, our re- gnostic yield (up to 22.9%) than previously reported in any obese cohort. source provides information on allele frequencies, in silico predictions of Monogenic obesity is underestimated in the super obese. the functional effects of a variant and allele-numbers in controls and repor- This work was funded by a grant from Diabetes UK to AB and RW, and Bio- ted patients. As a result it assists in evaluating the significance of a variant medical Research Centre awards to AB, RW, MvH and ClR. and thus aims to support molecular diagnostician in their challenge of ma- PM06.54 king the correct diagnosis. Heterozygous SDHA mutation resulting in complex II deficiency with In recent years, efforts have been made to establish a clinical registry for ocular, cardiac and neurologic involvement Niemann-Pick diseases called “The International Niemann Pick Disease Re- C. Courage1, D. Hahn2, J. Nuoffer2, C. Jackson2, S. Gallati1, A. Schaller1; gistry”. As we are collaborators in this project we aim to intertwine both 1Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Bern, registries, thus securing an ongoing input of information on the number and Switzerland. types of variants found in actual NP-C patients. We are planning to launch this new resource for Niemann-Pick Disease type C in spring 2015. Mitochondrial respiratory complex II (succinate dehydrogenase, SDH, CII) PM06.52 deficiency is rare, accounting for ~2% of all respiratory chain deficiencies. Positive correlation between orphan receptor RORα and ABCA1, Of the four nuclear encoded proteins composing CII (SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, ABCG1 in visceral adipose tissue SDHD) and its assembly factors (SDHAF1 and SDHAF2) mainly recessively A. Panteleeva1,2, V. Miroshnikova1,2, E. Demina1, T. Usenko1, I. Semenova1, E. Baranova2, inherited mutations cause mitochondrial disease phenotypes. E. Bagenova2, O. Berkovich2, S. Pchelina1,2; Here we report clinical, biochemical and molecular investigations of three 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2First Pavlov patients harbouring a heterozygous mutation in the flavoprotein subunit State Medical University of St. Petersburg, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. SDHA previously associated with CII deficiency. The index patient presented with optic atrophy, ocular movement disorder, progressive polyneuropathy, psychiatric involvement and cardiomyopathy. His daughter deceased at the Obesity is associated with impaired lipid metabolism and cholesterol accu- age of 7 months due to cardiac insufficiency. His 30-year-old son presents mulation in the intra-abdominal adipose tissue. ATP-binding cassette trans- with optic atrophy and cardiomyopathy. Spectrophotometric and oxygen porters ABCA1 and ABCG1 play a major role in cholesterol efflux suggesting consumption measurements in skin fibroblasts revealed isolated CII defici- their role in elimination of excess cholesterol and maintaining cholesterol ency in all patients. Sequencing of all complex II associated genes revealed a homeostasis in the adipocyte. RAR-related orphan receptor RORα have been previously described heterozygous mutation (c.1351C>T; p.R451C) in SDHA implicated as one of the regulators of the lipid metabolism and may play a in a highly conserved Flavin-binding domain. significant role in the regulation of ABСA1 and ABCG1 expression. However, Only few SDH gene defects are reported as an underlying cause of mitochon- the effect of RORα on ABCA1 and ABCG1 protein content in visceral fat du- drial disease. However, SDH genes as tumor suppressor genes are frequently ring obesity is unknown. associated with hereditary cancer syndromes, including paraganglioma and The aim of this study is to investigate correlation between orphan recep- pheochromocytoma and should be monitored also in patients presenting tor RORα and transporters ABCA1, ABCG1 in visceral adipose tissue with with mitochondrial disease. Contrasting to previously reported cases, our obesity. patients present with cardiomyopathy. The variability in disease-onset and Visceral fat was received from gastrocolic omentum during laparoscopic phenotypic presentation of this mutation, therefore, suggest modifying fac- cholecystectomy from 37 individuals. Protein levels of ABCA1, ABCG1 and tors influencing disease severity. Our report gives further evidence for an RORα were measured by western-blot. autosomal-dominant inherited mitochondrial disease caused by a hetero- All individuals were divided in 3 subgroups: morbidly obese (BMI≥31; N=8), zygous SDHA mutation. overweight (25≤BMI<31; N=15) and normal weight (BMI<25; N=14). AB- P
S06 .55 CA1 and ABCG1 protein levels were significantly higher in individuals with Functional and structural analysis of novel missense mutations of overweight when compared with normal weight (p<0.01; p<0.05, respec- phenylalanine hydroxylase tively). A positive correlation between RORα and ABCA1(-r=0.48; p<0.05) as M. Pecimonova1, E. Polak1, A. Soltysova1,2, M. Stojiljkovic3, K. Reblova4, Z. Levarski1, J. well as ABCG1(-r=0.43; p<0.05) levels in visceral fat was shown. These data Krahulec1, L. Schreiber5, L. Kadasi1,2; suppose that RORα may control ABCA1 and ABCG1 protein levels in visceral 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, fat tissue and thus influence on the obesity development. 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Science, Bratislava, The research was supported by RFFR 14-04-31690 grant. Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engeneering, University of P
S06 .53 Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Central-European Technology Institute, Research group Inherited Diseases – Genetic Research, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Department of Analytical High prevalence of monogenic obesity in super obese individuals Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. undergoing bariatric surgery S. I. M. Alsters1, A. M. Yiorkas1, M. Mueller1, A. Sosinsky1, A. Zekavati1, N. H. Ramzi1, N. A. Nor Hashim1, J. Murphy1, H. S. Chahal1, S. Purkayastha1, A. R. Ahmed1, M. M. van Haelst2, C. W. le Roux3, J. L. Buxton4, R. G. Walters5, A. I. F. Blakemore1; Phenylketonuria (PKU) and hyperphenylalaninemia are the most frequent 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University Medical Center Utrecht, disorders of amino acid metabolism. This group of disorders is primarily Utrecht, Netherlands, 3University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 4University College caused by mutations in human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH), lea- London, London, United Kingdom, 5University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. ding to decreased or deficient enzyme activity. Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) catalyzes the essential conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine in the ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANpDre, sUenKce | oWf mWoWlec.uElaSrH oGxy.gOenR, Giron and its natural cofactor tetrahyd1ro4b1i-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index opterin (BH4). In vitro analysis of PAH enzymes enables to determine the been described. catalytic function of different mutated forms of PAH, thus to confirm that We report of two siblings, born to consanguineous parents of Arab-Muslim the amino acid change is the disease causing mutation. This is important descent, who presented with macrocephaly, absence seizures, and gastro- in recent progress of PKU treatment and in the correlation between PAH intestinal bleedings due to portal vein thrombosis. An extensive diagnPoIsGtMic residual activity and tetrahydrobiopterin therapy. The most worldwide fre- evaluation was futile, including Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) which quent mutations of the PAH gene have been studied in vitro and in silico in failed to establish a diagnosis. However, focused sequencing of the the last two decades. In our recent study, three novel missense mutations gene including its promotor region found the patients to be homozygous for were identified in the Slovak population (p.F233I, p.R270I and p.F331S). We the -270C>G mutation previously described. One of the siblings died awating cloned these variants in the pMAL-MBP fusion vector and expressed in E. liver transplantation, while the other is treated with Sodium-Phenylbutirate coli X
L1  blue expression system. Enzymes were isolated using affinity chro- with improvement in her seizure frequency and severity. Finally, during a matography followed by size-exclusion chromatography. Wild type PAH and new pregnancy, prenatal diagnosis was pursued via amniocentesis, and un- each mutated form were assayed and their activity was measured by quanti- fortunately had found the fetus as homozygous for the same mutation. A fication of produced tyrosine using tandem mass spectrometry. The residual third affected sibling was born, and at 7 months of age had already shown activity of each mutation was assessed as percentual activity of the wild type portal vein thrombosis, as well as evidence of cerebral PinIGfaMrc-t, and Sodium- enzyme. To clarify and extend the results, we changed experimental condi- Phenylbutirate treatment was initiated. tions by co-overexpressing each mutation with pGroESL plasmid (carrying In conclusion, we expand the current knowledge on associated GPI chaperone genes GroEL and GroES). In addition, we performed structural deficiency, with further clinical, pathological and molecular delineation of analysis of all mutations using molecular dynamics simulations. This project this unique entity, including the first prenatal diagnosis, and additional in- was sponsored by grant APVV-0240-12. sights into the targeted-treatment with Sodium-Phenylbutirate. This case PM06.56 also underscores one of the pitfalls of WES. Molecular heterogeneity of PAH gene in PKU patients from Republic PM06.58 of Moldova POLG mutations in late-onset ataxia of unknown origin K. Boiciuc, D. Badicean, V. Scurtu, N. Usurelu, V. Sacara; D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, A. Sułek2, J. Trubicka1, B. Brodacki3, O. Emilianowicz1, P. Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. Hałat1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Pelc1, E. Ciara1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, E. Pronicka1; 1Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 3Military Institute of Medicine, Warsaw, Poland. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inherited metabolic disorder, autosomal re- POLG cessive (OMIM 261600), caused by deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH, EC 1.14.16.1) that leads to severe mental retardation. The aim of our Mutations in the mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma ( ) gene cause research was to appreciate prevalence of PKU in Moldavian population and a highly heterogenic disease spectrum including inherPitOeLdG ataxias. The re- of PAH gene mutations identified in PKU patients. ports about their frequency in unclasPsiOfiLeGd forms of ataxia yield equivocal Materials and Methods: Research was performed on DNA collected from 99 results, thus leading to uncertainties about the role of in these condi- Moldavian PKU patients accumulated during 25 years. PKU detection by neo- tions. The most common pathogenic variants associated with ataxic natal screening was based on the fluorimetric method. Identification of 10 phenotype are c.1399G>A (p.A467T), cP.2O2
L4 G3G>C (p.W748S) and c.2542G>A PAH gene mutations (R408W, 
P281 L, R158Q, R261Q, R252W, IV
S12 +1G>A, (p.G848S). 
L48 S, R261X, G272X, IV
S10 -11G>A) was performed by PCR/RFLP. We assessed the frequency of selected mutations in a cohort of 427 in- The results: According to neonatal screening data the frequency of PKU in dividuals (211 females and 216 males) with clinical symptoms of late-onset Republic of Moldova is 1:7325 newborns, the average screening rate being spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), in whom the most frequent dynamic mutati- 75.2%. In PKU patients were identified following genotypes: R408W/R408W ons causing autosomal dominant SCA (SCA1, 2, 3, 6) were excluded. DNA (27.6%), R408W/
P281 L (7.1%), R408W/R261Q (3.5%), R408W/
L48 S samples were obtained from leukocytes of peripheral blood. Genotyping of (3.5%), R408W/R158Q (2.3%) etc. The most frequent PAH gene mutation in the samples was performed by real-time PCR technique using specific Taq- Moldavian PKU patients is R408W (50,6%) followed by 
P281 L (5.5%), 
L48 S Man allele discrimination assays. (4.9%), R261Q (3.1%), R158Q (3.1%), R252W (3.1%), IV
S12 +1G>A (2.4%), Two heterozygous carriers and one p.W748S homozygote were identified in IV
S10 -11G>A (2.4%), R261X (1.2%) and G272X (0.6%). The mutation de- the studied group. The 52-year old patient presented with progressive cere- tection rate in PKU patients constituted 78.7% of the cases. 
L48 S, R261X, bellar syndrome, sensory-motor polyneuropathy and ophtalmoplegia with G272X, IV
S10 -11G>A mutations are recently investigated in Moldavian PKU atrophy of cerebellum, and less pronounced atrophy of the brain stem in patients due to their high prevalence in neighboring populations as Serbia, neuroimaging examination. The age of onset was 30. Positive family history Romania, Turkey etc. was reported: his brother demonstrated similar clinical signs andP hOiLs Gsister Conclusion: The obtained data revealed a high degree of heterogeneity of died at 33 years due to the epileptic seizures. Moldavian PKU patients in the PAH locus that could be the result of popu- Our findings are in line with the literature data and confirm that mu- lation heterogeneity open new possibilities for prenatal diagnostics in risk tations are not a frequent cause of late-onset ataxia of unknown origin, but families. should be considered in the cases with sensory neuropathy and ophthal- moplegia. P
S06 .57 The study was supported by the NCN project 2012/05/B/NZ2/01627 and Intractable seizures and tendency for cerebral and portal vein EU POIG.02.01.00-14-059/09 thrombosis in a family with inherited Glycosylphosphatidyl inositol deficiency due to a mutation in PIGM P
S06 .59 B. Pode-Shakked1,2,3, G. Heimer4,2, T. Vilboux5, T. C. Markello5, G. Kenet6,3, B. Ben-Zeev4,3, E. ANALYSIS OF THE EXPRESSION OF PEROXISOME PROLIFERATOR- Rozenthal7, M. Huizing5, M. Soudack8,3, D. Levinkopf1, B. Weiss9,3, W. H. Gahl5, Y. Anikster1,3; ACTIVATED RECEPTORS GAMMA (PPAR GAMMA) AND miR-27 IN 1Metabolic Disease Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children‘s Hospital, Sheba Medical OBESE PATIENTS Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 2The Pinchas Borenstein Talpiot Medical Leadership V. C. Rivero1,2, J. Triana3, M. Pérez4,3, M. Marcos4,3,5, R. Gonzáles-Sarmiento5,2, N. Program, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 3Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Matesanz6, G. Sabio7; Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 4Pediatric Neurology Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra 1Centro de investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Molecular Medicine Unit. Children‘s Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 5Medical Genetics Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain, 3Department Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, of Internal Medicine University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Molecular Bethesda, MD, United States, 6Thrombosis Unit, The Israel National Hemophilia Center, Medicine Unit. Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 7Hematology laboratory, Edmond and 5Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 6Department Lily Safra Children‘s Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 8Pediatric of Vascular Biology and Inflammation, Salamanca, Spain, 7Department of Vascular Imaging Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children‘s Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel- Biology and Inflammation, Madrid, Spain. Hashomer, Israel, 9Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Edmond and Lily Safra Children‘s Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel. Obesity acts as a stress signal that induces multiple inflammatory responses in tissue, which plays an important role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascu- Defects of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) biosynthesis pathway con- lar disease and metabolic syndrome. The PPARgamma is a nuclear receptor stitute an emerging group PoIfG iMnherited disorders of heterogeneous pheno- that regulates adiposity differentiation, insulin sensitivity and lipid metabo- type, which are a subgroup of congenital disorders of glycosylation. A mu- lism. Recent studies have shown that PPAR-γ may be regulated by miR-27a tation in the promoter of has been identified as the cause of portal and miR-27b, pointing to a possible relationship with the development of vein thrombosis and persistent absence seizures in three patients known 142 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOobTeLsiAtyN. D, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG to date. In one patient, targeted treatment with Sodium-Phenylbutirate hasABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Conclusions: This small analysis suggests that PIK3CA genotype may indeed influence clinical presentation. Larger numbers of genotype-phenotype correlati- We compared 43 obese adults with body mass index (BMI) >35 who under- ons should be undertaken to clarify this, to allow improved prognostication and went bariatric surgery versus 19 healthy controls with BMI <25. Intraope- patient stratification for clinical trials. rative biopsies of visceral fat and peripheral fat were taken. The expression This work is supported by Wellcome Trust Grants 097721/Z/11/Z and 091551/ of mRNA was examined by quantitative PCR analysis using a 7900 Fast Real- Z/10/Z, and the UK National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). Time PCR machine. Statistical analysis was calculated by using the program SPSS. Significant association was detected between a decrease in the expression PM06.62 of PPAR-γ1 in obese female patients and controls (P=0.045). We observed Vitamin E therapy in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome patients a negative correlation between expression of PPAR-γ1 in visceral adipose K. Koczok1, G. P. Szabo2, L. Horvath3, N. A. Porter4, I. Balogh1; tissue, weight (P=0.016) and BMI (P=0.001). This inverse correlation was 1University of Debrecen, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical stronger in women group in which an inverse correlation of PPAR-γ2 was Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary, 2University of Debrecen, Department of Pediatrics, observed with weight (P=0.004) and BMI (P=0.001). No association was Debrecen, Hungary, 3University of Debrecen, Department of Pharmacy, Debrecen, Hungary, 4Vanderbilt University, Department of Chemistry, Nashville, TN, United States. found in the expression of micro-RNAs in the group of cases and controls. These findings suggest that obese patients with higher BMI have a lower expression of PPAR-γ1 in adipose tissue, particularly in women and visceral Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive, multiple adipose tissue. The expression of PPAR-γ could be related to the metabolic malformation syndrome caused by 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase enzyme status and the degree of obesity. deficiency. Decreased cholesterol, elevated 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) Supported in part by PI13/01741 and oxidative derivatives of 7-DHC (oxysterols) are thought to contribute PM06.60 to the pathophysiology of SLOS. According to recent data vitamin E could A case of neonatal progeroid syndrome: Widemann-Rautenstrauch or be effective in reducing oxidative stress in SLOS patients. We have started Petty-Laxova-Wiedemann ? vitamin E treatment (in addition to cholesterol supplementation) in seven H. M. Kathom, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella, R. Tincheva; SLOS patients. Starting daily doses of RRR-alpha-tocopheryl acetate were Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. 230 mg for young patients (age group: 4 to 10 years) and 2x230 mg above 10 years of age. Plasma vitamin A and E concentrations of the patients were monitored monthly by HPLC method. Behavioral effects of the treatment were determined using the Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC). All patients Progeroid syndromes are a group or rare genetic disorders that mimic phy- had vitamin E deficiency before the treatment, while vitamin A concentra- siological aging. Some of the syndromes in this group are presented at birth tions were normal in all but one patient. Vitamin E levels reached reference and therefore are called neonatal progeroid syndromes. Many of those syn- range in five patients after one month and remained stable. According to dromes have clear genetic causes still both neonatal progeroid syndromes four scores (irritability, lethargy, stereotypic behavior, hyperactivity) of ABC of Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch and Petty-Laxova-Wiedemann, remain with no positive effect on behavior could be detected after 3 months. The fact that unknown causes. our patients were vitamin E deficient but vitamin A concentrations were We report a 9 month old boy with progeroid features presented at birth. The in the normal range except for one patient suggests a higher utilization of physical examination showed marmorated and loose skin, apparent macro- vitamin E and not an inadeqaute absorption. No positive behavioral effects cephally, sparse hair, prominent scalp veins, small and beak shaped nose, of the treatment could be detected after the first three months. downslating papebral fissures, triangular face, dysplastic, low set ears with This study was supported by the Hungarian Research Fund (K109076, I.B.). small lobes, sharp and pointed chin, thin squamous toe nails. Our patient presents features of both Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch and Petty- P
S06 .63 Laxova-Wiedemann. Most progeroid syndromes which are part of the dif- Morphological and proteomic studies reveal autophagy as a main ferential diagnosis were rejected with DNA analysis. Additional laboratory driver on Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome findings, follow-up and management will be further discussed. M. L. Cardoso1,2, R. Vitorino3, R. Pinto Leite4, R. Arantes-Rodrigues4, R. Fernandes2, C. Amaral1, C. Bernardo5, H. Reguengo1,6, R. Ferreira3, F. Amado3, F. Marques1,2; P
S06 .61 1Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Institute for Molecular and Genotype-Phenotype Correlation in PIK3CA-related overgrowth Cell Biology (IBMC), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3QOPNA, Mass spectrometry R. G. Knox1, V. E. R. Parker1, A. Luchetti2, I. A. Isaac1, H. Martin2, J. Harris1, E. Maher2, R. center, Department of Chemistry, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal, 4Genetic K. Semple1; Service, Cytogenetic Laboratory, Hospital Center of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, 1University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Institute of Metabolic Vila Real, Portugal, 5Experimental Pathology and Therapeutics Group, Research Science, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics, Cambridge University NHS Center, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Porto, Portugal, 6Department of Clinical Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Chemistry, Porto Hospital Center, Porto, Portugal. Introduction:PIK3CA encodes the p11
P0 IαK 3cCatAalytic subunit of phosphoino- Introduction: Studies reporting the dramatic consequences of low choleste- sitide 3-kinase and is a key mediator of cellular growth, survival and meta- rol levels on cells are scarce. In this study we used fibroblasts from Smith- bolism. Mosaic activating mutations in give rise to a wide spectrum Lemli-Opitz syndrome patients (SLOS) - a metabolic genetic disease affec- of clinical presentations which are critically dependent upon the timing of ting the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway - to investigate the consequences tMheet mhoudta:tion during embryogenesis, and the cell type affected. The extent of of cholesterol deficiency on cell morphology and protein expression. genotype-phenotype correlation has been less clear from studies to date. Materials and methods : Morphological studies (MTT test, immunocytoche- DNA derived from affected tissue of 96 probands was target-enri- mistry for L
C3 , MDC and acridine orange coloration as well as electron mi- ched with an Ion AmpliSeq™ panel, and sequenced on an Ion Torrent plat- croscopy) and proteomic analysis (iTRAQ LC /MS-MS) were performed on form. Clinical diagnoses at presentation included hePmIKi3hCypAe rplasia (25%), fibroblasts from SLOS patients and human controls, simultaneously cultiva- macrodactyly (16%), MCAP/MPPH (13%), and CLOVES (8%). 48/96 (50%) ted both on standard conditions and cholesterol depleted media. probands to date have been found to have mosaic mutations. Ge- Results: Morphological studies showed that when endogenous synthesis of notype-phenotype correlation analyses were performed using Chi-squared cholesterol is inadequate (SLOS) and there is no appropriate supply to over- tReesstiunlgts t:o compare clinical features and mutation site grouped by p110α come cellular needs (cholesterol depleted media), cell proliferation in vitro functional domain (ABD, 
C2 , helical and kinase). becomes impaired and autophagy is activated. The only significant correlation identified was between genotype Furthermore, SLOS cells in cholesterol depleted medium show an overex- and the presence of vascular abnormalities, with higher proportions o Cf h p i-ati- pression of a set of proteins. Mainly, these cells seems to increase MnSOD eCnlitnsi cwailt fhe aAtBurDe (asn)d 
C2  do%m oafi pnr mobuatnadtiso wnist hb earinCogr vraeslactuiolanr w aibtnh ormaslqituieasr.ed expression to combat oxidative stress derived from the increased amount clinical feature PIK3CA Domain Mutated P value of 7-dehydrocholesterol and its derivatives, caused by the inherited enzy- matic deficiency and thus control cell proliferation, whereas heat shock 70 Progressive disease 56 No 0.63 kDa protein 4, an autophagic protein (Atg2) also presents a cytoprotective Syndactyly 19 No 0.22 activity and inhibits apoptosis. Polydactyly 8 No 0.30 Conclusion: We conclude that the mechanism by which SLOS fibroblasts Epidermal naevi 15 No 0.53 Scoliosis 13 No 0.16 handles their metabolic deficit, involves autophagy which plays an impor- Lipoma/lipomatous mass 13 No 0.54 tant role in cell survival. Furthermore this work provided powerful indica- development tions that may be useful to expand the knowledge about the mechanisms Correlated with ABD and Vascular abnormalities 2 
E5  SHG 201
C25  d |o mGaLinA mSutGatOionWs , S
C0 . O00 T1 LANiDnv,o UlveKd |i nW ceWlluWlar. EpaStHhoGph.OysRioGlogy of SLOS. 143ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM06.64 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, Association of GL
P1 R and HTR2A Polymorphisms with Obesity and 3Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology, University Metabolic Traits in a Malaysian Population Children‘s Hospital, Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany. Y. D. Apalasamy1, S. Rampal2, T. T. Su3, F. M. Moy2, H. Abdul Majid3, A. Bulgiba2, Z. Mohamed1; 1Department of Pharmacology, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2Julius Thioredoxin 2 (TXN2T)X iNs 2a mitochondrial redox protein, which is ubiquitous- Centre University of Malaya, Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, University ly expressed with the highest expression levels in brain tissue. It is encoded of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 3Centre for Population Health, Department of Social by a nuclear gene, , containing a mitochondrial targeting sequence. and Preventive Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. TXN2 plays a crucial role in oxidative stress defense and in the regulation of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Animal studies suggest that TXN2 is essential during embryonic development. Obesity is frequently associated with metabolic complications such as hyper- Using exome sequencing in a 15-year-old adolescent suffering from an early tension, diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. Obesity is a complex disease onset neurodegenerative disorder with severe cerebellar atropThXy,N e2pilepsy, with high heritability estimates (> 0.70). Glucagon-like-Peptide-1 receptor peripheral neuropathy, dystonia and combined respiratory chain deficiency (G
L1 PR) plays important roles in glucose homeostasis and inhibition of ap- in muscle tissue, we identified a homozygous stop mutation in . TXN2 petite by acting on brain. On the other hand, Serotonin Receptor (HTR2A) is protein was not detectable in patient fibroblasts, confirming the predicted a neurotransmitter which works closely with leptin and insulin in metabolic loss of function. Cellular studies revealed increased reactive oxygen species response to dietary intake. It is largely unclear whether genetic variations in (ROS) levels, impaired oxidative stress defence and secondary mitochondri- these receptor genes lead to individual differences in susceptibility to me- al dysfunction with reduced cellular respiration and diminished ATP pro- tabolic complications. Therefore we investigated the associations of single duction. Lentiviral expression of TXN2 restored all these parameters con- nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of G
L1 PR and HTR2A genes with obesity firming the causal role of the mutation. Supplementations with antioxidants and metabolic traits. A total of 676 Malaysian Malays, obese (n=197) and effectively suppressed cellular ROS production, and lead to moderate clini- non-obese (n=479) were genotyped for the G
L1 PR rs2268641 and HTR2A cal improvement during short term follow-up of the patient. rs912127 SNPs. Anthropometric, fasting plasma glucose, body fat and lipid Our report on the first patient with TXN2 deficiency highlights the impor- levels were measured. Data were analyzed using Multivariate linear models. tance of TXN2 for neurodevelopment. Moreover, our results point to a po- After adjusting the age and gender, it was found that G
L1 PR rs2268641 was tential role of antioxidant treatment in affected patients. significantly associated with hip circumference (HC), (p=0.015). The GA al- This project was supported by the BMBF funded German Network for Mito- lele carriers had significantly higher HC (Mean (cm) =102.22±9.83) compa- chondrial Disorders (mitoNET #01GM1113C), by the E-Rare project GENO- red to GG and AA homozygotes. HTR2A rs912127 SNP was also significantly MIT (01GM1207) and by EU F
P7  Mitochondrial European Training project associated with waist hip ratio (WHR), (p=0.001) after adjusting the age and (317433). gender. AA homozygotes had higher WHR (Mean=0.89±0.10) compared to P
S06 .67 G allele carriers. However, both the SNPs were not associated with logBMI. A Patient with Ornithine Transcarbamylase Deficiency treated with While these findings require replication in larger studies, we provide new Glycerol Phenylbutyrate: Preliminary Experience evidence that GL
P1 R and HTR2A receptor gene variants may involve in me- R. S. ALTassan1, M. ALSayed1,2; tabolic abnormalities in Malaysian Malays. 1King FAisal specialist hospital and research center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Faisal This work was funded by grants 
E000049 -20001 and F
L009 - 2011. specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. P
S06 .65 Exome sequencing identifies TMEM70 deficiency in a Hungarian Roma family with severe congenital lactic acidosis Control of hyperammonemic crisis in patients with Urea Cycle Disorders K. Komlósi1, K. Hadzsiev1, T. B. Haack2,3, E. Pöstyéni1, J. Bene1, A. Szabó1, M. Czakó1, F. (UCDs) is of utmost importance to preserve cognition. Fónai4, T. Meitinger2,3, B. Melegh1; Glycerol phenylbutyrate (GPB) is an oral liquid formulation that has been 1Department of Medical Genetics and Szentagothai Research Center, University of Pécs, recently approved by FDA for chronic management of patients >2 years old Pécs, Hungary, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research with UCDs that cannot be adequately managed by a protein- restricted diet. Center for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany, 4Department of Obstetrics and It has the same mechanism of action as Sodium phenylbutyrate NaPBA, but Gynecology, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. it is a sodium- and sugar-free pre-pro-drug of phenylacetic acid (PAA) that has little odor and taste. Here we report a 13-year old OTC female with moderate cognitive delay, hy- Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency underlies over half the cases of conge- peractivity and recurrent hyperammonemic crisis (every 1-2 months). The nital lactic acidosis in children of Roma ethnicity, while lactic acidosis is also patient had poor compliance to NaPBA due to it is salty taste and peculiar a presenting symptom of various rare mitochondrial disorders. We report odor. After starting GPB, the patient showed significant improvement in the here a Hungarian Roma family with two boys affected by severe congeni- compliance as the medication was more tolerable compared to NaPBA. Her tal lactic acidosis, poor feeding, lethargy, cardiomyopathy, hypotonia and mother reported full compliance with the drug. Since starting the medicati- respiratory failure. The first boy died at 6 months of age due to sepsis and on, there was significant decrease in ER visit/admissions with subjective acute metabolic crisis, while the second boy survived with early initiation of improvement in activity. a ketogenic diet and shows severe developmental delay, hypotonia, grow- Several short-term randomized controlled trials in adults and children with th retardation, microcephaly and cardiomyopathy at 2,5 years. Enzymatic UCDs have supported the effectiveness of GPB in long term control of hyper- analysis of patient fibroblasts did not reveal any abnormality in pyruvate ammonemia, as well as significant improvement of behavioral function of dehydrogenase activity, and no mtDNA mutations were detected. Whole UCDs patients. [1-5] exome sequencing (WES) of the second son with SureSelect Human All Exon This is a preliminary report that supports the accumulating evidence of the Kit and 100 basepair paired end sequencing was carried out on an Illumina effectiveness of this medication as a long term alternative choice for NaPBA HiSeq2500 system with >97% of target covered >20-fold. Applying an auto- non-complaint Urea Cycle patients. somaTl rMeEceMs7si0v e model, 94 rare variants were identified, but only 3 out of 20 PM06.68 annotated genes were known to have a role in mitochondrial metabolism. Not typical North-European AT
P7 B gene mutation in Latvian patients Only carried a homozygous predicted loss-of-function variant: the with Wilson disease common c.317-2A>G splice site mutation resulting in ATP synthase defici- A. Zarina1,2, L. Piekuse1,2, M. Kreile1,2, I. Tolmane3,4, J. Keiss3, G. Cernevska5, I. Pukite5, Z. ency. Segregation analysis revealed homozygosity in both affected brothers Krumina5, A. Krumina6; and heterozygosity in the parents and the healthy sister. We describe the 1Riga Stradins university Scientific laboratory of molecular genetics, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga first Hungarian family with TMEM70 deficiency, supporting the clinical uti- Stradins university Department of Biology and Microbiology, Riga, Latvia, 3Riga East Clinical University Hospital, stationary “Infectology Center of Latvia”, Riga, Latvia, lity of 1W0
E3 S9
 8w3h eBnM a, ddressiPnDg 1a 1g2ro8u3p1 oKfK disorderBso wlyiathi Rlaersgeea grcehne Stcich ohleater-- 4University of Latvia, Faculty of Medicine, Riga, Latvia, 5Children Clinical university rsohgipen KeKit,y .J B Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 6Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Center, Riga, Latvia. OTKA OTKA , Janos PM06.66 IntroductionA.T P7
B Thioredoxin 2 deficiency causes early-onset neurodegeneration WilsAoTnP d7iBsease (WD) is a disorder of copper metabolism, caused by mutati- E. Holzerová1,2, K. Danhauser3, L. S. Kremer1, C. Terrile1, T. B. Haack1, H. Prokisch1,2, F. ons in gene . More than 500 distinct mutations have been described in Distelmaier3; the gene, from which 380 have a confirmed role in the pathogenesis 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, of the disease (Wilson disease mutation database: http://www.wilsondi- 144 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOseTasLeA.mNedD.u, aUlbKer t|a W.caW/daWta.bEaSseH.aGsp..O). RThGe most common mutation in theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Europe is H1069Q. rol level decreased dramatically, and normalized in 2 months. Materials and methods. Case Report-Case B: A 48-day-old Chinese boy initially presented with milk In total 235 patients have been sent for WD DNA diagnostics in Latvia. All choking and polypnea, but no other co-morbidities. His triglyceride (TG) the patients were first tested for the most common mutation H1069Q, by was 557mg/dL, but the cholesterol (CHOL) was normal. Genetic testing of using PCR Bi-PASA method; 64 patients, clinically confirmed with WD, whe- the patient revealed compound heterozygosis of two known pathogenic re the mutation H1069Q was not be found in both alleles, were tested for mutations: one is p.Leu279Arg and another is a large fragment deletion on other possible mutations (in the exons 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 11, 13, 14, 16, 18 of gene exon8/exon9/exon10. With a diet of low fat and vitamins added, the TG was AT P7
B – exons having the most common prevalence of mutations in WD controlled in a good level, and the baby was developing well in regard to patients) by direct sequencing. stature, weight, and mind. Results. Based on the regional hybrid capture parallel next generation sequencing Wilson disease was genetically confirmed in 42 patients. In total 68.94% platform, both SNVs and large fragment deletion could be identified simulta- of WD patients’ alleles were identified: H1069Q (62.12%); M769Hfs*26 neously. Familial Chylomicronemia is characterized by very severe hypertri- (2.27%); Val73GlufsX4 (1.52%) and D1267G, D765N, M645R, V1036I glyceridemia and will lead to acute pancreatitis, which is often life-threaten. (0.76% for each); 31.06% of the alleles remained unidentified. Among the Timely diagnose and prevention is critical for patients’ management and patients silent or not disease causing variants were found: R725R (2.27%); recovery. A1140V (12.12%);  S406
A (18.94%). P S07
.01 Conclusions. A missense SNP in CNR2 gene is associated with childhood asthma 1) The most prevalent mutation found in Latvian patients is H1069Q – in severity and treatment outcome 62.12% cases; C. E. P. Kozmus1,2, M. Deželak1, V. Berce3, U. Potočnik1,4; 2) Mutation Val73GlufsX4 presented in two patients is described among 1Centre for Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine, Sardinians and Bulgarians; University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, 3) The study should be continued to test all the AT P7
B gene, since the selec- University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Centre, Maribor, Slovenia, 4Laboratory for Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and tive screening has not identified all the mutations. Genomics, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of Maribor, P S06
.69 Maribor, Slovenia. Identification of a new CISD2 mutation in a French patient with a typical Wolfram syndrome C. Rouzier1, C. Delorme2, A. Chaussenot1, S. Ait-El-Mkadem1, K. Fragaki1, S. Bannwarth1, Both the interaction of several genes as well as environmental factors in- V. Serre3, M. Catala2, V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,4; fluences the asthma pathogenesis. The rs2229579 is a missense SNP in the 1Reference center for mitochondrial disorders, Nice, France, 2UMR 7622 CNRS et UPMC et Fédération de Neurologie, Université PIerre et, Paris, France, 3Jacques Monod CNR2 gene that codes for the cannabinoid receptor 2. Institute, Paris Diderot University, Paris, France, 4IRCAN UMR CNRS 7284 / INSERM We analyzed rs2229579 association with childhood asthma, and the effect U1081 / UNS, School of Medicine, Nice Sophia-Antipolis University, Nice, France. of rs2229579 on the response to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) or leukotrie- ne receptor antagonist (LTRA) treatment and CNR2 gene expression. We studied a case-control cohort of 341 children mild/moderate persistent Wolfram syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by dia- asthma and 245 controls. Blood samples were collected before treatment, betes mellitus and optic atrophy usually associated with diabetes insipidus, and 4-6 weeks after treatment with ICS or LTRA. deafness, renal tract abnormalities or neuropsychiatric disorders, mainly Atopic asthmatic patients with CT genotype presented significantly higher associated with mutations in the WF S1
 gene. Mutations in a second gene, FENO (p=0.0303), total IgE (p=0.0146) and lower log P C20
 (p=0.0403). Non- CISD2, have also been described in patients with Wolfram syndrome type 2 atopic asthmatics with CT presented only significantly higher eosinophil characterized by diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy associated with peptic count (p<0.001). After ICS treatment atopic asthmatics with CT genotype ulcer disease, bleeding tendency but without diabetes insipidus and psych- had less improvement of condition as measured by dFEV1/FVC (p=0.0440), iatric disorders. To date, only five families have been described and few data while after LTRA treatment asthmatics with CT genotype had worsening are available concerning both clinical phenotype and CISD2 function. condition measured by dFEV1/FVC (p=0.0286). No association was found Among our French Wolfram syndrome cohort of 98 patients with at least between rs2229579 genotype and asthma or CNR2 gene expression. We diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy, we identified 2 WF S1
 mutations in 78 found a significantly increased CNR2 gene expression in asthmatics before patients (80%). We sequenced the CISD2 gene in the 20 patients with only treatment compared to healthy controls (p<0.0001). Higher CNR2 gene ex- one WF S1
 mutation (7/98 patients, 7%) or without any mutation (13/98 pression was correlated with more severe asthma measured by FEV1/FVC patients, 13%). We identified a new missense homozygous CISD2 mutation, (p=0.0160). c.215A>G (p.Asn72Ser), in a patient with a «classical» Wolfram presentati- Our results suggest rs2229579 is associated with asthma severity and with on without digestive or hematologic symptoms and who did not carry any ICS or LTRA treatment response in children with asthma, and suggest the WF S1
 mutation. Segregation within the family, in silico analysis and absence involvement of the endocannabinoid system in asthma. in control individuals are in favor of the pathogenicity of this new variant. This work was supported by ‘Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia’ (SFRH/ In conclusion, we show that CISD2 must be analyzed in patients presen- BD/79804/2011), and Slovenian Research Agency ( P3
-0067) ting with a «classical» Wolfram syndrome when WF S1
 has been ruled out. PM07.02 Functional studies on primary fibroblasts, carrying the p.Asn72Ser CISD2 Association of NCOA5 gene rs2903908 variant with the Behcet’s mutation, are in progress to determine the effects of this mutant and to un- disease derstand the link between wolframin and CISD2 proteins. A. Rustemoglu1, E. Erkol Inal2, A. Inanir3, D. Ekinci1, U. Gul4, S. Yigit1, O. Ates1; 1Gaziosmanpasa University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, TOKAT, PM06.70 Turkey, 2Suleyman Demirel University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Physical Familial Chylomicronemia: Report of two Chinese infants presenting Medicine and Rehabilitation, ISPARTA, Turkey, 3Gaziosmanpasa University, Faculty of with lipemic plasma Medicine, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, TOKAT, Turkey, 4Akdeniz J. Zhou1, Y. J. Zhang2, W. X. Zheng1, Z. Z. Lan1, Z. W. Huang1, H. Y. Yang1, C. Liu1, P. P. Jiang1, University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Antalya, Turkey. R. Gao1; 1BGI, ShenZhen, China, 2Xin Hua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, Shang Hai, China. Abstract Behçet’s disease (BD) is a multisystemic chronic inflammatory autoimmu- ne disease of unknown etiology. Various genetic and environmental factors We used a monogenic dyslipidemias panel paralleled next generation se- have effects on the pathogenesis of the Behcet’s disease. NCOA5 gene enco- quencing assay to detect disease causing mutations in two infants presented des coregulator protein for ER-α which have affect in regulating autoimmu- with severe hypertriglyceridemia and lipemic plasma. nity, may have an impact on BD pathogenesis. Case Report-Case A: A 30-day-old Chinese boy, who was admitted to the lo- In this study, we aimed to clarify the impacts of the NCOA5 rs2903908 sin- cal hospital for coughing for ten days, and the blood was found to be pink. gle nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) on susceptibility and clinical findings Fasting serum lipids, which included triglyceride (TG) and cholesterol of BD. (CHOL) were abnormal, total cholesterol (TC) and triglyceridemia (TG) was This study included 300 BD patients and 288 healthy control patients. Ge- 1270 and 757mg/dL, respectively. Subsequent genetic testing of the patient netic analyses were performed by using the TaqMan allelic discrimination revealed compound heterozygosity of p.Arg270His and p.Trp421* mutati- assay. SPSS 16.0 Software was utilized to estimate OR and Chi-square tests. ons on LPL gene, both of which were known pathogenic mutations. Low-fat/ low-cholesterol diet therapy was EinStrHodGu c2e0d.1 U5ne |x pGeLctAedSlyG, sOerWum, SchCoOlesTteL-ANTDh,e UTTK g |e nWotWypWe o.fE tSheH NGCO.OA5R rGs2903908 SNP were significantly high1e4r 5inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S07
.05 Rapid detection of the three celiac disease risk genotypes HLA-DQ2.2, overall BD patients compared to those in healthy controls, and in patients DQ2.5 and DQ8 by multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification. with female gender compared to healthy female controls (p = 0.01, and p R. Vijzelaar1, A. van Gammeren2, E. van der Zwan3, R. Yilmaz1, I. van Hoogstraten4, A. = 0.026, respectively). The CT genotype of the NCOA5 rs2903908 SNP was Verheul5, E. de Baar2, L. Schrauwen2, W. Kortlandt5; significantly higher in the patients with BD who had genital ulceration or 1MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and uveitis compared to those in the patients group without genital ulceration Hematology, Amphia Hospital, Breda, Netherlands, 3Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Hematology, Sint Franciscus Gasthuis, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department and uveitis (p = 0.002, and p = 0.005, respectively). The C allele frequen- of Pathology VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Laboratory of Clinical cy was found statistically significantly higher in the BD patients with uvei- Chemistry and Hematology, Diakonessenhuis, Utrecht, Netherlands. tis compared to those in the patients group who did not have uveitis (p = 0.0001, OR, 95%CI = 2.19, 1.48-3.23). Our study represents the first time that the NCOA5 rs2903908 SNP seemed Celiac Disease (CD) is a chronic, small intestinal enteropathy and is asso- to be linked to BD susceptibility and clinical findings. ciated with the HLA genotypes HLA-DQ2.5 (HLA-DQA1*05 / HLA-DQB1*02), P S07
.03 HLA-DQ8 (HLA-DQA1*03 / HLA-DQB1*0302). More recently also HLA- Frequency of the CCR5-delta 32 chemokine receptor gene mutation in DQ2.2 (HLA-DQA1*02 / HLA-DQB1*02) has been identified to predispose the Czech population - study of 1 385 individuals for CD. Genotyping of the HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 genes is important sin- J. Jenčík, J. Thomayerová, K. Pavelcová, D. Panchártek, R. Klubal; ce genetic HLA-DQ2.2, -DQ2.5, and -DQ8 testing has a very strong negative Czech gene bank, Prague, Czech Republic. predictive value. Testing for relevant alleles is therefore recommended for risk stratification of individuals genetically susceptible to CD. The Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) probemix Introduction: A direct correlation between HIV infection and mutation in  P438
-D1 was developed to simultaneously detect the A and B subunits of the chemokine receptor (CCR5) gene has been established. The 32 bp deleti- the heterodimeric DQ2.2, DQ2.5, and DQ8 molecules. For each allele, i.e. on in the gene (CCR5-delta 32) alter function of the protein product, thereby HLA-DQA1*02, HLA-DQA1*03, HLA-DQA1*05, and HLA-DQB1*02, two altering chemokine binding/signaling. Homozygous carriers of the CCR5- probes have been added to the probemix. Three probes have been inclu- delta 32 mutation are resistant to HIV-1 infection because the mutation pre- ded to detect the HLA-DQB1*0302 allele of the HLA-DQ8 B-unit: one probe vents functional expression of the CCR5 chemokine receptor normally used detects all HLA-DQB1*03 alleles while the other two probes detect HLA- by the most of HIV-1 strains to enter CD4 T cells. However, resistance is not DQB1*0302/*0303 or HLA-DQB1*0302/*0305. absolute due to alternative CXCR4 co-receptor and HIV-1 isotropic switch. Results obtained by the MLPA assay confirmed the results of 39 samples Materials and methods: In the present study, we have determined by PCR previously genotyped by conventional PCR-SSO, PCR-SSP and PCR-SSCP/HD the allelic frequency of the CCR5-delta 32 mutation in 1385 Czech individu- methods, to accurately determine the presence of DQ2.2, DQ2.5 or DQ8 ge- als aged 4 - 86. CCR5-delta 32 homozygotes were confirmed by sequencing. notypes. In addition, MLPA has been shown to be able to distinguish between Results: 18,8% of studied individuals were heterozygous and 1,2% were ho- heterozygous or homozygous state of the alleles which is of importance sin- mozygous for the mutation. Overall, the frequency for the CCR5-delta 32 al- ce homozygous HLA-DQB1*02 in presence or absence of HLA-DQA1*02 or lele was 10,6%. Distribution of the mutation was unaffected by sex or age. HLA-DQA1*05 also predisposes for CD. Conclusion: The mutation is found principally in Europe and western Asia, The  P438
-D1 MLPA probemix provides a quick, reliable and complete me- with higher frequencies generally in the north. The frequency in the Czech thod to determine all three HLA-DQ genotypes relevant for CD. population population is consistent with the origin of the mutation in nort- PM07.06 hern Europe and natural gene flow into the central Europe. The CCR5-delta Frequencies of haplotypes associated with Coeliac disease in the 32 mutation is a good example of an advantageous allele with a well-charac- Czech population terized geographic distribution, which may play important role in managing M. Koudová, M. Blašková, M. Bittóová, Z. Vlčková, V. Indráková, M. Hlaváčová, V. of HIV infection in the future. Allogeneic stem-cell transplantation or geno- Nedvědová, M. Rímska, I. Slepičková, L. Pavlíčková; me engineering represent the most promising HIV treatment options. GHC GENETICS, Prague, Czech Republic. PM07.04 Expression analysis of Toll-like receptor pathway in celiac disease I. Romero-Garmendia, N. Fernandez-Jimenez, L. Plaza-Izurieta, A. Jauregi-Miguel, J. Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic small intestinal immune-mediated entero- Bilbao; pathy precipitated by exposure to dietary gluten in genetically predisposed BioCruces Health Research Institute/Unibersity of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain. individuals. There are HLA-DQ heterodimers that especially increase an individual’s predisposition to CD: DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201 in cis position (haplotype DQ2.5cis), DQA1*0505 - DQB1*0301/ DQA1*0201 - DQB1*0202 Introduction: Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic, immune-mediated gastroin- in trans position (haplotype DQ2.5trans) and DQA1*0301-DQB1*0302 in testinal disorder that develops in genetically susceptible individuals due to cis positon (haplotype DQ8.1). The aim of this study was to determine the an inappropriate immune response to ingested gluten. The only available frequency of mentioned CD-risk haplotypes in Czech population and to com- treatment is a life-long gluten-free diet (GFD). Toll-like receptor (TLR) pa- pare it with the previously published data. thway is known to be crucial in the regulation of innate immunity, but also 216 healthy individuals (101 males and 115 females, age 18-69 years) of the participates in the development of antigen-specific adaptive immunity. The Czech population were tested. DNA was isolated from oral mucosa or blood aim of this study was to characterize a possible deregulation in TLR pathway using MagCore HF16. CD-risk alleles were tested by strip assay certified me- in CD. thod (CeliacStrip). Materials and Methods: The expression of 28 genes related to TLR pathway The overall frequency of CD-risk haplotypes in Czech population was 36.1%. was measured by RT-PCR in biopsies from 16 patients with active CD, 16 Haplotype DQ2.5cis was detected in 18.5%, haplotype DQ8.1 in 14.8% and patients in a GFD and 15 non-celiac controls. The three groups where com- haplotype DQ2.5trans in 2.8% of samples. In 30.6% of samples no risk allele pared. CXC L11
 IFNG CXC L10
 I L10
 I L6
 CC L5
 was detected. Results: Nine of the 28 genTeICs AwMe1re dTiOffLeLrIePntiallyI eRxFp3ressed in active patients The frequency and dominance of DQ2.5cis over DQ2.5trans haplotype is in when compared to controls. , , , ,I RF5 and were agreement with previously published data, but the high frequency of DQ8.1 overexpressedT, IwRAhPer eas , CXCL 1a1ndI FNG CwXeCrLe1 u0n derexILp6ressed. among individuals with genetic risk (41%) is surprising, because this haplo- When treated patients and controls were compared, was underex- type is found only in 5% of patients with CD in Europe. This may indicate pressed, and overexpressed. , , and were that DQ8.1 is among Czech patients with CD in higher frequency than in Eu- differentially expressed between active and treated patients. Results were ropean or DQ8.1 haplotype means lower genetic risk to develop CD or it is contextualized with the results of 23 additional genes obtained recently in associated with subclinical CD (non-typical or silent form) and patients with our laboratory. this haplotype are not diagnosed. Conclusions: Our results confirmed significant alterations in several genes. P S07
.07 Patients treated with GFD showed a less altered pattern, although some Genome-wide copy number variation analysis in systemic lupus genes remain altered suggesting a constitutive role in the pathogenesis of erythematosus CD. Additionally, different degrees of alteration among the receptors, the F. B. Barbosa1, M. Simioni2, F. R. Torres2, E. A. Donadi3, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes2, A. L. pathway core and genes encoding costimulatory proteins, cytokines and Simões1; interferons in active patients suggest a probable alteration downstream of 1Department of Genetics, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, the receptors. Ribeirão Preto (SP), Brazil, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Campinas, Campinas (SP), Brazil, 3Division of Clinical 146 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Immunology, Department of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto (SP), Brazil. Methods: Sanger sequencing of the ELANE gene was performed in the pro- band, mother and father. Sequencing was approved by the NHS National Re- Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with a search Ethics Service (12/SC/0044) with the purpose of accurate diagnosis strong genetic background characterized by chronic inflammation and au- prior to bone marrow transplant. toantibody production. Genome-wide association studies identified several Results: Sequencing identified a single heterozygous missense mutation loci associated with SLE pathogenesis. However, there are few studies that in Exon 2, not present in either parent. The mutation (c.193G>T) was pre- focus on the role of copy number variations (CNVs) in SLE etiology. The dicted to result in an amino acid change p.(Val65Phe). This would alter the purpose of this study was to determine the role of CNVs in SLE patients. property of the specific amino acid from an aliphatic Valine to an aromatic Lupus nephritis (LN) was a criterion of inclusion for this study. Blood cell Phenylalanine. SIFT analysis predicted this variant to affect protein function lymphocytes fro m 23 SLE unrelated patients and 44 healthy subjects were with deleterious effects that would not be tolerated (calculated probability submitted to the Genome-Wide Human Cytoscan HD Array(Affymetrix®) in of 0.00). Polyphen 2 analysis predicted this variant to be highly damaging order to screenforCNVs in genomic DNA. SLE patients and controls had no (calculated probability of 1.00). statistic difference in total CNV numbers, median size of CNVs, and the pro- Conclusions: This is the first description of delayed separation of the um- portion of the genome covered by CNVs. However, our results showed that bilical cord associated with an ELANE c.193G>T mutation. Neonatal neu- SLE patients have common and r are CNVs in the loci that may contribute to tropenia due to a variety of causes is associated with delayed separation of the increased risk for SLE. We identified six common copy number varipati- the cord. Although the c.193G>T mutation has previously been reported in on regions (CNVRs) as potentialcandidates involved with SLE in 8 pin1 s1i.l2ic2o, cases of congenital neutropenia, more detailed clinical phenotyping of these 14q32.33, 22q13.33, Xp22.33 (2), and Xp26.2 loci (OR = 3.2–11.94; = rare cases will help reduce time to diagnosis in this life-threatening and po- 0.0002–0S.T0A3T34). A toCtaFlH oRf 5147 rare CNVs were detected and validated tentially treatable disease. The baby requires high doses of G-CSF (25 mcg/ in SLE patients. Rare deletions were found in two genes related to autoim- kg/day), which is in keeping with a severe phenotype. munity: and . This is the first report describing CNVs and CN- P S07
.11 VRs encompassing these regions in SLE patients. Financial Support: FAPESP Courier gene to deliver embedded DNA vaccine to immunize patients (2013/17062-9;2011/23794-7), CNPq (312547/2009-9) and CAPES. against intracellular human immunodeficiency virus P S07
.09 L. B. A. Scheiber II, L. B. Scheiber; Whole-exome sequencing of common variable immunodeficiency Osteoporosis & Arthritis Center, Trenton, MI, United States. G. de Valles-Ibáñez1, M. Piqué2, L. Alsina2, A. Esteve2, A. M. Plaza2, P. Soler-Palacín3, A. Martín-Nalda3, M. Martínez-Gallo4, L. del Pino5, E. López-Granados5, M. Juan6,7, F. Casals8; 1Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (UPF-CSIC), Barcelona, Spain, 2Immunallergy Unit, A DNA sequence has been designed to be embedded into the human geno- Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain, 3Pediatric Infectious Diseases and me (Table 1), when transcribed is intended to generate a mRNA, this mRNA Immunodeficiencies Unit, Hospital Universitari Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, when translated to produce a therapeutic Transcription Factor IIIA (TFIIIA) 4Immunology Department, Hospital Universitari Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, molecule to engage the HIV genome (GenBank K03455.1). We modified 5Clinical Immunology Department University, Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 6Immunology Department, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, Universitat de Barcelona, TFIIIA molecule (NC_000013), altering zinc fingers 1-5, to bond to HIV‘s Barcelona, Spain, 7Immunallergy Unit, Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcerlona, Spain, unique identifier, ‚agcagctgctttttgcctgtactgg‘, nucleotides 431-455, the 25 8Genomics Core Facility (UPF), Barcelona, Spain. nucleotides located between the TATA box and transcription start site. We studied amino acid-nucleotide binding characteristics. Permanently bin- ding a TFIIIA to HIV‘s unique identifier is intended to prevent transcripti- Introduction: Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is the most com- on of the HIV genome. Using a reverse transcription process, we developed mon symptomatic primary immunodeficiency, with a prevalence between a transcribable segment of DNA. The Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNF) 1/ 30,000 to 1/200,000 and reported incidence of 1/75,000 births. The ge- gene (AY214167.1) is active in CD4+ lymphocytes, including the reservoir netic defect underlying some of the primary immune deficiencies including for HIV. Transcribable sequence of DNA coding for the therapeutic TFIIIA CVID remains unknown, and the current hypothesis is that it might be mul- molecule replaces the TNF‘s original mRNA‘s protein coding sequence from tigenic. We have applied the next-generation sequencing technologies to the nucleotides 1750-4519. The modified TNF gene utilizes TNF gene‘s original study of CVID. 5‘ upstream and 3‘ downstream signaling segments. The modified TNF gene Material and Methods: The study has been performed in 36 patients with acts as a courier to transport the embedded DNA vaccine sequence. Likened CVID diagnosed from a Spanish cohort including sporadic as well as familiar to HIV genome, the modified TNF gene is inserted into the human genome cases. CVID diagnosis was made using current international criteria. Pati- and functions like an alternative copy of the TNF gene. The embedded DNA ents were analyzed by exome sequencing and copy number variants (CNV) vaccine undergoes transcription, to produce mRNAs which generate TFIIIAs analysis. designed to seek out and silence the HIV genome, creating a cell defensible Results: We obtained an initial list of about fifty candidate genes for each against intracellular HIV infection. patient. Candidate genetic variants were validated in the context of pedi- Table 1. Embedded DNA vaccine grees, according to different genetic models for the disease. Functional clas- 5‘ Upstream Modified TFIIIA 3‘ Downstream sifications coupled with an in-house algorithm for prioritizing mutations Sequences TNF alpha TFIIIA gene sequence TNF alpha gene sequence Zinc Fingers (as Amino Acids) gene sequence generated a shorter list of candidate genes for each patient. The integrated AY214167.1 NC_000013 AY214167.1 analysis of genetic data, together with the collected clinical and laboratory Original: 1-1749 --- 1-11166 4520-7240 data, narrowed down the list of candidate causal genes and mutations. Func- Modified: 1-1749 --- 1750-12915 12916-15636 tional validation of candidate genes is being performed to test their role in --- --- --- --- --- the molecular origin of CVID. --- ---------------------- 1-Original: 336-371 ----------------------- Conclusions: Exome sequencing is a powerful tool to detect the causal vari- --- ---------------------- Sequence: SANYSKAWKLDA ----------------------- --- ---------------------- 1-Modified: 2085-2120 ----------------------- ants in CVID cases with Mendelian inheritance. Our results also suggest an --- ---------------------- Coding: NSSRESSNSSRE ----------------------- oligogenic model for the disease in some patients. --- ---------------------- 2-Original: 2579-2614 ----------------------- Funding: This work was funded by grant SAF2012-35025 from the Spanish --- ---------------------- Sequence: GKAFIRDYHLSR ----------------------- Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad to FC. --- ---------------------- 2-Modified: 4328-4363 ----------------------- PM07.10 --- ---------------------- Coding: KSSRESSKSSKK ----------------------- --- ---------------------- 3-Original: 5346-5381 ----------------------- Sanger sequencing of neutrophil elastase in a neonate with congenital --- --------------------- Sequence: DQKFNTKSNLKK ----------------------- neutropenia --- ---------------------- 3-Modified: 7095-7130 ----------------------- B. J. Scally1, N. Roy1, A. Qureshi2, A. Pollard2; --- ---------------------- Coding: KSSKRSSESSEK ----------------------- 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of --- ---------------------- 4-Original: 6008-6043 ----------------------- Paediatrics, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom. --- ---------------------- Sequence: KKTFKKHQQLKI ----------------------- --- ---------------------- 4-Modified: 7757-7792 ----------------------- --- ---------------------- Coding: RSSKNSSESSKR ----------------------- Introduction: A male neonate presented with recurrent deep-seated skin --- ---------------------- 5-Original: 8207-8242 ----------------------- infections within the first four weeks of life. Full blood count identified se- --- ---------------------- Sequence: GKHFASPSKLKR ----------------------- --- ---------------------- 5-Modified: 9956-9991 ----------------------- vere neutropenia. Separation of the umbilical cord was delayed beyond two --- --------------------- Coding: RSSRKSSESSKE ----------------------- weeks of life; physical examination of the neonate was otherwise normal with no dysmorphic features identified. Family pedigree was unremarkab- le. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 147ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM07.12 PM07.14 A DGKE intronic mutation explains genetically unsolved cases of Mapping of private variations in human MHC conserved extended familial atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome haplotypes C. Mele1, M. Lemaire2,3, P. Iatropoulos1, R. Piras1, E. Bresin1, S. Bettoni1, D. Bick4,5, D. T. Lam1,2, M. Tay1, B. Wang1, Z. Xiao1, E. Ren1,2; Helbling4, R. Veith5, E. Valoti1, R. Donadelli1, L. Murer6, M. Neunhäuserer7, M. Breno1, V. 1Singapore Immunology Network, ASTAR, SIngapore, Singapore, 2National University of Frémeaux-Bacchi8, R. Lifton2, G. Remuzzi1,9, M. Noris1; Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 1IRCCS - Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Ranica (Bergamo), Italy, 2Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Distinct long-range genetic fixation in the MHC region, known as conser- Haven, CT, United States, 4Human and Molecular Genetic Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States, 5Department of Pediatrics, Medical College ved extended haplotypes (CEHs), have been described in numerous stu- of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States, 6Unit of Pediatric Nephrology, Azienda dies due to its unique genomic characteristic and strong association with Ospedaliera di Padova, Padova, Italy, 7Unit of Pediatry, Südtiroler Sanitätsbetrieb, many complex traits. However, despite the great interests, the limitations Brunico, Italy, 8Department of Immunology, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, of technology and heterogeneous nature of MHC haplotypes have thus far Hopital Europeen George-Pompidou and INSERM UMRS 1138, Cordelier Research prevented extensive study of sequence variation in CEHs. As such, the level Center, Team “Complement and Diseases”, Paris, France, 9Unit of Nephrology and of intra-CEH polymorphism and the possible effect of these variants are not Dialysis, Azienda Ospedaliera Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy. well-understood. In the study, with the use of multiple MHC homozygous cell lines, we demonstrated extensive sequence conservation in two com- mon MHC CEHs of Asian ancestry - A33-B58-DR3 and A2-B46-DR9 by high Genetic and acquired abnormalities causing dysregulation of the comple- throughput genome sequencing. This approach has allowed us to assemble ment alternative pathway contribute to atypical hemolytic uremic syndro- at least 90% phase-resolved MHC sequence representative of the A33-B58- me (aHUS), a rare disorder characterized by thrombocytopenia, non-immu- DR3 and A2-B46-DR9 haplotype. We also for the first time described the ne microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and acute kidney failure. However, extent of intra-CEH variation within the conserved boundaries of the MHC in a substantial proportion of patients the disease-associated alterations are CEHs and revealed that the level of variation is non-homogenous across still unknown. the MHC region. Importantly, our study showed evidence that these private We studied a family with infantile recessive aHUS, in whom whole-exome intra-CEH variants could potentially have functional impact in the context sequencinDgG aKnEalysis with conventional variant filtering parameters did not of gene expression. The availability of these alternate Asian MHC sequences reveal any obvioDuGs KcaEndidate mutation. The report of aHUS-associated mu- would complement the eight European MHC haplotype sequenced by the tations in , encoding diacylglycerol kinaDsGeK eEpsilon, led us to re-examine MHC Haplotype Project and provides a framework to study the MHC diversi- the non-coding variants obtained from next-generation sequencing, ty and variations. This insight gained from the results of this study may also allowing identification of a noveDlG iKnEtronic mutation (c.888+40A>G) enable an improved approach to MHC genetic dissection of disease-causing that segregated with disease. Sequencing of cDNA from affected individu- variants and genes. als revealed aberrant forms of mRNA predicteDdG tKoE cause profound P S07
.15 abnormalities in the protein catalytic site. The same mutation was found WRN helicase plays an important role in multiple myeloma in compound heterozygosity with a second nonsense mutation in all proliferation and inhibition of its activity by NS C19630
 induces affected siblings of another unrelated family. Homozygous and compound cytotocixity heterozygous patients presented similar clinical features, including aHUS D. -. Akcora Yildiz1, T. Ozkan2, M. Gunduz2, Y. Yukselten2, M. Ozen2, M. Beksac2, A. presentation in the first year of life, multiple relapsing episodes and prote- Sunguroglu2; inuria, which are prototypical of DGKE-associated aHUS. 1Mehmet Akif Ersoy University, Burdur, Turkey, 2Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey. This is the first report of a mutation located beyond the exon-intron bounda- ries in aHUS. Intronic mutations such as these are underreported since con- ventional filtering parameters used to process next-generation sequencing Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy characterized by proli- data routinely exclude these regions from downstream analyses in both re- feration of monoclonal plasma cells in the bone marrow. Despite several the- search and clinical settings. Our results suggest that analysis of non-coding rapeutic approaches, including high-dose chemotherapy, stem cell transplan- regions of aHUS-associated genes coupled with mRNA sequencing might tation and the usage of novel agents such as bortezomib, MM still remains an provide a tool to explain genetically unsolved aHUS cases. incurable disease. Extensive genomic instability associated with molecular P S07
.13 heterogeneity is a major hallmark of MM cells. Unfaithful DNA repair has Clinical exome sequencing of Finnish primary immunodeficiencies been implicated to promote the genomic instability and cancer cell survival. M. Kaustio1, L. Trotta1, H. Almusa1, T. Martelius2, M. Seppänen2, J. Saarela1; Werner Seyndrome (WRN) helicase is a member of RecQ helicase family and 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, contributes to DNA replication, recombination and repair. The supression of 2Immunodeficiency Unit, Inflammation Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki WRN expression in cancer cells by siRNA or its inhibitor led to an increased University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. succebility to agents generating DNA damage and cell death by stimulating apoptosis. Therefore, the inhibition of WRN expression might be a potential target for increasing the susceptibility of MM cells against chemotherapeu- Primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDs) are disorders in which part of tic drugs. In this study, we show the increased expression of WRN in both the immune system malfunctions as a result of mutations in immune rela- newly diagnosed and relapsed CD138+ myeloma plasma cells compared to ted genes. To date, over 220 genes responsible for these diseases have been both normal subjects and their CD138- non-tumorigenic cells. Furthermore, recognized, and this list is rapidly growing. The diagnosis of PIDs based on by using NS C19630
 a specific WRN helicase inhibitor, we further show a de- symptoms is often difficult, as they overlap between disorders and can also creased proliferation and an increased apoptosis in MM cells. These results vary considerably between individuals with mutations in the same gene. To show that WRN is involved in MM proliferation and its inhibition may serve elucidate the genetic causes for disease, we are performing clinical whole to enhance the efficacy of chemotherapy. exome sequencing on Finnish PID patients. Our cohort currently consists of This research has been supported by The Scientific and Technological Re- roughly 150 index cases, about 100 of which have been sequenced by now. searc Council of Turkey (No:113Z383). We have detected both previously identified and novel disease variants in known PID genes, as weTlNl FasR SidFe1n3tBified putative disease variants in genes PM07.16 that have not been previously associated with such diseases. For example, NLR P3
 and MEFV gene variants in PFAPA patients in Slovenia several variants in the gene have been previously described D. Perko, N. Toplak, T. Avčin, M. Debeljak; University Children‘s Hospital, University Medical Center, Ljubljana, Slovenia. as predi sposing to CVID, and interrogation of the exome sequence data of Finnish population cohorts (Sequencing Initiative Suomi) shows that some of thesevariants are enriched in Finland. This could partially explain why PFAPA syndrome is the most common autoinflammatory fever disorder in CVIDs seemT NtoF RbeSF o1v3eBrrepresented in Finland compared to the rest of Eu- childhood, with recurrent fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and adeni- rope. Consistently with this, we have identified previously reported disease tis. Mutations in the MEFV and NLR P3
 genes cause syndromes with PFAPA variants in in three patients with CVID. However, several of the overlapping symptoms which are rarely reported in patients from Slovenia. sequenced CVID patients do not carry mutations in this or any other pre- The aim was to assess the frequency of MEFV and NLR P3
 gene variants in viously reported PID gene, and thus warrant further investigation. patients with PFAPA syndrome in order to determine whether genes invol- ved in other autoinflammatory diseases, might play a role in PFAPA patho- genesis. We collected clinical and laboratory data of PFAPA patients under the age of 148 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO5,T wLhAo NweDre, UfolKlo w| Wed Wat Wthe. EUSnHiveGrs.iOtyR CGhildren‘s Hospital Ljubljana. All 10ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index exons of MEFV and 9 exons of NLR P3
 genes were directly sequenced. and critical in modern disease classification. 30 PFAPA patients were tested for MEFV and NLR P3
 gene variants. Ten pati- P S07
.19 ents (33%) had 11 variants, all in heterozygous state. 6 patients have Q703K Exome sequencing as a first tier test for primary immunodeficiencies variant in NLR P3
, one  E148
Q in MEFV and one combination of I591T in A. Simons1, A. Mensenkamp1, K. van Gassen2, W. van Zelst-Stams1, A. Janssen1, M. Netea1, MEFV and Q703K in NLR P3
. Novel variant in NLR P3
,  P200
T, was identified P. Arts1, A. Hoischen1, M. Nelen1; in one patient. One girl was found to have known variant in NLR P3
  S726
G, 1Radboud University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University which is associated with CINCA syndrome. She has had typical PFAPA sym- Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. ptoms, but also epilepsy and developmental delay. Five different gene vari- ants were identified in 10/30 PFAPA patients with MEFV variants found in 2 patients and NLR P3
 variants in 9. Our results indicate genetic heterogeneity Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) are a heterogeneous group of diseases of PFAPA population and overlap with other periodic fever syndromes. characterized by an increased susceptibility to infections, because of genetic defects in one or more components of the immune system. At the moment at P S07
.17 least 250 genes/loci are known as genetic causes for PIDs. Exome sequen- Whole-exome sequencing (WES) for the identification of underlying cing (ES) allows simultaneous analysis of a large panel of genes in a single genetic events in patients with primary immune deficiency (PID) test. We have applied this approach as a first tier diagnostic test for PIDs E. Fronkova, J. Stuchly, K. Fiser, M. Kotrova, A. Dobiasova, M. Novakova, R. Formankova, J. Stary, M. Kubricanova Zaliova, J. Trka; since May 2013. First, we designed an “in silico” immunodeficiency gene 2nd Medical School, Charles University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. panel which contains 270 genes (proven to be involved in PIDs and a few strong candidate genes). Since then we performed clinical diagnostic exo- me sequencing in >60 cases, all highly suspicious of having a PID. Analysis WES has become an attractive option for the genetic diagnostics in immuno- of variants present in the immunodeficiency panel, allowed us to establish logy. We tested the performance of WES in a cohort of 10 patients with PID a genetic diagnosis in 10% of the cases. In 15% of the negative cases we selected based on the following criteria: three or more possible candidate detected one pathogenic mutation in a recessive PID gene. It is not known genes based on the phenotype, or low amount of DNA available, not allowing yet whether this has an influence on the patients phenotype or whether a for stepwise sequencing of candidate genes. The raw data from HiSeq1500 second mutation might be present. In 80% of the negative cases we perfor- were analysed using an in-house pipeline and from the resulting vcf files med exome wide analysis. In 15% of these we identified highly suspected the common variants (<1%) and variants predicted as tolerated by both Po- variants in genes that likely play a role in the patients phenotype. Additional lyPhen and SIFT were discarded. Genes related to PID or aplastic anemia studies are ongoing to provide stronger causal evidence. were chosen from the remaining variants. This approach identified under- PM07.20 lying mutations in 5/10 cases: interleukin-7 receptor in infant with severe Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome: A mexican report with a new PSMB8 combined immunodeficiency (SCID); perforin in infant who died due to fa- mutation milial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; SLX4 and ASX L1
 in two child- C. Palacios1, A. Espinosa1, I. Palma1, S. Chavez1, O. Reyes1, H. Rosas2, M. Sierra1, A. ren with refractory cytopenia, and TACI in patient with common variable Cardenas2; immunodeficiency (CVID). In another infant with SCID a mutation causing 1Hospital Juarez de Mexico, México, Mexico, 2Hospital de Pediatria, Centro Medico Nacional Siglo XXI, IMSS, México, Mexico. cartilage hair hypoplasia was missed by WES, because the RMRP gene was not covered in the sequencing library. The diagnosis was done by clinical ge- neticist only after stem cell transplant, which was performed at 2.5 months of age. In three patients (2x CVID, 1x neutropenia) possible disease-causing Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome (NNS) (OMIM 256040) is a very rare heredita- mutations were suggested but not yet verified. In one patient, no mutation ry autoinflammatory disorder with onset in infancy with fever, pernio-like explaining his phenotype (neutropenia, B lymphopenia) was identiSfuiepdp.o Irn- rashes and gradually develops into partial lipodystrophy. It is a proteasome- tceodn cblyu IsGioAn N, iTn1 4o3u4r 3li amnidte CdZ c.2o.1h6o/r3t .t1h.0e0 W/2 E4
S0  2p2roOvPePdK a.s highly useful but not associated auto-inflammatory syndrome caused by autosomal recessive universal diagnostic tool for difficult cases in immunohematology. mutations in the PSMB8 gene (proteasome subunit β type 8) mapped on 6p21.3. Mutations in this gene also causes JASL syndrome (Japanese Auto- inflammatory Syndrome with Lipodystrophy), JMP (Joint Contractures, Mu- PM07.18 scle Atrophy, Microcytic Anemia, and Panniculitis-Induced Lipodystrophy Utility of next generation sequencing (NGS) in primary Syndrome) and CANDLE (Chronic Atypical Neutrophilic Dermatosis with immunodeficiency disorders (PIDs); cases based review Lipodystrophy and Elevated Temperature).We report a mexican female with A. Bisgin1, M. Yilmaz2, K. Karaer3, D. Altintas2, G. Bingol Karakoc2; 1Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics Dept. of Balcali Clinics congenital left cleft lip and palate, low birth weight ans short stature. She and Hospital, Adana, Turkey, 2Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine, Department had longstanding history of recurrent fevers and associated rash, gradaully of Pediatric Allergy & Immunology, Adana, Turkey, 3Intergen Genetic Diagnosis and developed partial lipodystrophy, developmental delay, pernio-like rashes. Research Center, Ankara, Turkey. Abnormal laboratory tests included elevated triglycerides, IgG, IgE; ANAs were negatives. Different homozygous PSMB8mutations had been identified until now. In order to determinate and to confirm the mutation because of Introduction: Primary immune deficiency disorders (PIDs) are a group of a NNS suspected, PSMB8 mutation screening was performed (6 exones in- diseases that the genetic basis of many has been identified. Although the tra- cluded). We detect a distinct mutation not reported previously: the G783A ditionally diagnostics are often sufficient to confirm the suspicion of certain nucleotide substitution. It causes a change from GCC codón to ACC, corre- PIDs, molecular tests are required to permit a conclusive diagnosis. Genetic sponding to protein Ala88Thr substitution. counseling together with clinical evaluation plays a critical role in the ap- P
S07 .21 propriate use of these tests, which have great potential to improve treat- Palmoplantar pustular psoriasis is associated to missense variants in ment outcomes. In this review by our experiences, we outline the algorithm CARD14, but not to loss-of-function mutations in I
L36 RN in Eueopean for PIDs and the clinical utility of next generation sequencing (NGS). patients Materials and Methods: We have designed a diagnostic algorithm and custo- U. D. Hüffmeier1, R. Mössner2; mized test panels via flow cytometry and then next-generation-sequencing 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 2University of Göttingen, by MiSeqSystem (Illumina). In-silico analysis for novel mutations was car- Göttingen, Germany. ried out using SIFT, Polyphen2 and MutationTaster. Results: The causative mutation was identified in only 18 out of 38 patients with suspected PIDs and 9 out of 12 patients with chronic granulomatous Palmoplantar pustular psoriasis (PPP) is a less common manifestation of disease (CGD). More than that, the identified mutations in 10 of 18 were no- psoriasis characterized by sterile pustules on the palms and soles. Little vel mutations. Many of undiagnosed suspected patients (n=20 for PID, n=3 is known on its genetic risk factors. In order to find out whether PPP has for CGD) whom immunophenotype does not help to identify them may have genetically more similarities with generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) or had as yet uncharacterized mutations in other genes. psoriasis vulgaris (PsV), we screened 217 German PPP patients as well as Conclusion: In summary, the availability of molecular genetic testing has 34 Estonian PPP patients for possible mutations in I
L36 RN and CARD14 and profound implications for immunologists and patients. The benefits of ge- performed an association analysis of the most relevant genetic risk factor netic testing are for diagnosis including the pre-symptomatic and screening, for PsV, the PSOR
S1  risk allele. We identified four heterozygous carriers of prevention including the prenatal and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, I
L36 RN mutations, but no evidence for association in comparison to geno- treatment even including the gene therapy modalities, prognosis and re- typed controls and large, publicly available data of control individuals. Also, search. our studies confirm previous studies showing no evidence for association of ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 149 Moreover, the application of NGS has broadened the understanding PIDs PPP to PSOR
S1 . In contrast, three different rare missense variants CARD14,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index previously described to influence the activation of NF-κB, were identified in CM-SJS/TEN. This study illustrates novel diagnostic and therapeutic me- eight patients and significantly associated to PPP in this case control study thods for CM-SJS/TEN. (p= 3.81E-04). Thus, our investigations suggest that CARD14 variants might PM07.24 be overlapping risk factors for PPP, GPP and PsV, although, due to their rare Targeted high throughput sequencing identifies novel disease frequency in PPP patients, their overall contribution to the genetic risk of candidate genes for systemic lupus erythematosus in Swedish PPP - as in other psoriatic entities - will remain small. patients PM07.22 S. V. Kozyrev1, F. H. Farias1, M. Wilbe2, J. Dahlqvist1, D. Leonard3, G. R. Pielberg1, M. Decreased Severity of Experimental Autoimmune Arthritis in Eloranta3, H. Hansson-Hamlin4, G. Andersson2, L. Rönnblom3, K. Lindblad-Toh1,5; 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Peptidylarginine Deiminase Type 4 Knockout Mice Sweden, 2Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of A. Suzuki1, Y. Kochi1, E. Kanno1, H. Matsumura1, K. Yamamoto1,2; Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of Medical Sciences, Section of 1RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 2Univ. of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Rheumatology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 5Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States. Introduction Peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 (PADI4) has been identified as a sus- ceptibility gene for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by genome-wide association Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder with hete- studies. PADI4 is highly expressed in the bone marrow, macrophages, neu- rogeneous clinical manifestations. The etiology of SLE is complex, involving trophils, and monocytes. Peptidyl citrulline is an interesting molecule in RA interplay between genetic, environmental and hormonal factors. Although because it is a target antigen for anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies, and many loci have been identified, only a small proportion of heritability of SLE only PADs (translated proteins from PADI genes) can provide peptidyl ci- is explained, indicating a demand for different approaches for discovery of trulline via the modification of protein substrates. The aim of this study was disease-associated genes. The aim of this study was to identify novel rare to evaluate the importance of the PADI4 gene in the progression of RA. genetic variants relevant for SLE. We performed targeted re-sequencing of Methods 219 genes selected on the basis of their role in immune responses, general We generated Padi4 knockout (Padi4−/−) DBA1J mice. The Padi4−/− DBA1J autoimmunity, and known associations with human SLE, or SLE-related di- and wild-type mice were immunized with bovine type II collagen (CII) to sease in dogs. The study cohort included 144 Swedish SLE patients and 17 develop collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). The expression of various in- matching controls. The Nimblegen capture array was used for target regions flammatory cytokines and Padi genes in immune cells was detected by the enrichment, which were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq2000. Variants were real-time TaqMan assay. Cytokine concentrations in sera were measured by filtered to be present only in cases, but not in controls or 1000 genomes or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Localization of the PAD4 and PAD2 dbSNP. For further functional validation we chose three variants located in proteins was indicated by immunohistochemistry. the genes MEF2D, TCRA and HAPLN3 and overlapping with DNase I hyper- Results sensitivity sites, ENCODE histone marks and ChIP-Seq peaks. The regulatory We demonstrated that the clinical disease score was significantly decreased potential of the novel variants was investigated with EMSA and luciferase in the Padi4−/− mice and Padi4 expression was induced by CII immunizati- reporter assay, and indicated that two variants may influence gene expres- on. In the Padi4−/− mice, serum anti-type II collagen (CII) immunoglobulin sion. Additional genotyping of 742 Swedish controls demonstrated a higher M (IgM), IgG, and inflammatory cytokine levels were significantly decreased frequency of the variants in SLE patients. A correlation between particular compared with those in the wild-type mice. Padi2 expression was induced disease manifestations and the novel variants was also observed. Our study in the immune cells of the Padi4−/− mice as a compensation for the defect successfully combines the detection of novel rare variants, with functional in Padi4. and clinical data to generate hypothesis about specific disease mechanis- Conclusion ms. Padi4 affected disease severity in the CIA mice and was involved in the en- P
S07 .25 hancement of the collagen-initiated inflammatory responses. Identification of the risk HLA variants of Graves’ disease by applying P
S07 .23 the HLA imputation method to large scale Japanese genome-wide Whole exome sequencing of Cold Medicine-Related Stevens-Johnson association study data Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (CM-SJS/TEN) with Severe O. Yukinori1, Y. Momozawa2, K. Ashikawa2, K. Matsuda3, Y. Kamatani2, A. Takahashi4, M. Mucosal Involvement in Japanese population Kubo2; Y. Hitomi1, S. Khor1, M. Ueta2, C. Sotozono2, S. Kinoshita2, K. Tokunaga1; 1Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan, 2RIKEN Center for Integrative 1Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, the University of Tokyo, Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan, 3Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 4RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences,, Yokohama, Japan. Kyoto, Japan. [Objectives] Graves’ disease (GD) risk is strongly associated with genetic Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are variations within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region. Ho- acute inflammatory vesiculobullous reactions of the skin and mucous mem- wever, its fine genetic architecture has not been elucidated. branes, and these reactions are reported to be caused by inciting drugs, viral [Methods] To fine-map GD risk alleles within the MHC region in Japanese, infections, or malignant tumor. Although the occurance of SJS/TEN is rare at we newly constructed a population-specific HLA reference panel consisting about 1-6 cases per million, mortality rates are higher than other drug rush of the healthy subjects of Japanese ancestry (n = 908). We conducted trans- (SJS: 3%, TEN: 27%). In addition, Quality-of-life (QOL) of the most survivors ethnic comparisons of linkage disequilibrium (LD) and haplotype structures is often low, as severe ocular surface complications are often developed as of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) variants by introducing a novel fra- the aftereffect. mework that utilizes an entropy-based LD measurement and a visualization Over 1,000 drugs have been reported as the so-called “causal medicine” of tool capturing high-dimensional variables. Finally, we applied our HLA im- SJS/TEN, and susceptibility to SJS/TEN caused by some of them the medici- putation method to the large-scale Japanese GD genome-wide association nes have been reported to be associated with HLA genes. As examples, HLA- study (GWAS) data (n > 9,000). A*31:01 and HLA-B*15:02 have been reported to be associated with carb- [Results] The Japanese population demonstrated stronger LD between the amazepine-induced severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs). Besides, HLA genes compared to European or other east Asian populations, highligh- HLA-B*58:01 have been reported as susceptible allele of Allopurinol related ted by one population-specific common long-range HLA haplotype spanning SJS/TEN. Recently, HLA-A and IKZF1 have been reported to be susceptib- through the entire MHC region and HLA genes (frequency > 0.08). Applicati- le for Cold Medicine-Related Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal on of the HLA imputation method to the Japanese GD GWAS data identified Necrolysis (CM-SJS/TEN) in Asian populations by genome-wide association that amino acid polymorphisms of the multiple class I and class II HLA genes study (GWAS). However, remaining genetic susceptibility of CM-SJS/TEN in- independently contribute to GD risk (HLA-DPβ1 amino acid positions 35 cluding rare variants and structural variants remains to be discovered. and 9, HLA-A amino acid position 9, HLA-B amino acid positions 45 and 67, To identify the functional variants for CM-SJS/TEN with severe mucosal in- and HLA-DRβ1 amino acid position 74; P < 6.0×10^-7), with the strongest volvement, whole-exome sequencing was performed in about 121 Japanese impact at HLA-DPB1 (P < 1.0×10^-40). CM-SJS/TEN patients with severe mucosal involvement using next generati- [Conclusion] Our study illustrates the value of the population-specific HLA on sequencer (NGS) - ion Proton (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Whole-exome reference panel for HLA imputation, with successful fine-mapping of the sequencing data were then analyzed using CLC Genomics Workbench (CLC MHC region risk of GD to multiple HLA amino acid polymorphisms. b 1io 5) 0 software. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG Here we will show the provisional results of Whole-exome sequencing forABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P
S08 .01 Netherlands. 16p13.11 microdeletion in a boy presenting with Mowat-Wilson phenotype A. Singer1, S. Ben-Shachar2, A. Bar-Shira2, C. Vinkler3; 1p36 deletion syndrome is one the most common subtelomeric deletion 1Genetic Institute, Ashkelon, Israel, 2The Genetic Institute & Prenatal Diagnosis Unit,, syndromes seen in humans. Uniform features of the syndrome include in- Te-Aviv, Israel, 3Institute of Medical Genetics,“Wolfson“, Holon, Israel. tellectual disability, characteristic dysmorphic facial features, cardiac and craniofacial anomalies. This syndrome has been well described in paedia- tric patients. However, in adult patients data on the natural history is still 16p13.11 microdeletion is a recently described syndrome characterized by limited. developmental delay, microcephaly, epilepsy, dysmorphic features and be- We describe five patients with a microdeletion 1p36, that were diagnosed havioral problems. The deleted region contains more than 10 genes inclu- during adulthood, to illustrate the variability of the clinical course. The most ding NTAN1 and ND
E1 . These genes may be relevant to the neuro-cognitive severe case was a male patient that was diagnosed with 1p36 deletion syn- phenotype of this syndrome. Variable phenotypic presentation has been de- drome at the age of 18 years. He had a profound intellectual disability, seizu- scribed with partial penetrance. Most cases are de novo. Prevalence in the res, challenging behaviour and bilateral congenital cataract. A few weeks normal population is 4:10,000 . However 16p13.11 deletions is detected in after diagnosis he developed stroke caused by a newly discovered dilated 60:10,000 patients with a diverse spectrum of epilepsy syndromes. cardiomyopathy, which is a common feature of 1p36 deletion syndrome. Un- Mowat Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a rare condition (1:60,000), characteri- fortunately, 6 months later he died of heart failure that was exacerbated by zed by a distinctive phenotype, mild to severe develeopmental delay, seizu- a respiratory infection. This case illustrates the importance of early genetic res, short stature, microcephaly, Hirschsprung disease or constipation, ge- diagnosis and syndrome specific follow-up in adult patients, to provide bet- nitourinary defects, heart defect, and eye anomalies. Almost all cases are ter care and early intervention in this challenging group of patients. associated with ZEB2 mutations, located on chromosome 2q22.3. PM08.04 We describe a 12y old boy with intellectual disability, behavioral problems, 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion syndrome: further refining the critical history of infantile spasms since the age of 3m, constipation, hypospadias, region dysmorphic features and microcephaly. Parents are healthy and unrelated. M. Lamp1, M. Malacarne2, M. Mogni2, D. Coviello2, C. Marciano1, F. Faravelli1, F. Forzano1; He has a non-identical twin brother who has ADD but is otherwise healthy 1Medical Genetics Unit, Galliera Hospital, Genoa, Italy, 2Laboratory of Human Genetics, and has normal intelligence. MWS has been considered in this boy. However, Galliera Hospital, Genoa, Italy. routine workup included CMA testing diagnosed a 16p13.11 microdeletion. Clinical reevaluation of the patient in view of the CMA results revealed the overlapping between both syndromes. The 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion syndrome is a rare disorder characterized We would like to suggest that 16p13.11 microdeletion may be a phenocopy by developmental delay, intellectual disability, growth retardation, microce- of MWS. CMA in our report showed once again its importance in resolving phaly, abnormal muscle tone, optic nerve dysplasia and a distinctive pattern cases with intellectual disability and suggested the existence of gene(s) in of craniofacial features. Reported deletions’ sizes range from 5.7 Mb, contai- the deleted interval that may be responsible for a phenocopy of MWS. ning numerous genes, to 0.2 Mb, including a single gene, BC
L11 A. PM08.02 We report a 4-year-old girl with delayed motor and language development, De novo 19p13.2 microdeletion encompassing the part of NFIX gene microcephaly, asymmetry in carpal bone maturation, facial hypotonia and in a girl with Sotos-like phenotype peculiar craniofacial features. Array-CGH revealed a de novo deletion of 350 M. Kucharczyk1, M. Młynek1, M. Kugaudo1,2, A. Cieślikowska1, A. Jezela-Stanek1, A. Kb in the locus 2p16.1, which only included a microRNA MIR4432 and part Gutkowska1, M. Białecka1, A. Marczak1, D. Sielska-Rotblum1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; of the BC
L11 A gene, and a duplication of 123 Kb in 22q13.1, inherited from 1Department of Medical Genetics, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, the proband‘s healthy mother. To our knowledge, this is the second smallest 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, deletion associated with the 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion syndrome reported Poland. to date. Compared to the individual with the 0.2 Mb deletion, who presen- ted with mild intellectual disability, abnormal muscle tone and expressive language delay, our proband also shows microcephaly and facial features 19p13.2 microdeletion is a rare genomic disorder. To date, less than ten evocative of the condition, while growth retardation and other features de- cases was described so far in the literature. This chromosomal syndrome scribed in previous cases are absent. manifests in developmental delay/intellectual impairment, postnatal over- In conclusion, the present case provides further evidence on the correlation growth, macrocephaly, craniofacial dysmorphy, slender habitus, advanced of heterozygous 2p15-p16.1 deletions with specific clinical features. Fur- bone age, and scoliosis. Hypotonia, unusual behavior with autistic traits, thermore, the small size of the current deletion might help to clarify the role ophthalmologic, gastrointestinal, and hand/foot abnormalities are also fre- of single genes in this complex phenotype. quent. Very similar phenotype is observed in the Sotos syndrome 2 (MIM #614753) that is caused by heterozygous mutations/deletions of the NFIX P
S08 .05 gene located on chromosome 19p13.2. 2p25 deletion: involvement of SNTG2 in autism or behavioral Here, we report on the case of a 7-year-old girl referred to genetic counse- troubles, and parental imprinting. ling because of psychomotor retardation, speech delay and dysmorphic fea- M. Plutino1, H. Karmous-Benailly1, F. Giuliano1, C. Massol1, K. Wagner2, V. Paquis- Flucklinger1, M. Dayem-Quere1; tures (macrocephaly, long/narrow and triangular face, high forehead, fron- 1Hôpital de l’Archet II, CHU de Nice, Nice, France, 2Hôpitaux Pédiatriques de Nice, CHU tal bossing, downslanting palpebral fissures, dysplastic low-set ears, small Lenval, Nice, France. nose, flat philtrum, micrognathia). At the examination, behavioral problems (anxiety, tantrums, autoaggression), seizures, and poor coordination were noted. Skeletal anomalies (advanced bone age, joint laxity, slender hands Deletions of the terminal region of the short arm of chromosome 2 have with long fingers, abnormal setting of the lower limbs), strabismus, hypero- been reported in the literature in less than 20 patients. These patients share pia as well as constipations and abdominal pain were also diagnosed. common clinical features including early-onset obSeHs3itHy,Y iLn1telAleCcPtu1aTl dMisEaMb1il8i- Whole-genome oligonucleotide microarray analysis revealed a de novo tSyN aTnGd2 bTePhOaviPoXrDalN troubleMsY oTr1 aLutism. A minimal critical region of 1.M97Y TM1bL 158.18 kb (the smallest so far) deletion of 19p13.2 region (chr19:13,020,206- has been estimated, encompassing seven genes ( , , , 13,178,390; hg19) encompassing seven genes; three of them (NFIX, DAND5 , , , and ). Many recent studies pointed out and CALR) could be the candidate genes for the genotype-phenotype rela- gene as the main candidate for ID and obesity. We present three new pa- tionship. tients carrying 2p25 deletions: an autist female child with developmental This study contributes additional information for the newly identified delay and her depressive father, and a third unrelated patient who hMasY pTs1yL- 19p13.2 microdeletion syndrome and clarifies the clinical roles of genes in chomotor retardation and behavioral troubles. MMoYrTe1oLv.er, our patients do the involved region. Our results also confirm that haploinsufficiency of NFIX not have an overwSeNigThGt2 phenotype, highlighting indeed the role of leads to Sotos-like phenotype. in obesitSyN, TasG 2none of the deletions encompasses The only common This study was supported by the MNiSW Grant No. 0193/I
P1 /2013/72. disrupted gene is , thus redefining the smallest region of overlap for P
S08 .03 autism. is expressed in brain. Its product interacts with neuroligins Phenotype and natural history of 1p36 deletion syndrome in five NLGN3, NLGN4X, and NLGN4Y, which are autism-related isoforms. Finally, adult patients the parental origin of the deletions seems to be of interest, as all inherited A. Kattentidt1, R. Kersseboom2, J. van de Berg3, J. Jansen3, L. van Zutven4, M. Simon4; deletions described today appear to be inherited from the paternal side. We 1Zuidwester, Spijkenisse, Netherlands, 2Tragel Zorg, Clinge, Netherlands, 3Ipse de will discuss the possible imprinting of the 2p25 region and its role in au- Bruggen, Nootdorp, Netherlands, 4Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, tism. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 151ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM08.06 A milder Angelman syndrome phenotype due to a novel molecular mechanism: a maternally inherited 30kb deletion of 15q11.2 cluding CH
L1  remains uncertain. Homozygous deletions of the region have including the main gene promoter and non-coding exon1 of UB
E3 A never been reported. D. H. K. Lim1, N. James2, L. Reali2, L. Steenpass3, B. Horsthemke3, R. Price2, C. Hardy2, D. Here we describe an eight year old boy, born to consanguinous parents, who McMullan2; has marked learning difficulties, absence of speech, stiffness in his lower 1Clinical Genetics Department, Birmingham Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, legs and persistent drooling. Array CGH studies carried out using the Blue- Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Gnome CytoChip Oligo ISCA 8x60k (v2.0) array showed a deletion of the Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Institut fuer Humangenetik, Universitaetsklinikum sequences detected by the oligonucleotide probes located from 93,979bp Essen, Universitaet Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. to 290,767bp. This equates to a 197kb interstitial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 3 at p26.3. This resulted in a partial deletion of the CH
L1  gene. Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) studies with targets within introns We present a novel molecular cause of Angelman syndrome (AS) in a female 1 and 2 of the CH
L1  gene, confirmed this deletion and showed that it was patient with microcephaly, dysmorphism, global developmental and speech homozygous. Further qPCR studies in the parents of this proband showed delay and intellectual disability. Her phenotype resembles a milder form of they both had a hemizygous deletion of this region. The proband has there- AS with no seizures and 20 words of speech at the age of 5 years. EEG inve- fore inherited one abnormal chromosome 3 from each parent who are both stigation of the patient showed typical AS findings. clinically unaffected. Suspecting a clinical diagnosis of AS, molecular analysis was undertaken This is the first case reported of a patient presenting with an abnormal using methylation specific PCR (MS-PCR) and revealed normal methylation phenotype with a homozygous deletion including part of the CH
L1  gene at at the SNRPN DMR ruling out UPD, deletion or an imprinting defect asso- 3p26.3. ciated with the majority of AS. Sequencing of the coding exons of UB
E3 A P
S08 .09 revealed no pathogenic mutations. Microarray CGH identified a maternally Copy number variant at Xp22.31: Clinical and genetic evaluation of 8 inherited 30kb deletion at 15q11.2 involving exon 1 of UB
E3 A. This deletion patients was de-novo in the patient’s mother and linkage analysis revealed the origin N. Baena, A. Ruiz, E. Gabau, M. Arasanz, M. Viñas, M. Guitart; of the deletion in the grand-paternal allele, explaining the normal pheno- Corporació sanitària Parc taulí, SABADELL, Spain. type in the patient’s mother due to genomic imprinting. Although intragenic deletions of the maternal copy of UB
E3 A are a recog- Introduction: nised cause of AS, to date there have been no reported deletions of exon 1. Exon 1 is non protein coding and therefore not routinely sequenced. The Xp22.31 submicroscopic duplication has been reported as either a possible intragenic deletion in our patient also includes the main promoter of UB
E3 A cMaeutsheo odf si:ntellectual disability (ID) and/or developmental delay or as a be- adjacent to exon 1 and the milder phenotype in our patient may be explai- nign variant. ned by secondary promoters downstream producing transcripts. We present the detailed clinical phenotype of our patient, discuss the initial Comparative genomic hybridization array (aCGH) (Agilent 60K) was used to difficulties of interpreting the clinical significance of this novel finding and aRneasluylstes :511 patients affected by ID and/or dysmorphic features/congenital present the subsequent RNA/expression analysis. defects. P
S08 .07 Mosaicism of truncanjting mutation in CASK is crucial for male We detected potentially pathogenic copy number variants (CNV) in 94 out of patients’ survival 511 patients analysed (18%). A submicroscopic duplication in the Xp22.31 C. Hatano1, T. Yokoi1, Y. Kuroda1, Y. Enomoto1, T. Naruto1, I. Ohashi1, R. Anzai2, M. Iai2, K. region was identified in 8 patients (5♂:3♂) ranging in size from 257 Kb to Kurosawa1; 1.7 Mb. In all individuals studied (four out of eight) the Xp22.31 duplication 1Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 2Department of Neurology, Kanagawa Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan. was inherited from the mother. The HDHD1, STS, VCX and PNPLA4 genes are included in four cases with a 1.6Mb duplication, who show autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and no dysmorphic features. Interestingly, two cases with a The CASK gene maps to Xp11.4 and is related to synaptic functions. Aberra- size below 580Kb, where only HDHD1 and STS genes are duplicated, show tions of this gene are associated with microcephaly with pontine and cere- a more severe phenotype with multiple malformations. The largest duplica- bellar hypoplasia (MICPIH), developmental delay, and nystagmus in females. tion detected (from VCX3A to VCX2) is associated with language delay. The We report a male patient with mosaicism of CASK mutation. patient also carries a deletion at 6p23 of 1.3 Mb as a result of an unbalanced He was born to nonconsanguineous parents at 39 weeks. The parents were tC(o6n;9c)l.u Fsiinoanll:y, a duplication of 565Kb involving VCX and PNPLA4 was detec- healthy and their family history was unremarkable. His birth weight was ted in a boy with psychomotor delay. 2334g (-1.4SD), length 45cm (-1.5SD), and the head circumference 30.0cm (-2.2SD). He had ventricular septal defect, and had mitral valve regurgi- We have detected an association of the Xp22.31 duplication with ID and ASD tation at 5 months old. He also had nystagmus. At 3 years and 6 months in both genders. According to the literature, there is a high variability in the old, his weight was 9075g (-3.2SD), length 82.0cm (-4.0SD), head circumfe- Xp22.31 duplication associated phenotype, which may be due to incomplete rence 39.0cm (-7.2SD). He had severe intellectual disability. At 4 years old, penetrance, the different genes involved, a position effect and X-inactivation. he doesn’t speak, nor does he keep sitting position. Chromosome studies Increased CNV on the X chromosome can contribute to deregulation of nor- showed a normal 46,XY karyotype. We performed cytogenetic microarray, mal cognitive development. which revealed no significant copy number variation. Next we performed PM08.10 targeted high-throughput sequencing of 4813 genes in which mutations had Partial ARID1B gene deletion as a cause of Coffin-Siris syndrome in been described in patients with Mendelian genetic disorders. We confirmed two (maybe three) siblings a de novo mosaic mutation (c.725G>A:p.W242X) of CASK. The ratio of muta- B. Parmentier, B. Grisart, S. Rombout, J. Désir; tion was 93% in peripheral blood lymphocytes. Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium. CASK knockdown mice are smaller than wild type mice but viable, whereas CASK knockout mice die at first day of their lives. For male patients, trun- cating mutation in CASK has been regarded as lethal. Next-generation se- Coffin-Siris syndrome has been described as mental retardation associated quencing confirmed a mosaicism masked by a high proportion of mutant with coarse facial features, hypertrichosis, and hypoplastic or absent fifth cells. These results suggest that mosaicism seemed crucial for male patients’ fingernails or toenails and other variable clinical manifestations. We report survival. the case of a non consanguineous portuguese couple. Their first pregnancy of a female fetus was interrupted at 23 weeks because of corpus callosum PM08.08 agenesis and cardiac defect. No genetic analysis or autopsy was requested at Homozygous deletion of CH
L1  resulting in severe intellectual this time. Their second pregnancy of a female fetus was also characterized by disability corpus callosum agenesis, and unique umbilical artery. At 2 years of age, she S. F. Jose, D. T. Pilz, S. M. Morgan; Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom. is affected by hydrocephalus, laryngomalacia, diaphragmatic hernia,coarse facial features, hypoplastic fifth toenails. No genetic analysis was requested before we saw her. Their third pregancy was characterized by a male fetus with left hydronephrosis, unilateral club foot, and corpus callosum poorly Hemizygous deletion of the CH
L1  gene at 3p26.3 is a very rare finding, pre- visualized. Microarrays CGH analysis was requested for the third fetus, using viously reported in 4 families. Cognitive impairment, in particular language a 60K Agilent whole genome array. It revealed a 230 kb intragenic deletion difficulties, is a consistent phenotypic feature. However, due to the small n1u5m2ber of cases reported to date, the cliE niS cH al G sig 2 ni0 fi1 ca5 n c| e G oL f dA eS leG tioO nW s in, -SCOofT ALRAIDN1BD g, eUneK ( e| xWonWs 6W-10.E) SatH pGos.iOtioRn G6q25.3. This discovery was clearlyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P
S08 .13 Diagnostic odyssey in severe neurodevelopmental disorders: The suggestive for the phenotype of the living daughter and the analysis found utility of clinical whole-exome sequencing the same deletion confirming a clinical suspicion of Coffin-Siris syndrome. J. THEVENON1, Y. Duffourd2, A. Masurel-Paulet1, M. Lefebvre1, F. Feillet3, S. El Chehadeh- Medical interruption of the third pregnancy was asked by the parents at 23 Djebbar4, A. Pélissier5, P. Callier6, N. Marle6, A. Mosca-Boidron6, A. Steinmetz1, C. Jugé2, weeks, but no autopsy was requested. Parental CGH microarrays testing did S. Nambot1, S. Béjean5, C. Peyron5, F. Huet7, M. Chouchane7, V. Darmency-Stamboul7, B. not reveal any copy number abnormality at this 6q25.3 region. However, Aral8, J. St Onge2, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, L. Faivre1, J. Rivière2; 1Centre de référence maladies rares, Dijon, France, 2EA4271 GAD, Dijon, France, familial history with two siblings affected (possibly three but no genetic ma- 3Centre de référence maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, Nancy, France, 4Centre de terial was conserved for the first pregancy to verify this hypothesis) strongly génétique, Strasbourg, France, 5Laboratoire d’Economie et de Gestion, Pôle d’Economie suggest that one of the parents is a carrier of a germinal mosaicism. et de Gestion, Dijon, France, 6Laboratoire de cytogénétique, Dijon, France, 7Service de P
S08 .11 Pédiatrie, Dijon, France, 8Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Dijon, France. Scavenging mRNA for Cognitive Function C. Ng1, S. Mohammad1, V. Taverniti2, C. Bonnard1, H. Lee3, A. Eskin3, S. F. Nelson3, M. Al- Raqad4, S. Altawalbeh4, B. Séraphin2, B. Reversade1,5; Objective: The current standard of care for diagnosis of severe intellectu- 1Institute of Medical Biology, Singapore, Singapore, 2IGBMC, CNRS UMR 1704/INSERM al disability (ID) and epileptic encephalopathy (EE) results in a diagnostic U964/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 3Department of Human Genetics, yield of ~50%. Affected individuals nonetheless undergo multiple clinical David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, evaluations and low-yield laboratory tests often referred to as a “diagnostic 4Queen Rania Paediatric Hospital, King Hussein Medical Centre, Royal Medical Services, Amman, Jordan, 5Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National odyssey”. This study was aimed at assessing the utility of clinical whole-exo- University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. me sequencing (WES) in individuals with undiagnosed and severe forms of ID and EE, and the feasibility of its implementation in routine practice by a small regional genetic center. mRNA decay is an essential and active process that allows cells to conti- Methods: We performed WES in a cohort of 43 unrelated individuals with nuously adapt gene expression to internal and environmental cues. There severe forms of ID and/or EE. All individuals had undergone multiple cli- are two mRNA degradation pathways: 3’ to 5’ and 5’ to 3’. The DCPS protein nical evaluations and diagnostic tests over the years, with no definitive dia- is the scavenger mRNA decapping enzyme which functions in the last step gnosis. Sequencing data analysis and interpretation were carried out at the of the 3´ end mRNA decay pathway. We have identified a DCPS pathogenic Dijon University Hospital Molecular Genetics Laboratory. mutation in a large family with three affected individuals presenting with Results: The molecular diagnosis rate of WES reached 32,5% (14 of 43 in- a novel recessive syndrome consisting of craniofacial anomalies, intellec- dividuals), with pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants associated with tual disability and neuromuscular defects. Using patient’s primary cells, six autosomal dominant (ARID1B, CTNNB1, DYRK1A, SHANK3, NAA10 and we show that this homozygous splice mutation results in a DCPS loss-of- TBR1), five autosomal recessive (ADCK3, GFER, SCN10A, TAF2 and SL
C13 A5 function allele. Diagnostic biochemical analyses using various m7G cap de- in two families) and two X-linked (CU
L4 B, and SL
C16 A2) conditions. Genetic rivatives as substrates reveal no DCPS enzymatic activity in patient’s cells. diagnosis had implications for a personalised clinical management in four Our results implicate DCPS and more generally RNA catabolism, as a critical families, including prenatal diagnosis test in one family. cellular process for neurological development, normal cognition and orga- Interpretation: Our data emphasize the clinical utility and feasibility of WES nismal homeostasis in humans. in individuals with undiagnosed forms of ID and EE, highlight the necessity Grant References of close collaborations between ordering physicians, molecular geneticists, • Strategic Positioning Fund on Genetic Orphan Diseases (grant number: bioinformaticians and researchers for enhanced data interpretation, and SPF2012/005) from A*STAR, Singapore. support the use of WES as a first-line test for individuals with severe neuro- • Agence Nationale pour la Recherche (grant number: ANR-11-BSV8-009- developmental disorders. 02 and ANR-10-LABX-0030-INRT managed under the program Investisse- PM08.14 ments d’Avenir ANR-10-IDEX- 0002-02). DYRK1A haploinsufficiency, a novel frequent cause of microcephaly PM08.12 and developmental delay? Arginine supplementation in De Barsy syndrome due to ALDH18A1 C. Deshpande1, F. Flinter1, L. Robert1, M. Ryten1, D. Lim2, J. Clayton-Smith3, S. Price4, U. Kini5, L. Bicknell6, P. Carroll6, M. Wilson7, N. Ragge8, A. McNeill8, K. Devriendt9, J. J. Louw10, mutations M. Gewillig10, C. Olgivie11, M. Holder-Espinasse1, and DECIPHER consortium; Y. Capri1, D. Gras1, C. Baumann1, E. Bourrat1, S. Dorgeret1, M. Elmaleh1, D. Martinelli2, J. 1Clinical Genetics Department, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2West Midlands Haeberle3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,4, A. Verloes1,5; Regional Clinical Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Centre for Genomic 1CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France, 2Bambino Gesu Children‘s Hospital, Rome, Italy, Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Clinical Genetics Department, Northampton, 3University Children‘s Hospital, Zurich, Germany, 4INSERM U1141, Paris, France, United Kingdom, 5Clinical Genetics Department, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6MRC Institute 5INSERM U676, Paris, France. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 7Clinical Genetics Unit, The Children‘s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 8Clinical Genetics Department, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 9Centre of Human De Barsy syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 10Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Leuven, Belgium, by intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, progeroid appearance, 11Cytogenetics Department, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. corneal clouding, joints hypermobility, osteopenia, athetoid movements and mental retardation. Dysmorphic aspect of the face and the skin inclu- des microcephaly, frontal bossing, large dysplastic ears, thin lips, cutis laxa, DYRK1A has been the most extensively studied chromosome 21 gene during wrinkled atrophic skin and reduced subcutaneous fat. To our knowledge, the last decade due to the correlation with Down syndrome neuropatho- only two cases of De Barsy syndrome associated with blood vessels tortuo- logies. It is known to be expressed in adult human brain with the highest sity have been described. level of expression in the cerebellum. It is closely linked with brain growth De Barsy syndrome is genetically heterogeneous since 2 genes have been in a gene dosage dependent manner. DYRK1A haploinsufficiency induces a identified: ALDH18A1 encoding delta1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase reduced brain size in mice whereas a DYRK1A gain-of-function model would (
P5 CS) and the gene encoding pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1(PYCR1). exhibit increased brain volume. DYRK1A has been implicated in tau phos- Both genes are involved in proline biosynthesis pathway but pathological phorylation and is becoming an attractive drug target since its overexpres- mechanisms leading to the syndrome are still misunderstood. Some pati- sion may induce Down Syndrome-like neurobiological alterations. ents carrying homozygote ALDH18A1 mutations have low level of proline, Dedlee tnioonvos or mutations involving DYRK1A have been reported in adses oncoivao- arginine, citrulline and ornithine. tion with intellectual disability (ID) and microcephaly. We have identified We report the case of a boy displaying all the features of De Barsy syn- 3 deletions at 21q22.12 including DYRK1A and 8 DYRK1A drome including specific profile of plasmatic amino acid chromatography. mutations in 11 unrelated patients through exome sequencing via the DDD He had also arterial tortuosity (which has been already reported twice in project and other collaborations. All patients presented with microcephaly ALDH18A1 mutated patients) and his CT scan showed calcifications which and ID. Ten patients presented with growth retardation, epilepsy and beha- has never been described yet in De Barsy syndrome. This patient carried viour issues. Additional features such as cleft palate, eye, brain and heart compound heterozygote ALDH18A1 mutations. malformations were identified. According to the role of 
P5 CS in the proline biosynthesis and as it was al- We will review our patients’ findings and compare them with those pre- ready done for another patient of the literature, supplementation with ar- viously reported to further delineate the phenotypic spectrum of patients ginine was tried during one year but no improvement was observed on the with DYRK1A abnormalities. We will also review public expression data set psychomotor development. This failure suggest that disturbance of proline on fetal and adult human brain to understand the underlying molecular me- biosynthesis in 
P5 CS deficiency would not be responsible of the neurologi- chanisms for this emerging syndrome. cal phenotype. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANDDY,R UK1KA |s WhouWldW be. EadSdHedG t.oO tRheG list of genes responsible for syndrom 1ic 5 I 3DABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index comprising microcephaly and epilepsy, such as ARID1B, SCN2A, ANKRD11, velopment of early Alzheimer’s disease-like dementia in adults with Down SATB2 and SYNGA
P1 . syndrome. Further studies should be performed to evaluate potential use- P
S08 .15 fulness of this marker in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Myosin-18B and mathematical ability in independent cohorts: lack of The study was sponsored by the Polish National Science Centre (DEC-2011- replication in independent cohorts /03/B/NZ5/01328). S. Fajutrao Valles1, K. A. Pettigrew1, K. Moll2, K. Northstone3, S. Ring3, C. Pennell4, C. P
S08 .17 Wang4, R. Leavett5, M. E. Hayiou-Thomas5, P. Thompson6, N. H. Simpson7, S. E. Fisher8, The Comprehensive genetic and metabolic investigation of undiagnosed SLI Consortium, A. J. O. Whitehouse9, M. J. Snowling10, D. F. Newbury10, S. Paracchini1; early onset epileptic encephalopathies 1School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom, 2Department S. M. Papuc1, K. Steindl1, L. Abela2, P. Joset1, B. Oneda1, L. Simmons2, D. Mathis2, B. of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics, and Psychotherapy, Ludwig- Schmitt2, G. Wohlrab2, L. Crowther2, M. Zweier1, L. Gogoll1, M. Papik1, B. Plecko2, A. Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 3School of Social and Community Medicine, Rauch1; University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4School of Women‘s and Infants‘ Health, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Division of Child University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia, 5Department of Psychology, Neurology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. University of York, York, United Kingdom, 6Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, St Andrews, United Kingdom, 7Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 8Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Early-onset epileptic encephalopathies (EOEEs) represent a heterogeneous Australia, Crawley, Australia, 10St. John‘s College, University of Oxford, Oxford, United group of neurological disorders, often characterized by therapy-resistant Kingdom. seizures, electroencephalographic abnormalities as well as motor and co- gnitive deficits or decline. Despite the poor prognosis, early diagnosis in af- fected children may contribute to improve disease management and enables Dyscalculia (or mathematical ability) is a condition where mathematical genetic counseling. Due to excessive heterogeneity in EOEEs, clarification of ability is severely impaired. Twin studies suggest that it is partly caused by a the etiology is difficult. We therefore studied the usefulness of comprehen- genetic component, which is yet to be understood at the molecular level. Re- sive genetic and metabolomic testing in 63 consecutive patients with EOEE cently, a coding variant (rs133885) in the Myosin-18B gene was shown to be followed in the pediatric neurology division. We performed high-resolution associated with mathematical abilities with a specific effect among children chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) using the Affymetrix Cytoscan HD with dyslexia. This association represents one of the most significant genetic array and high coverage (average more than 290fold) whole exome trio se- associations reported to date for mathematical abilities. However, this asso- quencing (WES) using the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. 6.3% of patients ciation has not been replicated before. We conducted a replication analysis showed clearly pathogenic CNVs. In 5 (26.3%) out of 19 trios analyzed so in different cohorts characterised with maths-related measures. The study far by WES, deleterious mutations in disease causing genes were identified; was conducted primarily using the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and 2 (40%) of them represent autosomal dominant mutations, 2 (40%) were Children (ALSPAC) (N=3819), which was adequately powered for this ana- inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and 1 (20%) was an X-linked lysis. We tested additional cohorts including the York Cohort (N=291), the condition. Furthermore, in another 5 (26.3%) trios we found deleterious Specific Language Impairment Consortium (SLIC) (N=367) and the Raine variants in genes previously reported in association with epilepsy and/or Cohort (N=667). Cohorts were stratified for a definition of dyslexia where ID, but not described in EOEEs. Metabolome analysis in plasma was so far possible. We did not observe any associations between rs133885 in Myosin- completed in 36 patients and revealed abnormal profiles in 5 patients. In 18B and mathematical abilities among individuals with dyslexia or in the one case a novel plasma biomarker could be identified and matched with the general population. Our results then suggest that the Myosin-18B variant is mutated gene supporting the functional relevance of the respective mutati- unlikely to be a main factor contributing to mathematical abilities. on. Therefore, CMA and WES is a powerful diagnostic tool in EOES revealing SP is a Royal Society University Research Fellow. The study in the ALSPAC a diagnosis in at least 33% of patients. cohort was supported by [Grant number G0800523/8647] and [Grant PM08.18 ref:102215/2/13/2]. The Raine study was supported by [Grant 572613] Genetic diagnosis in early infantile epileptic encephalopathy and and [Grant MOP 82893]. The work in the University of Oxford was suppor- severe neurodevelopmental delay using a gene panel: Our experience ted by [Grant number 1004065] [G1000569/1 and MR/J003719/1] and and results so far. [090532/Z/09/Z]. The study in the SLIC cohort was supported by [060774 N. E. Trump1, A. McTague2, M. Kurian2, A. Papandreou3, A. Ngoh2, L. Jenkins1, R. Scott4, C. and 076566]. Boustred5; PM08.16 1North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Neurosciences Unit, UCL-Institute of Child Health, London, United MTRNR2
L12 : A candidate blood marker of early Alzheimer’s disease- Kingdom, 3Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4North East Thames like dementia Clinical Genetics, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5North East M. Bik-Multanowski1, J. J. Pietrzyk1, A. Midro2, B. Stasiewicz-Jarocka2, A. Dobosz1; Thames Regional Genetics Service, London, United Kingdom. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland. The early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE) syndromes are a hetero- geneous group of conditions characterised by intractable seizures and deve- Histological changes constantly reported in autopsied brain tissue of lopmental delay or regression. We describe the successful implementation adult patients with Down syndrome are identical with those observed in of a gene panel into diagnostic service, our experience so far and the results Alzheimer’s disease. Interestingly, many adults with Down syndrome never from 400 patients. present with cognitive deterioration whereas in others, Alzheimer’s disea- Two different custom enrichments (SureSelect, Agilent and TSCA, Illumina) se-like dementia develops already in the fifth decade of life. were used to target 45 genes associated with EIEE and developmental delay The aim of the study was to identify variations of genome expression in followed by sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq. The custom SureSelect panel blood that could serve as markers of early dementia in adults with Down performed significantly better than TSCA and is now our chosen platform syndrome. for this panel which has now been expanded to 66 genes. Methods: Mutations in 21 different genes were identified in 67 patients giving a detec- Cognitive assessment was performed in a cohort of 48 adults with Down tion rate of 17%. The most frequently mutated genes were SCN2A (11 pati- syndrome with subsequent microarray-based analysis of whole genome ex- ents), CDK
L5  and KCNQ2 (6 patients each). We found mutations in a number pression in leukocytes. The participants of the study were stratified with of genes in patients with electroclinical phenotypes not typical for the gene. regard to their age and cognitive status to allow for comparison of group- Given genetic heterogeneity and phenotypic pleiotropy in EIEE, the panel specific expression profiles. is proving a useful and popular diagnostic tool for Neurologists and Clini- Results: cal Geneticists, thereby allowing better disease prognostication and genetic Analysis of microarray data revealed highly significant diMffeTrReNncRe2sL b1e2tween counselling for these families, as well as reducing the number and cost of groups of younger patients with severe cognitive disability and of older conventional diagnostic tests. patients without dementia with regard to expression of gene, which is known to be associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Subsequent com- P
S08 .19 parison of another subgroup of younger patients with documented cogni- Recurrent CNVs within 17q12 region found in Bulgarian patients with tive deterioration and the above group of older patients without dementia complex epileptic syndromes gave very similar results. V. Peycheva1, N. Ivanova1, S. Zhelyazkova2, M. Bozhidarova3, E. Slavkova4, G. Sarailieva4, Conclusion: T1h5e4 findings of the study suggest a proteE cS tiH veG ro 2 le0 o1 f 5 M | T RG NL RA 2LS 1G 2 O inW de, -SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index G. Maksimov4, D. Deneva4, V. Dimova5, I. Litvinenko3, I. Tournev2, V. Bozhinova4, V. Mitev1, P
S08 .21 A. Jordanova6, R. Kaneva1; A rare instability event in the FMR1 locus: clinical, molecular and 1Molecular Medicine Center and Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, genetic counselling implications Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital M. Soeiro e Sá1, I. Marques2,3, O. Moldovan1, P. Jorge2,3, A. Fonseca4, A. Paris4, R. Santos2,3, “Alexandrovska”, Department of Neurology, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, A. Sousa1; 3University Pediatrics Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University-Sofia, 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Clinic of Child Neurology, University Hospital of Neurology and Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Psychiatry “St’ Naum”, Department of Neurology, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Portugal, 2Unidade de Genética Molecular, Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto de Bulgaria, 5Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment „Prof. Dr Stoyan Kirkovich“, Magalhães, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Unidade Multidisciplinar de Stara Zagora, Bulgaria, 6Neurogenetics Group, VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, Investigação Biomédica, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4PIN-Progresso Infantil, Carcavelos, Portugal. Copy number variations (CNVs) often result from non-allelic homologous Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by an expansion of a CGG repeat in the recombination (NAHR) during meiosis. They are frequent cause of intellec- 5’UTR region of the FMR1 gene to over 200 triplets. In typical FXS cases, tual disability (ID) and epilepsy. In the present study we performed compa- silencing of the FMR1 gene due to methylation of its promoter precludes rative genomic hybridization (aCGH) using Agilent Microarray Kit, 4x180K protein expression. Loss of the FMR1 protein leads to the physical, neuro- in a sample of 71 Bulgarian patients with epilepsy and ID. cognitive and behavioural FXS features. Somatic mosaics in the FMR1 locus In 11 patients recurrent microaberrations within 17q12 region were found, are uncommon and can be due either to the presence of alleles with various approximately 1 Mb distal from the breakpoints of the classical 17q12 de- CGG repeat sizes or epigenetic differences in the extent of methylation. Mo- letion/duplication syndromes. Four of them carried microduplications and saicism for more than two alleles is a particularly rare finding, although it seven - microdeletions. All of the examined patients show overlapping phe- has been previously described. These phenomena hamper prediction of the notype, involving generalized tonic-clonic, myoclonic and absence seizures, disease prognosis. ID, behavior problems, speech impairment. Some additional features are Herein, we report two independent male cases with a phenotype compa- ataxia, hypotonia, facial dysmorphisms and memory problems. All of the tible with mosaic FXS who show atypical mosaic patterns for CGG repeat CNVs vary in size between 95 and 359 Kb, but the minimum shared region number, one a mosaic for a full mutation/normal allele and the other for includes CACNB1 gene, encoding beta subunit of voltage- dependent Ca2+ a full mutation/premutation/normal allele. Their mothers were carriers of channel. This gene is suggested as a strong candidate, responsible for epi- the premutation. Southern blot analysis, still considered the gold standard lepsy in mice. Moreover, mutations of a paralog of CACNB1- CACNB4 are as- for molecular diagnosis of FXS, enabled the characterization of different size sociated with some types of epileptic conditions. Three of the deletions en- mosaics in both cases. compass part of FBX
L20  gene, implicated in brain functions by modulating The mechanisms of trinucleotide repeat instability in the FMR1 locus are neuronal synaptic plasticity. This gene is ubiquitously expressed in brain still not fully understood, although several have been proposed. Likewise, and loss of function mutations in mice cause histopathological and behavior it is still not clear when the repeat expansion occurs (pre-zygotic vs. post- abnormalities. Therefore, disruptions of FBX
L20  gene might contribute to zygotic models). We discuss the possible mechanisms of repeat instability in the complex epileptic phenotype seen in our patients. Further investigations our cases and present arguments in favour and against both repeat expan- are needed to elucidate the effect of the microaberrations and to clarify the sion models. Implications for clinical management, molecular diagnosis and phenotype-genotype correlations. genetic counselling are discussed. The study was supported by DTK02/67/2009, funded by NSF. PM08.22 PM08.20 Rapid and cost-effective first-tier tool for screening Fragile X Mental Mendelian disorders through exome sequencing Retardation 1 expansions using triplet-primed PCR and melt curve J. Botet1, P. Maietta1, M. Peña-Vilabelda1, A. Fernandez-Jaén2, D. Martín Fdez.-Mayoralas2, analysis A. Patiño3, I. Espejo Portero4, M. Alonso Cerezo5, S. Álvarez1; I. Rajan Babu1, H. Law2,3, C. Yoon2, C. G. Lee1,4,3, S. S. Chong1,5; 1NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Quirón, Madrid, Spain, 3Clínica 1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2KK Women’s and Children’s Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 4Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 3Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Spain, 5Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain. Singapore, 4National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 5National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. BACKGROUND Fragile X Mental Retardation 1 FMR1 For the identification of molecular defects in patients with suspected gene- IntrodFuMctRio1n: CGG-triplet repeat expansions in the 5’-untranslated region of tic disorders, wholed ee xnoomvoe sequencing (WES) has now entered in medical the X-linked ( ) gene are associated with practice as a diagnostic approach and trios analysis as the most effective three related-conditions, including fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia strategy to identify causal variants. syndrome, fragile X-associated primary ovarian insufficiency and fragile X METHODS TM syndrome. The high-cost factor anFdM/Ro1r the labor-intensive nature of the cur- We performed exome sequencing using the Ion AmpliSeq Exome technolo- rently available molecular diagnostic approaches prohibit their application gy (Life Technologies) with Ion ProtonTM. Sequencing reads were analysed as a first-tier screening test for mutation in large-scale population- using Torrent Suite software. Trio annotated variants using ION Reporter based screening programs. We tested the utility of a simplified first-line were prioritized with an in-house analytical pipeline to identify causative screening strategy that relies on melt peak temperature (Tm) analysis of genetic variants. direct triplet-primed PCR amplicons (dTP-PCR MCA). Correlation between RESULTS Tm and CGG-repeat size based on capillary electrophoresis (CE) of FdMTPR-1P CR We present data on the first 50 probands for whom referring physicians or- amplicons was also evaluated. dered whole-exome sequencing trio analysis. Patients were mainly children Materials and Methods: The assays were initially optimized on 29 re- with neurologic disorders including developmental and/or speech delay, ference DNA samples, followed by a blinded validation on 107 previously autism, and intellectual disability. We identified 5 pathogenic and 14 pro- characterized patient DNA samples. bably pathogenic mutated alleles that were highly likely to be causative in Results: Samples carrying an expanded allele generated dTP-PCR melFt MprRo1- 18 of the 50 patients, achieving a 36% molecular diagnostic rate. Among files with pronounced rightward shift to higher Tm range. All normal and ex- the 18 patients, 1 had X-linked dominant, 2 X-linked recessive, 1 audteo nsoomvoa”l pansion carriers were accurately classified by dTP-PCR MCA, and the recessive, and 14 autosomal dominant diseases. The X-linked dominant va- genotypic classification of the clinical samples was completely concordant riant and all of the autosomal dominant mutant alleles occurred “ . with the previouslyF dMeRte1rmined genotypes as well as the dTP-PCR CE re- Additionally, variants of uncertain significance were identified in 21 pati- sults. In addition, we also tested the ability of the assays in detecting low- ents. These could be novel genes, however further studies are needed to level mosaicism for expansion using artificial DNA mixtures. define its role as causative events. Conclusions: When used in a large-scale screening setting, this simple and CONCLUSIONS cost-effective MCA-based first-line screening tool could rapidly screen out We have identified the underlying genetic defect in 36% of consecutive the large majority of unaffected individuals, thus minimizing the number of patients referred for evaluation of a possible genetic condition using WES. samples that need to be analyzed by Southern analysis. These data allow us to conclude that trio analysis is a powerful and effective Financial Support diagnostic method for mendelian disorders. This work was supported by Departmental research funds. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 155ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P
S08 .23 A novel HCN1 mutation not associated with epileptic encephalopathy E. Bettella1, R. Polli1, E. Leonardi1, L. Zoccante2, A. Murgia1; segmental duplications that make it prone to non-allelic homologous re- 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment, Department of Women’s and combination (NAHR). It can be divided into a proximal region containing Children’s Health, University of Padova, Padua, Italy, 2Neuropsychiatry Unit, Department 16 genes and a distal region containing 13 genes. Array-Comparative Ge- of Life Science and Reproduction G.B. Rossi Hospital, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. nomic Hybridization (array-CGH) has led to the identification of new syn- dromes including microdeletion 1q21.1 and 1q21.1 microduplication. Cli- nical features of patients include intellectual disability (ID) and dysmorphic The hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channel (HCN1-4) features. Clinical variability and lack of distinct facial dysmorphisms have family has important roles in the control of heart rate and neuronal excita- been reported in individuals affected by these imbalances, making genetic bility. HCN channels selectively conduct K+/Na+ inward current after hy- counseling very challenging. perpolarized potential. In neurons, HCN channels participate in a variety Oligonucleotide array-CGH analysis using an Agilent 180K platform was per- of functions among which excitabily, dendritic integration and plasticity. formed in 1200 patients with ID, autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and con- Animal models have indicated that dysregulation of these channels is as- genital anomalies. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis usingc sociated with several forms of epilepsy including febrile seizures, absence SureFISH probes was performed in patients for validation and in parents to and temporal lobe epilepsy as well as other neurological disorders. Recently determine the origin of 1q21.1 rearrangements. HCN1 point mutations have been found in individuals with early onset epi- We identified 8 probands with imbalances involving the distal 1q21.1 region leptic encephalopathy with features resembling Dravet syndrome but with (6 deletions and 2 duplications) and 1 proband with a duplication invol- different progression over time. All of them developed intellectual disability ving the proximal region. Inheritance was unknown in 5 patients, 2 micro- and autistic traits. deletions had arisen de novo and 2 microdeletions was inherited from an Here we report the case of a 9 year old girl with a Rett like phenotype, cha- unaffected mother. All 9 patients with 1q21.1 imbalances revealed mental racterized by intellectual disability, hand stereotypies, absent speech, nega- retardation, microcephaly/macrocephaly and dysmorphic features. tive brain MRI and EEG data and no history of epilepsy. By NGS approach, Array-CGH is a useful tool for 1q21.1 rearrangements screening. Duplica- with the use of a targeted intellectual disability/epilepsy gene panel, we tions were less frequent in our cohort, consistent with recent studies for found the girl to carry a novel de novo heterozygous missense mutation in NAHR. Patients with 1q21.1 imbalances have a considerable phenotypic di- exon 4 of the HCN1 gene. This mutation is located in the glycine-tyrosine- versity that could be associated with incomplete penetrance and variable glycine (GYG) motif, which constitutes the ion selectivity filter typical of K+ expressivity. Family studies and further clinical data are essential to impro- permeable channels. This motif is highly conserved structurally and functio- ve genetic counselling. nally during evolution. PM08.26 This is the first report of a HCN1 mutation involved in a neurodevelopmen- PTB
P1  Gene Synonymous Mutation In Intellectual Disability tal phenotype without epilepsy. A. Alkhateeb1, W. Habbab1, S. Aburahma2; PM08.24 1Qatar Biomedical Research Institute, Doha, Qatar, 2Jordan University of Science and A novel HDA
C8  mutation in a two-year-old girl with a CdLS- Technology, Irbid, Jordan. overlapping features but unrecognizable facial gestalt B. Graffmann1, A. Green1, F. Kaeiser2, M. Stefanova1; Objectives: 1University Hospital Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 2Institut für Humangenetik, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. A patient with intellectual disability, developmental delay and basal ganglia abnormal signal on MRI was evaluated for disease gene iden- tMifeictahtoiodns.: We aimed to identify the gene responsible for this patient’s phe- The HDA
C8  gene encodes a regulatory factor of the cohesin complex. While notype. several mutations in HDA
C8  have been identified in patients with Cornelia- The patient is Jordanian Arab from a consanguineous marriage. de-Lange-syndrome (CdLS) one single mutation identified in a large family Samples from her parents and two unaffected sisters were also collected with Wilsson-Turner-syndrome (WTS). and DNA extracted. Homozygosity mapping was analyzed Ruseisnugl tIsll:umina We have performed gene-panel-sequencing analysis on a two-year-old girl chip microarray. Candidate gene was sequenced usPinTgB P
S1 anger sequencing. with unclear diagnosis and found a novel de-novo HDA
C8  mutation. The Bioinformatic analysis was done utilizing web-based tools. Diffe- identified mutation (c.910+1G>A) affects the conserved splice-donor site of rent homozygosity intPeTrvBaPl1s were characterized. (poylpyrimidine the HDA
C8  gene and is predicted to results in an aberrantly spliced mRNA tract-binding protein 1) gene was identified as a candidate gene within a that might be degraded by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay or encode a homozygous interval. relative expression level contributes to esta- truncated HDA
C8  protein. blishing neural-specific PaTltBePrn1ative splicing patterns and is a key player in The patient was born to healthy non-consanguineous parents, aged 38 mo- alternative splicing of many genes associated to lineage-specific cell diffe- ther and 42 father. The pregnancy and delivery were uneventful, born at rentiation. Sequencing identified a homozygous silent mutation in 38 w.g., birth weight 2700 g, birth length 47 cm. The girl presented with exon 7 (c.708C>T, pH236H) that co-segregated within the family. a growth delay (length at -4SD, weight -3SD, head circumference -3SD), This mutation was not reported in any database before nor was it detec- delayed fontanel closure, and delayed teeth eruption. She showed delayed ted in 400 control chromosomes from the same population. Bioinformatic psychomotor development, sitting steadily at the age of 15 months, did not testing of DNA sequence by exon splicing enhancer finder identified the walk and had no speech by the age of two years. The following dysmorphic sCeoqnucelnucseio wn:here the mutation lies as an exonic enhancer bound by SRSF1 features and anomalies were noticed: round face, low forehead, hypertelo- (IgM-BRCA1) with a score of 2.03. rism, deep-set eyes, epicanthus, concomitant convergent strabismus, entro- Our daPtaT BsuPg1gest that this unique homozygous mutation might pion, astigmatism, thick eyebrows, synophrys, long eyelashes, hypoplastic play a role in the pathogenesis of this patient. It is the first time to suggest supra-orbital ridges, flat zygomatic region, large nose with bread prominent the involvement of gene in the etiology of a human genetic disease. base, prominent columella, short philtrum, thin lips, medial cleft palate, mi- Functional analysis should confirm the role of this mutation. crognathia, posteriorly rotated dysplastic ears, short neck, rocker-bottom P
S08 .27 feet, and impaired conductive hearing. Brain MRI showed hypoplastic ver- Expanding the phenotype associated with de novo mutations of the mis and wide ventricles. No inner organ anomalies. KDM5B gene The phenotypical spectrum of HDA
C8  mutations is very broad and may not T. Bienvenu1, K. Poirier1, C. Zordan2, N. Lebrun1, G. Viot3, N. Bahi-Buisson4, D. Lacombe5, necessarily be recognized as CdLS. P. Billuart1; P
S08 .25 1Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, Inserm U1016, CNRS (UMR8103), Paris, Chromosome 1q21.1 recurrent imbalances in patients with France, 2Service de Genetique Medicale, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 3Unité de Génétique, Maternité de Port-Royal, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 4Service de developmental delay revealed by Array-CGH Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Service de Génétique L. M. Pires1, S. I. Ferreira1, P. Paiva1, M. C. Pinto1, A. Jardim1, C. Pais1, M. Venâncio2, J. B. Médicale, Hôpital Pellegrin, Paris, France. Melo1,3,4, I. M. Carreira1,3,4; 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CIMAGO – Centro Histone lysine methylation influences processes such as gene expression de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, Genética e Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 4CNC - and DNA repair. Thirty Jumonji C (JmjC) domain-containing proteins have Centro de Neurociências e Biologia Celular, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. been identified and phylogenetically clustered into seven subfamilies. Most JmjC domain-containing proteins have been shown to possess histone de- methylase activity toward specific histone methylation marks.One of these 
C1 h5ro6mosome region 1q21.1 is structurallyE SveHryG c o2m0p1le5x f|o GrmLeAd SbGy sOevWer,a lS COsuTbLfaAmNiliDes,, tUheK K |D WM5W faWmi.lyE, SinHcluGd.eOd RfoGur members. KDM5A has been pre-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index viously demonstrated as involved in autosomal recessive intellectual defici- ID syndromes, sporadic cases of unspecific ID, etc.) totaling 147 Lithuanian ency (ID), while KDM5C has been reported mutated in nonsyndromic and patients with ID. Patients were first screened by arrayCGH, and 17 patients/ syndromic form of X-linked ID with or without epilepsy, short stature, or be- families (12%) were found to carry causative CNVs such as del10q22.1- havioral problems. Interestingly, de novo loss-of-function and missense mu- q22.3, del6q16.1-q22.31, del17p13.2-p13.3 and mos dup8p11.22-q11.23. tations in KDM5B were identified in patients with ID and autism spectrum The remaining patients are currently being exome sequenced. The first disorder but also in unaffected individuals. Here, we report three novel de results of these analyses include several potentially causative variants. In novo mutations in the KDM5B gene identified by whole-exome sequencing particular the genes OTOG, PKHD1
L1 , IFI44, GFI1 and SYT
L3  were found and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. A frameshift mutation c.2642_2643del to carry extremely rare variants in evolutionary conserved codons as com- CT was identified in a girl with severe epileptic encephalopathy, a splicing pound heterozygote in families with two affected individuals. The validation mutation c.808+1G>A was found in 17 year-old boy with delayed speech de- of these findings through identification of more patients with mutations in velopment, mild facial features including prominent nasal bridge, and highly these genes, in vivo complementation, as well as engineering of animal mo- arched palate, and moderate intellectual deficiency, and a missense mutati- dels is warranted and under way. on c.1642C>T (p.Leu748Phe) described as probably damaging by bioinfor- PM08.30 matics tools in a 5-year-old boy with developmental delay, autism features, Further delineation of MEF2C-related autosomal dominant ID: 6 novel and mild facial features. We will discuss the effect of mutation position (such mutations and one intragenic deletion as the deletion of the C-terminal part or mutation in the JmjC domain) and M. Zweier1, A. Baumer1, C. Zweier2, E. K. Bijlsma3, M. Reuter2, E. A. Peeters3, M. the influence of double/multiple events in other genes involved in neuronal Koopmans3, M. Zollino4, E. Wey1, A. Gregor2, C. Kraus2, A. Reis2, A. Rauch1; function (such as PIGA, Shank3, and Shroom4 also found mutated in these 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich-Schlieren, Switzerland, patients) on the clinical phenotype. 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, PM08.28 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. GenIDA: a social network and database to inform on natural history of monogenic forms of intellectual disability and autism F. Colin1, T. Mazzucotelli2, P. Parrend2,3, A. Deruyver2, J. L. Mandel1,4,5; Haploinsufficiency of MEF2C, encoding a member of the myocyte enhancer 1Translational medicine and neurogenetics dept., Institut de génétique et de biologie factor 2 (MEF2) subfamily of transcription factors, was recently identified as moléculaire et cellulaire (IGBMC) – INSERM U964 – CNRS UMR7104 – University of Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 2Engineering, informatics and imaging sciences laboratory the underlying cause of the 5q14.3q15 microdeletion syndrome, characte- (ICube) – CNRS UMR 7357 – ENGEES – INSA of Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 3ECAM, rized by profound muscular hypotonia, severe intellectual disability, early- Strasbourg-Europe, Schiltigheim, France, 4Genetic diagnostic laboratory, CHU, onset epilepsy and variable other anomalies. Including the first description Strasbourg, France, 5Collège de France, Chaire de génétique humaine, Paris, France. of the phenocritical role of MEF2C in 2010, eleven patients with de novo point mutations or small indels were reported and only seven of them were described in detail. Intellectual disability (ID) has an incidence of 2% and overlaps with autism. We now report on six novel patients with de novo point mutations or small It is characterized by a striking genetic heterogeneity that underlies a phe- indels in MEF2C and one patient with an intragenic deletion identified by notypic heterogeneity in severity and in associated medical problems. Pro- mutational screening of patients referred for Rett, Angelman or Pitt-Hop- gress in genome analysis has allowed the identification of many recurrent kins syndrome-like conditions. We provide functional characterization of CNVs and of more than 400 genes implicated in monogenic forms of ID/ the two detected missense mutations, both affecting the highly conserved autism. An increasing number of genetic diagnoses are made in individuals MADS domain, by expression analysis of MEF2C and phenotypically related with ID/autism but the genetic heterogeneity renders extremely difficult genes in vivo. In contrast to the generally observed absence of speech one of the determination of genotype-phenotype correlations and natural history. our patients harboring a novel missense mutation is the first reported pati- Symptomatic treatments for comorbidities are proposed with limited op- ent being able to speak several single words at the age of 4 years functioning portunities to assess their efficacies or potential adverse effects. at the mild to moderate intellectual disability level (IQ55). In addition we We have initiated the development of an alternative database model for observed absence of seizures in the second patient harboring a missense specific genetic causes of ID/autism, organized in a social network format mutation indicating a milder phenotypic expression in some patients with whereby most clinical information is entered by the family of the patient missense mutations. In summary we expand the mutational spectrum of based on wide range questionnaires translated in different languages. Con- intragenic MEF2C defects, further delineate the associated phenotype re- tacts between families affected by the same genetic cause is possible in an sembling Rett and Angelman syndrome, and point to a milder clinical course anonymous way, creating gene or CNV specific social-networks to which in- in patients with missense mutations. terested professionals could be associated, akin to disease specific patients P
S08 .31 associations. Anonymized summary data will be accessible to families and Clinical Exome Sequencing (CES) in Complex Syndromic Disorders to professionals. We will present the structure and features of the GenIDA I. Vogl1, S. Doelken1, S. H. Eck1, S. Küçük1, S. Rath1, V. Hasselbacher1, I. Rost1, D. Wahl1, H. G. social network that is currently in its beta testing phase. Klein1, S. Chahrokh-Zadeh2; This innovative strategy to collect information on natural history and co- 1Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics, Martinsried, Germany, 2Center morbidities of rare monogenic forms of ID/autism will promote families’ for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany. empowerment and hopefully impact patients’ care. The setting up of patient e-cohorts should favor international clinical studies. Supported by USIAS and RaDiCo. Intellectual disability (ID) is defined by an IQ below 70 and observed in ap- P
S08 .29 proximately 1.5 -2% of live births. Although ID can be caused by a variety UNIGENE: Familial intellectual disability in Lithuanian patients of non-genetic factors, genetic traits contribute in 50% of the cases. 40% L. Ambrozaitytė1, A. Morkūnienė1, Ž. Čiuladaitė1, E. Preikšaitienė1, E. Pranckevičienė1, of these genetic cases can be elucidated by conventional diagnostic such as T. Rančelis1, L. Cimbalistienė1, L. Gueneau2, K. Männik2, N. Voisin2, A. Reymond2, V. chromosomal analysis, aCGH, and fragile X testing, while 60% remain un- Kučinskas1; solved.In a pilot study, we used CES in 15 patients with ID in which con- 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, ventional diagnostics yielded no causal aberration. Enrichment of target Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, genes was performed using the Illumina TruSight One Sequencing Panel Switzerland. (4,813 genes associated with known clinical phenotypes). The analysis also included the unaffected parents (trio approach) and was performed on the HiSeq2500 Next-Generation Sequencing platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, Intellectual disability (ID) affects 1-3% of the population. Genetic mutations USA). Data analysis was performed using CLCbio Genomics Server (v5.5.2) account for about half of the 60% of cases that are currently undiagnosed. (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). 1,157 ID associated genes of the 4,813 enriched The main aim of our Swiss and Lithuanian collaboration is to identify no- genes were chosen for further annotation and analysis. These evaluated ge- vel genome variants that cause congenital neurodevelopmental disorders. nes were known from literature or databases to be associated with ID. In 5 (UNIGENE project has received funding from Lithuanian-Swiss cooperation of 15 patients, we were able to identify the likely cause of the ID. We detec- programme to reduce economic and social disparities within the enlarged ted mutations and possible pathogenic variants in different genes: ATRX, European Union under project agreement No CH-3-ŠMM-01/04) SPG20, URO
C1 , PMM2, EXOS
C3 . All detected mutations were confirmed by We enrolled 132 families with one or two affected members according to the Sanger sequencing. Two were listed as pathogenic in the HGMD database following standardised selection criteria (IQ<70 or developmental delay (for and the patients’ phenotypes were in accordance with the description in the children under 6 years old) in cases of congenital malformations of central literature. Therefore no further analysis was required. For the 3 other po- nervous system, not previously EdeSsHcriGbe 2d 0m1u5lt i|p lGe LcoAnSgeGnOitaWl a,n SomCaOliTesL/A NtDen,t iUalKly |p aWthWogeWni.cE vSaHriaGnt.sO mRRGNA sequencing and metabolic testing 1w5er7eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index performed. supervision. Materials and Methods: Parents and one unaffected and four PM08.32 affected sibs were available for study. Disease locus was identified by linka- NGS-based panel analysis of 20 children with intellectual disability ge mapping using SNP genotype data. Whole exome sequencing was applied and their healthy parents detects sporadic and compound to find rare/novel variants at theP lToRcHusD. 1Results: The disease locus was an heterozygous mutations approximately 2-Mb region at 2p23.3 and yielded a multipoint LOD score of S. Beck-Woedl1, U. Grasshoff1, S. Waldmueller1, M. Sturm1, S. Junker1, O. Riess1, I. 3.7. Only homozygous missense p.Cys52Tyr mutation segregated Krägeloh-Mann2, J. Gburek-Augustat3, P. Bauer1; with the disease in the family. All the affected siblings were homozygous 1Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Children‘s Hospital for this mutation and the unaffected sister was not. None of thPe T9R8H cDo1ntrol Paediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine, Tuebingen, Germany, 3Children‘s samples from the Pakistani population tested positive for the mutation. The Hospital; Paediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine, Tuebingen, Germany. mutation was predicted as damaging by bioinformatics tools. en- codes a peptidyl tRNA hydrolase belonging to the PTH2 family. The protein has 140 amino acids whose sequence is totally conserved between human Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID, IQ<70) affects up to 3 % of the ge- and chimpanPzTeReH, aDn1d 52Cys is conserved across all vertebrates. The gene is neral population. Until recently the underlying cause remained unknown in expressed in many organs, including the brain. about half of the affected individuals. Next generation sequencing techni- Conclusion: is a novel gene for mild to moderate intellectual disabi- ques help to elucidate the genetic background of ID. Apart from fragile X lity. We are planning to continue the population screen and to perform gene syndrome which is a common cause of ID (7%) and which has been part expression assays in various parts of human brain. of the routine diagnostic work up for years, more than 1000 other genetic (Supported by Boğaziçi University BAP 7695) diseases for intellectual disability are known to date. P
S08 .35 Material and Methods: Following in-solution enrichment of 526 ID-linked A patient with syndromic intellectual disability and features genes (exons and splice sites), we sequenced 20 female and male affected reminiscent of Cornelia de Lange syndrome due to a de novo mutation children and their parents (trio) in whom genomic imbalances and fragile X of E
P300  syndrome had been excluded. A. Eaton, C. Smith, R. Lamont, D. Dewey, A. M. Innes, J. Parboosingh, F. P. Bernier; Results: In three patients we detected de novo dominant disease-causing va- University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. riants in the genes TUBA1A, ML
L2  and GFAP. 6 patients were diagnosed with recessive childhood disorders inherited from their parents (ASPM, PCNT, PEX2, AT
P2 A2, CP
S1  and ZFYV
E26 ). Conclusion: In summary, the stepwise Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome (RTS) is associated with growth retardation, in- analysis of the index followed by carrier testing of the parents was replaced tellectual disability, and distinctive facial features with broad thumbs and by immediate trio sequencing. This led to the direct identification of de novo toes. Causative mutations in two genes, CREBP (RT
S1 ) and E
P300  (RT
S2 ), variants and bi-allelic variants in 9 out of 20 cases. The data presented sug- have been described, accounting for approximately 75%, and 3% of cases gest that trio analysis may accelerate sequencing data interpretation and respectively. The phenotype of the RT
S2  patients is generally appreciated segregation analyses in families with cases of intellectual disability. to be milder, though only 14 cases have been reported. Recently, Woods et P
S08 .33 al (AJMG 2013) reported a novel E
P300  mutation in a patient with features High throughput sequencing in molecular diagnosis of non syndromic that overlap Cornelia de Lange syndrome ( CdLS). intellectual disability. New mutations identified within 71 genes We describe an 8 year-old girl referred for dyspmorphic features, short sta- specifically selected for non syndromic ID. ture, microcephaly, and global developmental delay. Her mother had severe F. Faletra1, A. Morgan1, I. Gandin2, P. Palumbo3, O. Palumbo3, E. Biamino4, V. Dal Col5, pre-eclampsia during her pregnancy. Trio-based whole exome sequencing E. Laurini5, S. Pricl5, P. Bosco6, M. Carella3, G. B. Ferrero4, C. Romano6, A. P. D‘Adamo7, D. identified a de novo mutation in E
P300  (c.2713_2714delCC). Her physical Vozzi2; features include full eye lashes, thin arched eyebrows, a low-hanging co- 1IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2University of trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3IRCCS Ospedale Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4University of Turin, Turin, lumella, mild micrognathia and hirsutism on her back and arms, but with Italy, 5MOSE-DEA, University of Trieste,, Trieste, Italy, 6IRCCS Associazione Oasi Maria normal thumbs and toes. Her features were reminiscent of mild CdLS. Psy- Santissima, Troina, Italy, 7Uni, Trieste, Italy. chometric testing revealed a full scale IQ in the borderline range; however subscale discrepancies were noted with relative strengths in verbal com- prehension. Additional deficits were noted on assessment of her attention, The technological improvements of the last years made possible considerab- executive function, visual perceptual processing, social perception and mo- le progresses in the knowledge of the etiology of Intellectual Disability (ID). tor skills. Her outgoing personality and verbal strengths are reminiscent of However at present very little is known about the genetic heterogeneity un- William syndrome, and her educational and social struggles are significant. derlying the Non-Syndromic form of ID (NS-ID). To investigate the genetic Our case further supports that there may be a broader phenotypic spectrum basis of NS-ID we analyzed 43 trios and 22 isolated NS-ID patients using caused by mutations in this gene, and brings into question whether testing a targeted sequencing (TS) approach. 71 NS-ID genes have been selected for E
P300  mutations in patients with CdLS may be warranted. and sequenced in all subjects. We found probable pathogenic mutations in 7 PM08.36 out of 65 patients. The pathogenic role of mutations was evaluated through Validation of PTPN23 as an intellectual disability gene through sequence comparisons and structural analysis was performed to predict the identification of a second likely disease-causing variant effect of alterations in a 3D computational model through molecular dyna- K. Wessel1, N. Nahavandi1, K. K. Kandaswamy1, A. AlHashem2, B. T. Melaiki2, A. Rolfs1,3, R. mics simulations. Additionally a genotype-phenotype correlation has been Abou Jamra1; performed. This approach allowed us to find new pathogenic mutations 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi with a detection rate close to 11% in our cohort. This result supports the Arabia, 3Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Medizinische Universität Rostock, Rostock, Germany. hypothesis that many NS-ID related genes still remain to be discovered and that unlike the syndromic form, NS-ID is a more complex phenotype, likely caused by a deep and broad interaction between genes alterations and en- vironment factors. Intellectual disability (ID) is an extremely heterogeneous disorder. In the PM08.34 last few years, whole exome sequencing (WES) has facilitated the identifica- Searching for a novel gene responsible for mild to moderate tion of many new candidate genes in which mutations may lead to ID. Howe- intellectual disability syndrome ver, often these results cannot be used in a clinical diagnostic seettt ianlg, as no E. Yıldız1, S. Mümtaz2, S. Malik2, A. Tolun1; further mutations and/or patienPtTsP hNa2v3e been described to provide a second 1Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Human Genetics Program, Department of Animal Sciences, Faculty of Biological independent validation of the initial results. Recently, Alazami . repor- Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan. ted a missense variant in the gene, c.3995G >T (p.Arg1332Leu), in one child with global developmental delay, epilepsy, brain atrophy, and some skeletal malformation. Introduction: Intellectual disability is a neurodevelopmental disorder that Alazami concluded that this gene is a candidate gene for brain atrophy and is characterized by impaired intellectual functioning, and it affects 1-3% of global developmental delay. We performed WES in an 8-year-old boy pre- the population. We investigated a consanguineous Pakistani family afflicted senting with global developmental delay and developmental regression, with mild to moderate mental retardation. The affected individuals were epilePpTsPyN, 2b3ra in atrophy, microcephaly, ataxia and abnormal movements. In poor in reasoning, judgement and mathematical skills as compared to nor- this analysis, we detecitne dsi lai choomozygous variant, c.904A>G (p.Met302Val) in m1a5l 8age mates. However, they could be trEaSinHedG f o2r 0si1m5p l|e GlifLeA taSskGsO unWde, rS COth Te LAND, g Uen Ke , | w Whi Wch Wis h .Eig Shl Hy Gco .n Ose Rrv Ged and predicted to be pathogenic by several but not all programs. We observe a significant overlap ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index symptoms between the tPwToP Npa2t3ients, and conclude that both mutations are was sequenced. Missense variations in two plausible novel genes implicated probably causative. in autosomal recessive ID were identified: lysine (K)-specific methyltrans- Therefore, mutations in are likely to be associated with an autoso- ferase 2B (KMT2B), zinc finger protein 589 (ZNF589), as well as hedgehog mal recessive form of ID with brain atrophy and epilepsy. Further symptoms acyltransferase (HHAT) with a de novo mutation with autosomal domi- such as skeletal malformation, regression and ataxia are reported in only nant mode of inheritance. The KMT2B recessive variant is the first report one of the two patients and further studies are needed to precisely delineate of recessive Kleefstra syndrome-like phenotype. Identification of plausible the specific phenotype characteristics. causative mutations for two recessive and a dominant type of ID, in genes P
S08 .37 not previously implicated in disease underscores the large genetic hetero- Title: Value of a diagnostic confirmation service by an accredited geneity of ID. These results also support the viewpoint that large number laboratory of ID genes converge on limited number of common networks i.e. ZNF589 S. Clasper1, T. Lester1, U. Kini2, H. Stewart2, A. Seller1; belongs to KRAB-domain zinc-finger proteins previously implicated in ID, 1Oxford Medical Genetics laboratories, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical HHAT is predicted to affect sonic hedgehog, which is involved in several Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. disorders with ID, KMT2B associated with syndromic ID fits the epigene- tic module underlying the Kleefstra syndromic spectrum. The association of these novel genes in three different Pakistani ID families highlights the The explosion of Next Generation sequencing has produced an unpreceden- importance of screening these genes in more families with similar pheno- ted amount of valuable data which has enabled potential characterisation types from different populations to confirm the involvement of these genes and diagnoses in disease for a vast array of patients. Many of these findings in pathogenesis of ID. are produced by research laboratories and confirmation in a diagnostic PM08.40 laboratory enables patients and their families access to publically funded Novel homozygous mutation in KPTN gene causing a familial healthcare resources through the NHS that would not otherwise be available intellectual disability-macrocephaly syndrome to them including; disease support, family testing and prenatal diagnosis S. Pajusalu1,2, T. Reimand1,2,3, K. Õunap1,3; (PND). 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, We present an audit of our referrals from the areas of paediatric develop- 2Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Department of Biomedicine, mental delay and dysmorphology covering eighteen months of our diagno- University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, stic confirmation service. We review two of these cases in more depth and Tartu, Estonia. use them to highlight the benefits of the interpretation provided by using a diagnostic service; such as providing a classification for a phenotype or re- classification of a proposed diagnosis, both of which may have implications BACKGROUND: Recently, Baple et al. (Am J Hum Genet 2014, 94(1):87-94) for patient management. described a large Amish pedigree where homozygous or compound hetero- zygous mutations in KPTN gene encoding kaptin protein resulted in a clini- PM08.38 cally distinctive syndrome consisting of macrocephaly, global developmen- KBG Syndrome: A DDD front-runner? tal delay, behavioural abnormalities, and seizures (MIM 615637). Here we T. Ashraf1, M. Irving1, N. Canham2, S. Holder2, N. Foulds3, A. Magee4, V. McConnell4, R. Fisher5, M. McEntegart6, J. Tolmie7, S. Joss7, J. Clayton-Smith8, DDD Study; report the second case of KPTN-related syndrome in two Estonian siblings 1Guys Clinical Genetics Service, London, United Kingdom, 2North West Thames with novel homozygous KPTN mutation and similar phenotype. Regional Genetics Centre, London, United Kingdom, 3Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, CASE REPORT: The probands are 32-years-old brother and 24-years-old si- Southampton, United Kingdom, 4Department of Genetic Medicine, Belfast City Hospital, ster from Estonia. The parents are non-consanguineous, but were born in Belfast, United Kingdom, 5Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 6St the same parish. The brother and sister have macrocephaly, with occipito- George‘s Clinical Genetics Service, London, United Kingdom, 7Clinical Genetics Service, frontal circumference of 63 cm (+4.5 SD) and 60 cm (+4 SD) respectively. Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 8Manchester Centre for Genomic Their intellectual disability could be classified as moderate. The verbal abi- Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom. lities are more affected than the motor development in both siblings. Beha- vioural problems and a few episodes of seizures were present only in the brother. KBG syndrome (Omim #148050) is a rare genetic disorder caused by ha- METHODS AND RESULTS: Whole exome sequencing identified homozygous ploinsufficiency of the ANKRD11 gene. The phenotype has previously been one-nucleotide frameshift duplication in KPTN gene (c.665dupA:p.Q222fs). described to include macrodontia of the mandibular central incisors, skele- Homozygosity of both affected siblings and heterozygosity of parents was tal and craniofacial anomalies as well as intellectual disability. Many sources confirmed by Sanger sequencing. SNP-array showed a 1.5 Mb homozygous quote that the cognitive deficit and the clinical features in this condition can stretch encompassing KPTN gene in both siblings. be mild, thus making it an underdiagnosed genetic condition. CONCLUSIONS: With this report we confirm the pathogenicity of KPTN gene The Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) study aims to identify the mutations and delineate the core phenotype of the novel autosomal reces- underlying genetic cause in children with developmental delay and/or con- sive genetic syndrome. We also prove the hypothesis of the first describing genital abnormalities, where conventional genetic testing has failed. Exome authors that KPTN-related syndrome is not restricted to Amish population. sequencing of the first 1000 child and parent trios found several patients This work was supported by the Estonian Research Council grant PUT355. with likely pathogenic mutations in ANKRD11. This data suggests that KBG syndrome is not as rare or as benign as initially suspected which prompted P
S08 .41 a Complementary Analysis Proposal (CAP) to further explore the phenotype Intragenic deletion of DOCK3 gene in a patient with dysphasia and of this condition. intellectual delay Questionnaires on detailed phenotypes were sent to the lead Genetic cli- T. AIT MOUHOUB1, E. LANDAI
S1 , P. FEUCHER1, A. LANNOY1, C. CARREAU1, P. JONVEAUX2, H. DAGONET1, H. EZZEDIN
E3 , M. DOCO-FENZY1,4; nicians for all of the patients identified with ANKRD11 mutations through 1CHU REIMS, REIMS, France, 2CHU NANCY, NANCY, France, 3CH CHARLEVILLE- DDD so far. The data was amalgamated and photographs of the patients MEZIERES, CHARLEVILLE-MEZIERES, France, 4EA3801, Reims, France. were obtained with parental consent. Here we present a summary of the frequently reported clinical features, characteristic dysmorphology and genotype within this cohort of patients. DOCK3 (Dedicator of Cytokinesis 3) belongs to CDM family protein which re- Recommendations have been made about diagnostic clues and management gulates several biology process involved in the engulfment of apoptotic cells strategies when this genetic diagnosis is suspected clinically. and in the cell migration. DOCK3 gene expression is restricted to the brain, P
S08 .39 notably in the occipital, frontal and temporal lobes where is the Wernicke‘s Exome sequencing identifies three novel candidate genes implicated speech area implied in speech processing. To date, there is no well-defined in intellectual disability clinical syndrome associated with DOCK3 gene mutation or deletion. The Z. Agha; only clinical publication involving DOCK3 gene evoked a patient with atten- International Islamic University Islamabad, Islamabad, Pakistan. tion deficit hyperactivity disorder-like phenotype and SL
C9 A9 and DOCK3 genes disruption. Here, we reported a 11 year-old boy presenting with a phonological and Intellectual disability (ID) is a major health problem mostly with an synthaxic dysphasia, intellectual delay, without related dysmorphia, neit- unknown etiology. Recently exome sequencing of individuals with ID iden- her deafness nor visual acuity disorder. He was born at term, with these tified novel genes implicated in the disease. Therefore the purpose of the following parameters: weight 3730 g (75th percentile)- size 50.5 cm (50th present study was to identify the genetic cause of ID in one syndromic and percentile), HC 36 cm (75th percentile). His evolution was marked by mild two non-syndromic Pakistani famEiSliHesG. W 2h0ol1e 5ex |o GmeL AofS thGreOe WID, pSrCobOanTdLsA N cD og, nU itK ive | dW elW ay, W lan.E guS aH geG i. mO pR aiG rment without motor delay. Cerebral1 M5R9IABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM08.44 Biallelic mutations in the Notch pathway regulator MIB1 in two was normal. His father and his three brothers have language impairment. brothers with syndromic intellectual disability and distinctive facial We highlighted by array CGH (Agilent - 180K) an intragenic 156 kb deletion features in DOCK3 gene located at 3p21.2. Familial exploration is in progress. This M. A. van Slegtenhorst1, R. Oostenbrink2, J. N. R. Kromosoeto1, M. E. H. Simon1, G. M. S. case is interesting because it could involve a new gene in language disorder Mancini1; associated with intellectual delay. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. PM08.42 Identification of lncRNAs involved in neuronal development and intellectual disability Dominant mutations in the ankyrin domain and in the ring fingers domain S. Vergult, E. D‘haene, E. Jacobs, B. Menten; Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, of the 
E3  ubiquitin ligase MIB1, that promotes endocytosis of the NOTCH- Belgium. ligand DELTA and JAGGED, have been linked to the etiology of familial non- compaction cardiomyopathy (NCCM) M(LIBu1xan et al 2013). In a large cohort Background of patients with unexplained intellectual disability (ID), de Ligt et al (2012) listed a de novo missense mutation in as candidate for ID. We observed Recent studies have assigned important functions to lncRNAs in gene regu- a family consisting of three siblings born to healthy non-consanguineous lation and protein interactions. Since many of these lncRNAs emerged re- Dutch parents. A girl died at the age of 9 months from complications of cently during vertebrate and primate evolution, a crucial role in the human extra-hepatic bile duct atresia, abdominal situs inversus, polysplenism and Mbreatinh oisd asnticipated. Here, we aimed at identifying candidate lncRNAs asso- intestinal malrotation. Two male siblings, at present 11 and 7.5 years old, ciated with neuronal development and intellectual disability (ID). presented with comparable problems consisting of failure to thrive, delayed motor developmental, microcephaly, intellectual disability, friendly beha- A strategy was defined using publically available data regarding neuron spe- vior, delayed and nasal speech, large nose bridge and small nares, pointed cific histon modifications, REST binding & DNAse 1 hypersensitivity. This chin, small mouth, high palate with teeth malocclusion, thin upper lip, fea- was complemented with extensive expression profiling of both coding and tureless philtrum, large ears, short neck, fair complexion, kyphoscoliosis, noncoding genes in seven nonneuronal tissues and eight brain samples. As barrel shaped chest. Cardiac screening of the eldest child at 2.5 years sho- aR epsruooltfs-of-principle, this approach was first applied to all RefSeq coding ge- wed a slightly enlarged riMghIBt 1ventricle, but was otherwise normal. Whole nes. exome sequencing of DNA from both sibs showed two shared compound heterozygous changes in , one maternally inherited highly conserved Of the coding genes, 4040 met the criteria of having a neuron specific H3K4- missense variant,c.244G>A in the zinc finger domain and MthIBe 1other in the me3 mark, REST binding and DNAse 1 hypersensitivity in the promoter re- splice donor site for exon 3 (c.531+1G>T), adjacent to the Mib Herc2 do- gion (filter 1) as well as a relatively high expression in at least one brain main. We hypothesize that biallelic recessive mutations in cause a se- sample (filter 2). A significant enrichment of ID genes was noted in this list vere and complex phenotype, including intellectual disability. (178/4040) and in 65 genes, a GWAS hit for neuropsychiatric disorders was P
S08 .45 observed; indicating the power of this approach. Detecting small Copy Number Variations, smaller than 400 kb, When applied to 32108 lncRNA transcripts (lncipedia 2.1), 2980 lncRNAs improves the diagnostic yield of CMA in intellectual disability passed filter step 1. While the majority of lncRNAs have a relatively low ex- N. Chatron1, E. Fonteneau2, M. Faoucher1, C. Depienne2, A. Labalme1, E. Lejeune2, M. pCroenscsliuonsi, oann enrichment of lncRNAs passing filter step 2 was seen (215/2980 Till1, C. Mignot2, C. Schluth-Bolard1, C. Nava3, A. Putoux1, G. Lesca1, F. Mochel2, M. Alex1, A. versus 1360/32108). A GWAS hit was noted in one of these lncRNAs. Jacquette4, M. Rossi1, D. Héron2, P. Edery1, A. Brice2, D. Sanlaville1, B. Keren2; 1Service de génétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 3GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, CRicm UPMC Inserm Using this integrated approach, we identified 215 interesting candidate ln- UMR 
S975 /CNRS UMR 7225, Paris, France, 4GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de cRNAs for neuronal development. These lncRNAs will be functionally vali- Génétique, Lyon, France. dated. P
S08 .43 Partial rescue of RTT-like symptoms in Mecp2-deficient mice after Cytogenetic microarray (CMA) allows the elucidation of 15 to 20 percent administration of a self-complementary AAV9 (scAAV9) construct of remaining unexplained cases of intellectual disability. A threshold of 400 expressing a codon-optimized Mecp2 transgene. kb is proposed to consider Copy Number Variants (CNV). Array use in dia- V. Matagne1,2, L. Villard1,2, J. Roux1,2; gnostic setting could detect smaller CNV mostly polymorphic generating 1Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France. numerous confirmations. Here, we propose to evaluate the diagnostic in- terest of small CNV (inferior to 400kb) in intellectual disability (ID). This collaborative study groups an Illumina SNP-array platform and an Agilent Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder primarily CGH-array platform for a total of 3330 patients explored for syndromic or affecting CNS functions. Most RTT cases are due to mutations in the methyl isolated intellectual disability from 2011 to 2014. CpG binding protein 2 (MEC
P2 ) gene, a global transcriptional modulator. Over 26,866 CNV detected, 22,683 (84.4%) were smaller than 400 kb. There is currently no cure for the disease and drugs alleviating symptoms Among the 1440 CNVs considered as relevant, 850 (40.9 %) were smal- are the only available therapies. ler than 400 kb increasing by 70% the amount of necessary confirmation Recently, two different research teams reported that gene therapy in the by another technique. We concluded that 44 of 605 (7.3%) of these CNVs Mecp2-deficient RTT mouse model partially cured the disease (Gadalla et al (smaller than 400kb) were pathogenic. 36 were deletions which involved 2013; Garg et al 2013). Although both studies showed a rescuing effect, the pathogenic gene in ID and 8 were duplications. It is noteworthy that, except overall benefits of this therapy seemed to depend on the age at which the a MEC
P2  duplication, all small duplications were either intragenic or pro- virus was administered, as well as the viral construct. bably truncating an ID gene possibly leading to haploinsufficiency. In order to try and improve vector delivery and expression, we designed a To conclude, analyzing CNV smaller than 400 kb significantly increases the plasmid construct expressing a codon-optimized version of Mecp2 that was number of verification but enhances the diagnostic yield of 1.3 % in pati- used to generate a scAAV9 virus. Thirty day-old Mecp2-deficient male mice ents with ID, which is equivalent to 44 patients in our cohort. However, we were injected with the virus through the tail vein (2*1011vg/mouse). Post- propose not to consider small non-truncating duplications. While massive- mortem analysis was carried out in 60 day-old animals and the percentage ly parallel sequencing techniques are becoming routine diagnosis, it seems of transduced brain cells was quantified by immunohistochemistry. Despite preferable to detect as many pathogenic CNVs as possible using CMA. a low percentage of Mecp2-expressing cells (6-10% of WT levels), we did PM08.46 find an improvement in spontaneous activity (Open field) and sensorimotor Comparisons of Mcph1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts coordination (Rotarod), as well as a decrease in apneas that are characteri- T. Staab, D. Luehders, D. Schindler; stic RTT symptoms (plethysmography). University of Wuerzburg, Department of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany. These preliminary data indicate that even a low level Mecp2 expression can improve RTT symptoms in Mecp2-deficient mice. Further studies will aim at confirming these data and investigating the potential therapeutic effect of Biallelic mutations in the MCPH1 gene are the cause of primary microce- the same viral construct in female RTT mice. phaly (OMIM 251200) associated with premature chromosome condensa- tion (PCC) in G2 phase and delayed decondensation post mitosis. MCPH1 encodes a multifunctional protein that was reported to be involved in brain 160 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOdeTvLelAopNmDen, tU, DKN |A W daWmWage.E rSesHpoGn.sOe RanGd the regulation of chromosomeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index condensation. phenotype correlation in interstitial 6q deletions: a report of 12 new cases. In this study we investigated mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from Neurogenetics 13(1):31-47 three different types of published Mcph1 knockout mice. We failed to detect P
S08 .49 a delay in G2 checkpoint release after irradiation, as shown in earlier expe- The costs and benefits of clinical genomic sequencing for monogenic riments of our group using patient derived MCPH1-deficient cells. However, disorders we did observe a flatter slope of increase of the mitotic rate of MEFs from the D. J. Schofield1,2,3, B. Doble3,4, T. Roscioli3,5, J. Mattick3,6; Mcph1 knockout mice compared to controls. 1University of Sydney, Camperdown Sydney, Australia, 2Murdoch Children’s Research Furthermore, we compared the rates of different DNA repair focus formati- Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 3Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, on after irradiation of cells with 1 Gy or exposure to hydroxyurea. Analysis 4Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 5Sydney Children‘s Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 6St. Vincent’s Clinical School, UNiversity of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. of yH2AX and 53B
P1  indicated up to three times higher rates of foci-positive cells in knockouts than in control cells. In contrast, RAD51 and RPA foci ap- peared at similar rates and with similar time courses in Mcph1-deficient as in control cells. Genetic disorders affect a large proportion of the population and result in Finally, we prepared mitotic chromosomes to compare the levels of PCC. The substantial economic and social burden. The rapid advances in genome se- rate of prophase-like cells (PLCs) of Mcph1-deficient MEFs was increased quencing have created an opportunity to rapidly and more universally iden- compared to those of normal control cells. The Mcph1 knockout MEFs sho- tify disease-causing gene mutations, facilitating more efficient diagnosis and wed PLC rates between 0.7-4.5%, whereas the controls showed rates only improved disease management and prevention. Here we have compared the between 0.2-0.3%. costs of disability resulting from gene mutations with the potential health Our results suggest that the presence of Mcph1 is necessary for the early and social benefits of implementing whole genome testing for the detection DNA damage response after irradiation and that the effect of Mcph1 defici- of significant monogenic diseases. We found that the annual costs of intellec- ency is confined to mitosis. tual and physical disability are substantial with average costs ranging from about $40,000 per annum for children with an intellectual disability to over P
S08 .47 $400,000 for young adults with severe intellectual disability. The aetiology Homozygous mutation in the eukaryotic translation initiation factor of many conditions associated with intellectual and/or physical disability 2alpha phosphatase gene, PP
P1 R15B, is associated with extreme can be identified through clinical genomic sequencing at a current cost (in- microcephaly, short stature, and developmental delay cluding analysis) of ~US$10,000, although that cost should decline rapidly K. K. Kernohan1, T. Martine2, M. T. Geraghty1, W. Qin1, C. Care4Rare1, J. Majewski3, J. Richer1, K. M. Boycott1; with continued technological advances and especially the development of 1Children Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2McGill University and well-curated genotype-phenotype correlation databases. Different applica- Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 32McGill University and tions of clinical genomic sequencing offer varying abilities to avoid cases of Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada. disability with greater benefits likely to be realized the earlier in the repro- ductive cycle testing is offered. The potential to mitigate even a fraction of the costs and social impacts associated with disability through clinical geno- Protein translation is an essential cellular process initiated by the associa- mic sequencing makes a compelling socioeconomic case for consideration tion of a methionyl-tRNA with the translation initiation factor eIF2. The of implementation of such testing as well as the construction of supporting met-tRNA/eIF2 complex then associates with ribosomal subunits and other national and international databases. translation factors, which together comprise the translational machinery. PM08.50 This process is regulated by the phosphorylation status of the α subunit of Whole gene duplication of SCN2A and SCN3A is compatible with eIF2 (eIF2α); phosphorylated eIF2α attenuates protein translation. Here we normal intellectual development report a consanguineous family with severe microcephaly, failure to thrive A. Thuresson, C. Soussi Zander; and intellectual disability in two siblings. Whole-exome sequencing identi- Dept. of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden. fied a homozygous missense mutation, c.1972G>A; p.R658C, in PP
P1 R15B, a protein which functions with the PP
P1 C phosphatase to maintain dephos- phorylated eIF2α in unstressed cells. The p.R658C PP
P1 R15B mutation Duplications at 2q24.3 encompassing the voltage-gated sodium channel is located within the PP
P1 C binding site. We show that patient cells have gene cluster are associated with early on-set epilepsy. All cases described in greatly diminished levels of PP
P1 R15B-PP
P1 C interaction, which results the literature also presented with different degrees of intellectual disability, in increased eIF2α phosphorylation and resistance to cellular stress. Final- and has apart from the sodium channel gene cluster also involved neighbo- ly, we find that patient cells have elevated levels of PP
P1 R15B mRNA and ring genes. protein, suggesting activation of a compensatory program aimed at resto- Here we describe a family including a mother and two daughters, all pre- ring cellular homeostasis which is ineffective due to PP
P1 R15B deficiency. senting with a duplication involving only SCN2A, SCN3A and the 5’-part of PP
P1 R15B now joins the expanding list of translation associated proteins SL
C38 A11. All three had a normal cognitive development and infantile epi- which when mutated cause rare inherited diseases. lepsy with a spontaneous remission after one year. This suggests that an PM08.48 extra copy of SCN2A and SCN3A have an effect on epilepsy pathogenesis, 6q22.33 microdeletion in a family with intellectual disability, variable which might be similar to what is seen in patients with SCN2A mutations. major anomalies and behavioral abnormalities However, the number of copies of SCN2A and SCN3A does not seem to have L. Mackenroth1, K. Hackmann1, A. Beyer1, K. Hackmann1, J. Schallner2, B. Novotna2, B. an effect on cognitive outcome. Klink1, E. Schröck1, A. Tzschach1, N. Di Donato1; P
S08 .51 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, TU The power of next generation sequencing in identifying atypical Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, presentations of known OMIM genes: the exemple of CU
L4 B Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden, Germany. M. Lefebvre1, D. Martin-Coignard2, J. Rivière1, Y. Duffourd1, J. Thevenon1, C. Thauvin- Robinet1, C. Redin3, J. Mandel3, C. Ben Signor1, A. Piton3, L. Faivre1; 1CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 2CH Le Mans, Le Mans, France, 3CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, Interstitial deletions on the long arm of chromosome 6 have been described France. for several regions, such as 6q16, 6q22.1, and 6q21q22.1, and with variable phenotype such as intellectual disability/developmental delay, growth re- tardation, major and minor facial anomalies. An overview is given by Ro- Intellectual disability (ID) has an estimated prevalence of 2% in the general senfeld et al., reviewing twelve reported cases of the literature and propo- population and is more common in males. Mutation in CU
L4 B, a gene enco- sing phenotype-genotype correlation [Rosenfeld et al. 2012]. However, an ding for a member of cullin-RING complex, is known to cause Cabezas syn- isolated microdeletion of the sub-band 6q22.33 has not been described so drome corresponding to a X-linked ID associated with aggressive outburst, far and thus, no information is available concerning the specific phenotype seizures, hypogonadism and dysmorphism. To date, 35 males patients are associated with such a copy number variation. reported with mutation in CU
L4 B, all of the propositus were diagnosed after Here we define the clinical picture of an isolated 6q22.33 microdeletion the age of normal puberty. We report here 3 new patients of 2 families with based on the phenotype of six members of one family with loss of app. 1 Mb CU
L4 B mutations, diagnosed with Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) at a in this region. Main clinical features included mild intellectual disability and younger age (4 to 19 years) and presenting with atypical features such as behavioral abnormalities as well as microcephaly, heart defect, and cleft lip sensory neural deafness, iris heterochromia and patchy depigmentation of and palate. The mother attended supportive school; however she did not the skin (suggesting a Waardenburg syndrome), hypertrophic cardiomyo- require a legal guardian and lived independently with regular social sup- pathy, or medullar ischemia in early infancy. All of them presented with mild port regarding the childcare.RefeEreSnHceGs:R 2os0e1nf5e l|d GJAL, eAt SalG. 2O01W2. ,G SenCoOtyTpeL-AN tD o , s eU veK re | pW syW choW m. oE toS rH dG ela.O y, R mG acrocephaly and facial dysmorphism. 1 Sh6 o1 rtABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P
S08 .55 Similar orofacial phenotype in a family with Xq24-Xq25 duplication stature, obesity, kyphosis, seizures and hypogenitalism were found in 2 out D. Belengeanu1, D. Marian1, V. Belengeanu1, C. Bratu2, D. Misceo3; of 3 patients after reverse phenotyping. Due to these confounding factors, 1University of West Vasile Godis Arad, Arad, Romania, 2University of Medicine and the diagnosis of Cabezas syndrome has not been clinically raised and nee- Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo ded NGS. Two novel truncating CU
L4 B mutations, were found, , inherited University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. from the healthy mother of the 2 brothers in family 1, and de novo in the 3rd patient. In conclusion, the use of NGS and reverse phenotyping allowed to establish the diagnosis in these atypical presentation of the Cabezas syn- Mandibular prognathism is a common dentofacial phenotype with a sub- drome. stantial genetic component, however, few susceptibility loci have been map- ped. PM08.52 Mandibular prognathism is a feature of the XXY, XXXY, and XXXXY syndro- Unexpected molecular diagnoses of intellectual disabilities: making mes and of interest is the progressive increase of this feature as the number headway with the Trusight One sequencing panel of X chromosomes increases. A. Jacquette1,2, I. Marey1,2, C. Mignot1,2, S. Whalen3,2, C. Depienne4, C. Nava5, P. Charles1,2, A. Faudet1,2, F. Lesne1,2, B. Keren4, D. Heron1,2; We refer a family, mother and two adult boys with the same orofacial mor- 1département de génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 2centre phological pattern, for clinical and craniometric assessment and for cepha- de réference «déficiences intellectuelles de causes rares», Paris, France, 3service de lometric analysis. Génétique, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 4UF de génomique du développement, The index case - male of 30 years old with intellectual disability and obesity, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 5UF de neurogénétique, Hôpital de la Pitié- dysmorphic features with triangular shaped face, short palpebral fissures, Salpétrière, Paris, France. prognatism, macrostomia, and low set ears. Surprisingly, the brother of 32 years old and the mother of 60 years old presented the same orofacial fea- tures, associated with milder intellectual disability. Recent advances in genetic technologies provide new opportunities to elu- Given the intellectual disability, genetic testing was carried out. The ka- cidate genetic defects. The introduction of NGS methods in the diagnostic of ryotype was normal. As regards the array-CGH analysis, a Xq24-Xq25 intellectual disabilities (ID) led to the identification of 20 to 50 % supple- ChrX:115.568.872-126.991.548 bp, microduplication was found, confir- mentary disease causing variants. med through quantitative Real Time PCR. BAC-FISH was done for all 3 fa- We applied the Trusight One technology (Illumina) which contains the 4813 mily members and it revealed that the duplicated segment was located on genes already involved in human pathology. chromosome X and it was likely to have a direct orientation. On extraoral We studied a series of 36 patients with ID who have been extensively inve- examination, they presented oval face with appearance of long face due to stigated without diagnosis. the lower facial level predominance, through a short and flat philtrum, sharp From our first results, this method allowed us to disclose diagnoses that chin, retrusive concave facial profile. were unexpected owing to: At craniometry they presented hyperbrachicephalic type according to the - the mild phenotype of a known syndrome, well exemplified by a sibpair cranial index, hyperleptoprosop facial type according to the facial morpho- with apparently non syndromic ID carrying an ATRX mutation logy index, and leptorrhine nasal type. Lateral cephalometric analysis sho- - the limited knowledge about very rare and/or poorly described pheno- wed skeletal class III malocclusion with prognathism. types or the lack of specificity of a given disorder, as illustrated by a patient PM08.56 with a GRIA3 mutation Exploring possible genetic heterogeneity in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome - the limited knowledge about the early phenotype of some progressive di- combining whole-exome and targeted next-generation sequencing. seases with developmental delay, as exemplified by a young patient with ID G. Marangi, S. Ricciardi, S. Lattante, D. Orteschi, M. Zollino; but without typical brain MR images carrying PANK2 mutations. Catholic University, Rome, Italy. Among NGS approaches in ID, Trusight One technology is an interesting tool for the diagnosis of known but rare diseases. P
S08 .53 Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is characterized by ID, typical facial gestalt, Mutation in NRAS in familial Noonan syndrome - Case report and and additional features, including breathing abnormalities. It is generally review of the literature caused by the haploinsufficiency of TCF4 gene. However, no mutation can S. Gudmundsson1, S. Ekvall1, M. Wilbe1, J. Dahlgren2, E. Legius3, A. van Haeringen4, O. be identified in a relevant number of patients with an apparently typical Westphal2, G. Annerén1, M. Bondeson1; phenotype. 1Immunology, Genetics, Pathology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, We developed a clinical checklist based scoring system to select patients 2Paediatrics, the Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 4Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands. presenting with a phenotype that is highly suggestive of PTHS. We tested for pathogenic variants in TCF4 a total of 200 patients referred with a clinical suspect of PTHS, of whom 25 had a proven mutation in TCF4. Based on our Noonan syndrome (NS), a heterogeneous developmental disorder asso- score system we selected 75 subjects with a score >10 and normal TCF4 to ciated with variable clinical expression including short stature, congenital be studied in search of the disease causative variant. Patients were further heart defect, unusual pectus deformity and typical facial features, is caused grouped into categories with homogenous phenotypes according to their by activating mutations in genes involved in the RAS-MAPK signaling pa- score and the presence of additional clinical features. thway. NF1, PTPN11, SO
S1 , Aiming to explore the possible genetic heterogenity underlying cases with WCBeL p, BreRsAeFn, tR aA Fcl1in, SicHaOl Can2,d M mAoPl2eKcu2l, aMr AcPh2arKa1c,t SePriRzEatDio1n, N oRf AaS f,a HmRiAlyS with KNRoAoS- PTHS-like phenotype but with negative molecular tests, a small group of nan syndrome. Comprehensive mutation analysis of these subject (n=4) already underwent whole exome sequencing (WES) NRAS and analysis. It allowed us to identify a set of variants in shared genes to be con- was performed using targeted next-generation sequencing. Result revealed sidered for further validation. a recurrent mutation in , c.179G>A (p.G60E), in the index patient. This Additionally, we have been performing targeted next generation sequencing mutation was inherited from patient’s father, which also showed signs of on the remaining patients, by using a custom panel including both genes NS. responsible for diseases that are to be considered in differential diagnosis Neither of the affected individuals in this family presentNeRdA wSith juvenile of PTHS, and genes resulting from exome sequencing data filtering and prio- myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML), which together with previously results ritization. suggest that the risk foNrR NASS individuals with a germline developing Preliminary results are presented and discussed. JMML is not different from the proportion seen in other NS cases. 50% of Supported by Telethon grant nr: GEP 14089. NNRS AinSd-ividuals with an mutation present with lentigines and/or Café- P
S08 .57 au-lait spots, demonstrating predisposition to hyperpigmented lesions in Heterozygous deletion of 4 exons of the PTPRT gene confirms its positive NS individuals. Moreover, the affected father in our family contribution to intellectual disability. presented with a hearing deficit since birth, which together with lentigines D. Ilencikova1, G. Webersinke2, S. Deutschbauer2, M. Maurer1, H. Duba1; are two characteristics of NS with multiple lentigines (previously LEOPARD 1Department of Human Genetics, Landes-Frauen- und Kinderklinik, Linz, Austria, 2Laboratory for Molecular Biology and Tumor Cytogenetics, Department of 1st Internal syndrome), supporting the difficulties in diagnosing individuals with RAS- Medicine, Krankenhaus Barmherzige Schwestern, Linz, Austria. opathies correctly. The clinical and genetic heterogeneity observed in RAS- opathies is a challenge for genetic testing. Advantages of next-generation se- quencing allows screening of large number of genes simultaneously, which Understanding of the genetic basis of intellectual disability (ID) has been will have an important impact on the correct diagnosis, prognosis and treat- increased in recent years. The use of sensitive pangenomic techniques as m1e6n2t of these patients in the future. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG aCGH and SNParray contributes to discover new genes associated with syn-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index dromic and non-syndromic ID. tory action in alternative splicing of a large tissue-specific gene networks. We reportan 18-month-old Turkish child with a psychomotoric develop- Materials and methods: Oligonucleotide array-CGH analysis, using an Agi- mental disorder who presents with unstable sitting, severe hypotonia and lent 4x180K platform, was performed in 1200 patients with mental retarda- speech delay but without dysmorphisms. SNP array analysis identified tion, autism spectrum disorders and congenital anomalies. a „de novo“ 185 kbp deletion on chromosome 20q12 encompassing a de- Results: In our cohort, we identified 6 cases with intragenic deletions in RB- letion of 4 exons of a single coding gene, named PTPRT (Protein-Tyrosine FOX1, 4 of them with additional CNV in other chromosomes. These CNVs Phosphase,Receptor Type T). The PTPRT gene entry in OMIM database are located at 16p13.3, extended in a 1,2Mb region between 6,087,983-7- (608712) includes a single variant of unknown significanceTHR1365MET ,207,012 (GRCh37/hg19), which corresponds to intronic regions in 5 out of [dbSNP:rs199947379]. 6 patients. Five of these patients have an inherited deletion, from an unaffec- This variant was revealed due exome sequencing in 3 Dutch sibs with se- ted progenitor, and one has an unknown inheritance pattern. vere intellectual disability, published by Schuurs-Hoeijmakerset al. (2013). Conclusions: The phenotypes of all these children have in common, as wide- Authors noted that the PTPRT gene is expressed in the brain or in neuro- ly described, neurological alterations. The rearrangements identified lead to nal tissue and encodes a transmembrane receptor of the protein tyrosine a reduction in RBFOX1 expression, corroborating the importance of RBFOX1 phosphatase family, which are important proteins in signal transduction. haploinsufficiency in this phenotypes. The continuing follow-up of these They described a complex phenotypein 5 affected sisters including beha- patients and similar cases can help our understanding on the phenotypic vioral problems, microcephaly, congenital heart defects, short stature, and diversity of these patients. diaphragmatic herniation. The combination of a heterozygous missense va- PM08.60 riant and a heterozygous intronic deletion of 150 kb suggests an autosomal Mosaicism for a start codon mutation in MEC
P2  in a male with clinical recessive pattern of inheritance. features of Rett Syndrome: phenotypic description and review of the In our patient we considered no heart defects and diaphragmatic herniati- literature. on. Due to age behavioral problems have not been evaluated until today. K. A. Davis1, R. E. Lamont1, J. S. Parboosingh1, R. L. Sparkes1,2, J. Lemay2, A. Innes1,2; In summary, we report a case of ID associated with a heterozygous deletion 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, of the PTPRT gene, confirming a PTPRT haploinsufficiency, which contribu- 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. tes to intellectual disability. PM08.58 Mutations in QARS, encoding glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase, cause Rett Syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder caused normocephalic intellectual disability and seizures - expansion of the by mutations in the methyl CpG-binding protein 2 (MEC
P2 ) gene at locus phenotype Xq28, which presents with both classic and variant phenotypes in females. R. Segel1,2, S. Gulsuner3, N. Rosenfeld1, H. Fridman1, P. Renbaum1, E. Levi-Lahad1,2, A. In males, mutations similar to those that cause RTT in females are usually Aran1,2; lethal; however, somatic mosaicism for classic RTT mutations or less delete- 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Hebrew University Hadassah Medical rious, nonsynonymous mutations result a spectrum of neurological features School, Jerusalem, Israel, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. reminiscent of classic RTT in females. In this case, an 8-year-old male pre- sented with clinical features of RTT including: microcephaly, Chiari I mal- formation, neurodevelopmental regression, seizures, bradykinesia, apnea Intellectual disability (ID) and seizures are common characteristics of nu- and stereotyped midline hand movements. MEC
P2  analysis identified both merous neuro-genetic syndromes. Recessive loss of function mutations in a normal sequence and a c.1A>T (p.Met1?) mutation in peripheral blood QARS, encoding Glutaminyl-tRNA Synthetase, were recently described in and fibroblasts with normal dosage by multiplex ligation-dependent probe 2 families as a cause of ID with intractable seizures in infancy, progressive amplification (MLPA). This has only been reported in females with classic microcephaly , and atrophy of the cerebral cortex, cerebellar vermis and ce- RTT. Somatic mosaicism for classic RTT mutations has rarely been reported rebellar hemispheres (Zhang et al 2014). in males, however, this is the first known case involving the start codon of We report two children with ID and seizures, born to first-cousin parents. MEC
P2 , p.M1. Subsequent analysis by array comparative genomic hybridi- Both were born at term, with normal birth weights. The affected boy had zation (aCGH) did not identify copy number changes in MEC
P2  but did pick multiple-type seizures (atypical absence and drop attacks) from age 3 up a 172 kb deletion of Xq21.31, which is considered unlikely to contribute months, while his sister had mild atypical absences from age 6 years. Both to the patient’s phenotype. The unbalanced heterozygous mutation suggests siblings (currently 11.5 years and 10 years old respectively) have severe somatic mosaicism. Although a small duplication cannot be ruled out given ID with expressive language impairment, but are both normocephalic with the limitations of our array and MLPA probes, this is felt to be less likely to normal brain imaging and mild dysmorphic features. be the mechanism. The phenotypic presentation of this patient is discussed Whole Exome sequencing revealed 5 possibly damaging coding variants ho- along with a review of the current literature on males with RTT. mozygous in both affected children and heterozygous in the parents: 4 mis- P
S08 .61 sense variants and one stop loss mutation. Only one was in a gene associated Syndromic X-linked intellectual disability segregating with a missense with a neurological phenotype: QARS c.858C>A; p.Phe286Leu, not reported variant in RLIM in 1000 genome, EVS and ExAC. This missense mutation is predicted to be E. Tønne1, R. Holdhus2, C. Stansberg2, A. Stray-Pedersen1, K. Petersen3, H. G. Brunner4, C. damaging by Polyphen (0.999). Two unaffected sibs were heterozygotes for Gilissen4, A. Hoischen2,4, T. Prescott1, V. M. Steen2,5, T. Fiskerstrand2,5; the QARS mutation. Functional studies of this mutation will be presented. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Department Glutaminyl-tRNA Synthetase is a ubiquitously expressed class-I aminoacyl- of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Computational tRNA synthetase. Our results suggest QARS mutations cause a wider spec- Biology Unit, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 4Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences trum of functional brain abnormalities, and should be considered as a can- (RIMLS), Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, didate gene for non-syndromic ID with seizures. Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. P
S08 .59 RBFOX1 intragenic deletions detected by array-CGH - 6 new cases with neurological phenotype We describe a three generation Norwegian family with a novel X-linked N. Lavoura1, J. B. Melo1, S. I. Ferreira1, M. C. Pinto1, C. Pais1, A. Mascarenhas1, L. Ramos2, intellectual disability (XLID) syndrome characterised by subtle facial dys- I. M. Carreira1; morphism, autism and severe feeding problems. By exome sequencing we 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro detected a rare missense variant (c.1067A>G p.(Tyr356Cys) NM_183353.2) Hospital e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. in the RLIM gene, in two affected male second cousins. Sanger sequencing confirmed the presence of the variant in the four affected males and in the three carrier mothers available for testing. The variant was not present in Introduction: In the last couple of years, it has become evident the impor- 100 normal Norwegian controls, has not been reported in variant databases tance of whole genome array-CGH in the screening of de novo microdele- and is deleterious according to in silico prediction tools (SIFT, Polyphen and tions or duplications in patients with phenotypic features of mental retar- MutationTaster). The clinical phenotype and the variant co-segregate, with dation (MR) and autistic spectral disorders (ASD). Copy number variations a LOD score of 3.0 for linkage to the shared region (36.09 Mb). No other (CNV) in RBFOX1, also known as A2B
P1 , have been associated with human shared rare variants on the X-chromosome were detected, and all female neurodevelopmental disease, including autism spectrum disease. carriers had an extremely skewed X-inactivation pattern. This gene, spanning 1.7 MB on chromosome 16p13.3, is one of the largest RLIM encodes ring zinc finger protein 12 (RNF12), an ubiquitin ligase which genes in the human genome, responsible for encoding splicing regulatory is essential for X-inactivation in mice and which acts as a co-regulator of a factors, specifically expressed in E neS uH roG ns 2 an0 d1 m5 u | s cG leL sA , aS ndG hO avW in, g S a C reO guT laL -ANrDan, gUe Kof |t rWanWscrWipt.iEoSn HfaGcto.Ors,R pGarticularly those containing a LIM ho1m6e3o-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index domain. Tyrosine in position 356 in RNF12 is located within a highly con- should be analysed by direct sequencing in additional subjects with similar served domain essential for binding such transcription factors. Expression clinical presentations. of RNF12 is widespread during embryogenesis, and particularly high in the PM08.64 outer layers of the cerebral cortex. Homozygous missense mutation in SNI
P1 , encoding Smad Nuclear The detected variant likely disrupts an essential function of RLIM in neuro- Interacting Protein 1, associated with severe autosomal recessive development, and raises the possibility of important, previously unknown neurodevelopmental disorder roles for this ubiquitin ligase. R. Maroofian1, E. Baple.2, B. Chioza1, M. Patton1, A. Crosby1; PM08.62 1Medical Research, RILD Wellcome Wolfson Centre, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom, 2University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Identification of an inherited splicing SCN8A mutation in a family with Trust, Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United Kingdom. intellectual disability, autism, ataxia and seizures by whole exome sequencing D. Prchalová1, M. Hančárová1, K. Šterbová2, V. Stránecký3, M. Vlčková1, M. Havlovicová1, Z. Sedláček1; Introduction: Neurodevelopmental disorders are a highly heterogeneous 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of and diverse group of genetic or acquired conditions that are responsible for Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of brain or central nervous system dysfunction. Although many genes respon- Paediatric Neurology, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University sible for these conditions have been discovered, the aetiology and disease Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, pathogenesis of most forms remains poorly understood. Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague, Materials and Methods: Using a combination of autozygosity mapping and Czech Republic. whole exome sequencing (WES), we studied an autosomal-recessive neuro- developmental disorder with seizures, craniofacial dysmorphism and other features found among the Amish community. Whole exome sequencing (WES) can identify causes of abnormal clinical Results: Whole-genome mapping of family members from two sibships phenotypes. We report a 15-year-old boy and his 9-year-old brother with using HumanSNPCyto-12 DNA Analysis BeadChip revealed a homozygous normal karyotypes and SNP array findings who showed moderate intellec- region on chromosome 1p34 common to the three affected children. Exome tual disability (ID), autism and speech delay. The older boy had abnormal sequencing of one affected child identified a novel homozygous mutation in EEG and showed absence seizures since the age of 9 years. The younger boy SNI
P1  c.1097A>G (p.Glu366Gly) as the likely causative variant. The variant presented ataxia at the age of 5 years. Their mother showed mild ID, as dSCid- cosegregated with the disease phenotype in the families investigated as well Nth8eA maternal grandmother and a maternal uncle. as a further seven affected individuals from four other nuclear Amish fami- WES of the brothers and their mother identified a heterozygous splicing lies. Five heterozygous carriers of the mutation were identified among 350 mutation (NM_014191, c.1134+1G>A) which was absent in all exome Amish controls, which is not unexpected in this genetic isolate. Mutation databases. It was confirmed using Sanger sequencing in both boys, their mo- pathogenicity was predicted through five in-silico programs. ther, grandmother and uncle, and predicted to disrupt the splice donor of in- Conclusions: Our findings define the clinical spectrum associated with bial- tron 9, with exon 9 skipping being one of the likely outcomes. Sequencing of lelic mutation in SNI
P1 , which we show to be the likely cause of the severe lymphocyte cDNA of the carriers confirmed this aberrant transcript leading neurodevelopmental disorder in these families. Assessing the functional to frameshift and premature termination (p.G331GfsX11). The interpreta- outcomes of the missense mutation in the encoded protein and its regulato- tion of this variant transcript is however complicated by its presence also ry function will expand our knowledge about the essential role of SNI
P1  in in normaSl CcNon8tArols. Other variant transcripts and differednec enso ivno transcript growth and development of the brain or central nervous system. ratios are under study. Supported by MRC grant G1002279 Multiple mutations have been reported, mostly missense variants in patients showing predominantly seizures, while one truncating P
S08 .65 varSiaCnNt8 sAegregated in a family with a broader spectrum of cognitive and be- Deciphering the biochemistry of Snyder-Robinson Syndrome: havioural deficits. Our findings may support the notion that while missen- Metabolomics identifies a new biochemical marker in patients se mutations causing increased channel activity can be associated affected by Snyder-Robinson syndrome (SRS) mainly with seizures, heterozygous loss-of-function mutations may predis- K. Steindl1, L. Abela2, L. Simmons2, B. Schmitt3, P. Joset1, M. Papuc1, H. Sticht4, A. Baumer1, L. M. Crowther2, D. Mathis5, B. Plecko2, A. Rauch1; pose to a slightly different phenotype. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Division of Supported by NT/14200, 00064203, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022 and NF-CZ11- Child Neurology, University Children’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Division PDP-3-003-2014. of Epilepsy and Neurophysiology, University Children’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, P
S08 .63 Switzerland, 4Institute for Biochemistry, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 5Division of Clinical Chemistry and Biochemistry, University Single genes deletions/duplications detected by array-CGH: diagnostic Children’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. relevance and suggestions for new disease genes. D. Orteschi, M. Murdolo, E. Ponzi, A. Asaro, C. Cafiero, G. Marangi, S. Lattante, S. Ricciardi, G. Neri, M. Zollino; Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, Rome, Italy. Snyder-Robinson syndrome (SRS) is a probably underdiagnosed X-linked disorder characterized by intellectual disability, dysmorphic face, muscle hypotonia, kyphoscoliosis, osteoporosis, seizures, and speech and gait ab- During the application of array-CGH to the diagnosis of syndromic forms of normalities. SRS is caused intellectual disability (ID), a total of 39 Copy Number Variants (CNVs) limi- by mutations in spermine Synthase (SMS), but diagnosis of SRS has been ted to single genes were observed, with size ranging from 85 Kb to 1.3 Mb. hampered by lack of a specific biomarker that can be measured in body flu- They accounted for 1.5 % of cases (38/2600). Results were confirmed by a ids or native cells. The balance of spermine and spermidine is maintained by second independent experiment. Sequencing of the candidate gene on the SMS and is crucial for proper chromatin structure, ion channel regulation, normal homologous was performed in some cases, with normal results. transcription and translation. Based on gene content analysis and on biological properties of the genes, a We established the diagnosis of SRS by clinical exome sequencing in two no- total of 5/38 CNVs, encompassing FMR1, VP
S13 B, SCN1A, MEF2C and APC, vel monozygotic twin patients and subsequently demonstrated an abnormal respectively, were considered pathogenic, with clinical presentation in car- spermine/spermidine ratio in cultured lymphoblasts. The novel Arg130Cys riers recapitulating the expected phenotype. A total of 10/38 CNVs (nine mutation is predicted to diminish enzymatic activity by decreasing dimer recurrent deletions and one duplication, encompassing GPHN, AUT
S2 , CT- stability and affecting the structure of the adjacent spermine binding site. NNA3, SHANK2, and CNTNA
P2 ) were likely pathogenic variants, previously The third SRS patient investigated was published previously (Mastrangelo described as characterized by incomplete penetrance and variable expressi- et al. 2013). Differential expression profiling of metabolites in the SRS pa- vity, ranging from ID to ADS. tients revealed a high peak that was absent in controls. After identification A total of additional three CNVs define new genetic conditions, most likely, of the SMS mutation, the abnormal peak could be readily identified as N- never reported before. They include 1) duplication of ZI
C3  in a male sub- acetylspermidine, a polyamine intermediate product involved in spermine ject with complex malformations resembling the oculo-auriculo-vertebral and spermidine metabolism. Thus we conclude that spermine synthase de- spectrum, 2) partial NFIB deletion associated with trigonocephaly and ID, ficiency leads to intracellular accumulation of spermidine, which is conver- 3) partial CD
C42 S
E2  deletion associated with periventricular heterotopia. ted to N-acetylspermidine and exported from the cell. Therefore targeted The remaining 20 CNVs or untargeted plasma analysis of N-acetylspermidine represents a powerful were considered of uncertain significance. screening marker for SRS relying on a single blood plasma sample. T1h6e4se observations focus on rare small CENSVHs Glim 2it0ed1 5to |s GingLlAe gSeGneOs Wtha, tS COOuTrL sAtuNdyD d,e UmKon |s tWratWes Wthe.E gSreHatG p.oOteRntGial of a combined genetic and me-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tabolomic approach and provides further insight into the metabolic dysre- We report the case of a 6-year-old boy with intellectual disability (ID) and gulation of SRS. severe language delay, hyperactivity, microcephaly, genital malformation P
S08 .67 with undescended testes, and peculiar dysmorphic features. MRI showed Compound heterozygous mutation in SZT2 gene in a patient with a dysplastic corpus callosum. Classical investigations, including array-CGH macrocephaly, epilepsy and severe intellectual disability were negative. Exome sequencing found compound heterozygous mutati- B. Albrecht1, H. Lüdecke1, T. Strom2, H. Engels3, D. Wieczorek1; ons in THO
C6  (p.Tyr45* and p.Gly190Glu). THO
C6  is a member of the THO/ 1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2Institut fuer Humangenetik, Helmholtz- TREX complex which is involved in coordinating mRNA processing with Zentrum, München, Germany, 3Institut fuer Humangenetik, Biomedizinisches Zentrum, mRNA export from the nucleus, highly expressed in the midbrain and eyes. Bonn, Germany. To date, a unique consanguineous Hutterite families comprising 4 affected children with common ancestors have been described with a THO
C6  homo- zygous mutation. The patients have distinctive facial features, microcephaly, We report on a family included in a trio exome sequencing study performed developmental delay, and possible heart and genitourinary malformations. on 250 patients with intellectual disability. Reverse phenotyping confirmed the presence of similar facial features, in- The 15 year old boy is the first and only child of healthy, non-consanguineous cluding tall forehead with high anterior hairline, deep-set eyes with short, German parents, born at term after a pregnancy complicated by uterus upslanted palpebral fissures, long nose with low-hanging columella, and myomatosus and gestosis. Birth measurements were normal but green am- thick vermilion of the upper and lower lip. Other common features included niotic fluid was noted. The boy walked independently with 2 ½ years and the severe speech difficulties and the presence of genital malformations. Ad- never learned to speak and he is not toilet trained. Seizures started with 4 ditional cases are requested to consider this gene as an undoubtful disease- years of age and could be treated effectively. Agitated behavior and autistic causing gene. features needed medication. Brain MRI revealed reduced temporal gyri on PM08.70 the left. The patient attends a special school and behaves like a toddler. Body Fast and effective genome editing to study dominant de novo measurements were normal throughout life, but head circumference was mutations: the WDR45 example above the 97th centile. The patient has a high and broad forehead, promi- C. A. Biagosch1,2, S. Hensler1,2, D. Janik3, F. Neff3, L. Becker4,5, W. Wurst5,6, T. Meitinger1,2, nent lips and small hands and ffseet. H. Prokisch1,2; Trio exome sSeZqTu2encing revealed a maternally inherited frame-shift muta- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, tion (c.841delC, p.(Gly281Ser *33)) and a paternally inherited missense 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, München, Germany, mutation in gene (c.9787G>A, p.(Asp3263Asn)). The possibly dama- 3Institute of Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, ging missense mutation may lead to a residual protein function and cause 4Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Ludwig-Maximilians-Univeristät, München, Germany, 5Institute of Experimental Genetics, German Mouse Clinic, a milder phenotype resembling the three brothers described by Falcone et Neuherberg, Germany, 6Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum al (2013) who are homozygous for a 3-bp in-frame deletion. Patients with München, Neuherberg, Germany. homozygous or compound heterozygous truncating mutations as described by Basel-VanaSgZaTit2e et al (2013) show severe infantile encephalopathy with epilepsy. This sixth patient broadens the phenotypic spectrum caused by Increasing Trio sequencing for intellectual disability delivers more and mutations in gene showing an intermediate clinical course compared more potentially disease causing de novo DNA variants. This situation ne- to the patients published to date. cessitates an effective validation tool. We present an effective genome edi- PM08.68 ting approach based on embryo microinjection of TALENs. We chose to ge- Targeted molecular diagnosis of intellectual disability with or without nerate a mouse model for the X-linked dominant form of NBIA (neurodege- autism: update from 217 to 275 genes and 100 to 300 patients neration with brain iron acculumation), caused by de novo loss-of-function confirms a 20-25% diagnostic efficiency and highlights genes recently mutations in WDR45. In humans, the course of disease is two-staged with identified or recurrently mutated developmental delay and intellectual disability in childhood and a second A. Piton1, B. Gerard2, F. Mattioli1, E. Nourisson2, C. Feger2, J. Mandel1; phase of rapid neurological deterioration characterized by parkinsonism 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique, CHU Strasbourg, and dementia occurring in early adulthood with characteristic neuroima- Strasbourg, France. ging findings such as hypointense signals in substantia nigra and globus pallidus. Microinjection of TALEN mRNA into oocytes resulted in 19% mu- tated founders (5/26). Mutations were deletions between 10 and 57bp We have recently reported the results of targeted sequencing (TS) of 217 with a frameshift in 4/5 mutations. From the in situ design and delivery of genes implicated in intellectual disability in 106 patients (mostly males) TALENs (~1month), over in vitro testing in cell culture to in vivo injection with ID and no diagnosis after CGH array and phenotype-driven testing of into embryo’s (~2months) until the genotyping of founder mutants it took 4 candidate genes (Redin et al. J Med Genet 2014). The diagnostic yield after months. The murine Knock-Out proved to not necessarily be de novo; there- stringent evaluation was 26% (23% for sporadic ID cases). We have now fore we chose a mouse harboring a 20bp deletion in Exon 2 for further bree- extended this using an improved panel of 275 genes, and have tested ano- ding. Investigation of nine month old male brains (n=8) revealed numerous ther 200 patients. Our current results confirm a diagnostic yield of 20 to degenerated neurons and large axonal spheroids, clear signs of neurodege- 25%. Our results indicate that de novo mutations in few genes, such as DYR- neration in medulla oblongata, cerebral cortex and thalamus of mutant ani- K1A or TCF4, are found recurrently in ID patients and may account each mals only. Furthermore, a neurobehavioral screen of 21 animals at the age of for 1-2% of cases (ie not far from the incidence of fragile X). The update of one year showed motor impairment (Balance Beam, p=0.004; Inverted Grid, our gene list allowed us to identify mutations in very recently identified ID p=0.018; Open-field, p=0.014). genes, such as NAA10, TBR1, POGZ, TRIO, ZBTB20 (Primrose syndrome). P
S08 .71 We also report the first non-consanguineous and compound heterozygous A new ILRAP
L1  point mutation: clinical report of a X-linked mental case of A
P4 S1
 ID with spastic paraplegia. Whole exome sequencing (WES) retardation family. performed for fifteen individuals with no mutation identified after targeted U. Ullmann, S. Boulanger, P. Hilbert, V. Benoit; sequencing (TS) did not reveal any obvious mutation in other genes not in- IPG, Gosselies, Belgium. cluded in the panel. The large decrease in the depth of coverage obtained for WES compared to TS (60X vs 300X) made CNV analysis (with depth-of- coverage-based methods) and variant detection less efficient for our genes I L1
RAP L1
 (interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein-like 1) located at of interest. Therefore, until prices fall and coverage increase, targeted se- Xp21.3-21.2 has been shown to be deleted in X-linked mental retardation quencing of candidate genes remains a useful method for routine diagnosis patients with contiguous gene syndrome. Rarely, intragenic deletions or mu- of intellectual disability. tations have been identified. Non-specific intellectual disability, behaviour P S08
.69 impairment with autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) and mild dysmorphism A second family with THO C6
 mutations and syndromic intellectual are actually recognized to be associated with I L1
RAP L1
 mutations. disability I L1
RAP L1
gene comprises 11 exons and harbors 3 extra-cellular Ig-like do- A. Masurel-Paulet1, J. Thevenon1,2, N. Jean1, D. Lehalle1, D. Minot1, C. Thauvin1,2, J. mains (NM_014271.3). I L1
RAP L1
 protein does not bind interleukin-1 but Rivière2, L. Faivre1,2; is regulating the formation of synapses of the cortical neurons. I L1
RAP L1
 1Hôpital d’Enfants, DIJON, France, 2Equipe GAD, Université de Bourgogne, France. forms with the protein tyrosine phosphatase rho (PTPrho) a complex indu- cing pre and postsynaptic differentiation (Hayashi et al., 2013). So far, very few papers reported family with XLMR caused by point mutati- Exome sequencing is a new technology allowing the identification of the ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANoDns, iUn KIL 1| RWAPW L1
W ge.EneS (HRaGm.Oos-RBGrossier et al., 2014). We report here a fa1m6i5ly molecular bases of genetic conditions in patients without clinical diagnosis.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index with XLMR with two brothers as probands, their mother and sister carrying All these small duplications involved STAG2 and/or XIAP but only one du- a new point I L1
RAP L1
 mutation c.1054C>T (p.Arg352*). The mutation was plication involved GRIA3. There was no minimum duplicated critical region identified after X-chromosome analysis by next generation sequencing tech- shared by all these duplications. Ten individuals had mild to severe mental nique. This new mutation lying in exon 8 induces a premature stop codon. impairment but one individual was normally intelligent. In addition, the 11 The resulting truncated protein is predicted to lack part of extracellular do- individuals did not share any recognizable dysmorphic features. In conclusi- main, transmembrane domain and the entire cytoplasmic domain. To our on, the findings in our case series do not provide evidence for the pathoge- knowledge, this substitution is not yet described in the literature but its pa- nicity of the Xq25 microduplication. thogenic character is highly likely. P S09
.001 Interestingly, in contradiction with the so far published data, all the fema- Phenotypic expression of 15q11.2 microdeletion syndrome le carriers were found with mild learning disabilities, and some behaviour K. Kosma1, G. Papageorgiou2, B. Zouvelou1, A. Xadaira3, L. Maragoudaki1, E. Kanavakis1, impairments without any X-skewed inactivation detected at the level of lym- S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, M. Tzetis1; phocytes DNA. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Endocrinology,Hellenic Police Medical Centre, Athens, Greece, 31st Department of Pediatrics, Athens, Greece. PM08.72 Recurrent microduplications at Xp22.31 are not sufficient to convey a disease phenotype The 15q11.2 B P1
-B P2
 microdeletion contains TUBGC P5
, CYFI P1
, NIPA2 and C. Rigon, M. Donà, E. Micaglio, F. Pauro, M. Cassina, L. Salviati, M. Clementi, E. Trevisson; NIPA1 genes implicated in neurodevelopment and usually presents with Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Woman and Child Health, University of Padova, autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, develop- Padova, Italy. mental delay, hypotonia, ataxia, dyspraxia, seizures, psychiatric imbalances and mild dysmorphic features while athrogryposis is described in one case so far. Arthrogryposis includes various different conditions leading to re- The pathogenicity of Xp22.31 duplications is still controversial. Recent stu- duced movement and joint contractures. We present the clinical and mole- dies have suggested a possible causal relationship of this genomic rearran- cular findings of 2 affected male siblings (4 and 1 years old respectively) gement with an abnormal phenotype, indicating that it may be a risk factor with 15q11.2 microdeletion syndrome who were initially referred to the for intellectual disability. Department of Medical Genetics because of arthrogryposis and mild psy- In an effort to clarify the significance of these duplications we report the chomotor delay. They were both born at full-term gestation to healthy un- genotype, the inheritance and the clinical features of six females with in- related parents. The oldest sibling presented arthrogryposis of the hands terstitial duplications of Xp22.31 ranging in size from 1,48 Mb to 1.76 Mb at the age of 2,5 years old and later extended to the knee and elbows, while found by array-CGH analysis. Five of these individuals presented intellectual the younger sibling developed arthrogryposis at the age of 10 days. Their disability, whereas the genomic rearrangement was an incidental finding in neurologic examination didn’t disclose any abnormality and their muscu- the sixth individual. lar strength and tone appeared normal. High resolution 4X180K Agilent The duplicated X chromosome was inherited in all the five patients. The arrays (> 236.000 probes, average resolution of 8.9 Kb) revealed that they inheritance was mainly paternal and all parents were clinically unaffected. both carried 15q11.2 microdeletion (of approximately 400Kb), containing Although the Xp22.31 triplication has been suggested to be more penetrant the TUBGC P5
, CYFI P1
, NIPA2 and NIPA1 genes. This is the second report than the corresponding duplication, we found four copy of this region in one of arthrogryposis presenting with 15q11.2 microdeletion syndrome, thus patient and three copy in her unaffected father. extending the previously described phenotypic spectrum of developmental In contrast with the more recent reports that increased the confidence delay- autism. about the pathogenicity of the Xp22.31 microduplication, our findings do PM09.002 not allow to confirm its association with a disease phenotype and cannot Molecular characterization of a de novo chromosomal rearrangement exclude the possibility that this is a rare population variant. and in utero interference define ENO1 as a candidate gene for 1p36 P S08
.73 polymicrogyria. Recurrent Xq25 Microduplication: pathogenic or benign variant? A B. El Waly1,2, C. Mignon-Ravix1,2, P. Cacciagli1,2,3, E. Buhler4, B. Ben Zeev5, L. Villard1,2; report of 11 cases from a French cohort 1Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France, A. Guichet1, M. Gorce1, J. Andrieux2, M. Barth1, F. Bilan3, S. Chantot-Bastaraud4, E. Colin5, 3Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de La Timone, Marseille, France, 4Inserm U901, Inmed, A. David6, C. Dubourg7, B. Gilbert-Dussardier3, D. Haye8, D. Héron9, H. Journel10, C. Le Marseille, France, 5Pediatric Neurology Unit, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel. Caignec6, M. Mathieu-Dramard11, C. Missirian12, A. Moncla13, O. Pichon6, A. Putoux14, C. Quelin15, D. Sanlaville16, A. Toutain8, C. Vincent-Delorme17, D. Bonneau5; 1Service de Génétique, CHU Angers, France, 2Institut de Genetique Médicale CHRU, While chromosome 1p36 deletion syndrome is one of the most common Lille, France, 3Service de Génétique, CHU Poitiers, France, 4Service de Génétique et terminal subtelomeric microdeletion syndrome, 1p36 microduplications Embryologoe médicale, Hopital trousseau Paris, France, 5Service de Genetique, CHU are rare events. We identified the smallest case of de novo 1p36 duplica- Angers, France, 6Service de Genetique Médicale, CHU Nantes, France, 7Service de Genetique Moléculaire et génomique, CHU Rennes, France, 8Service de Génétique, tion reported to date using high resolution arrayCGH. The patient has in- CHU Tours, France, 9Département de Génétique et Centre de Référence « Déficiences tellectual disability, microcephaly, epilepsy and perisylvian polymicrogyria intellectuelles de causes rares,GRC, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, AP-HP, Groupe (PMG). PMG has frequently been observed in patients with 1p36 deletion Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière,Paris, France, 10Service de Pédiatrie et Génétique, CH syndrome. The duplicated segment in our patient is intrachromosomal and Vannes, France, 11Service de Genetique et Oncogénétique, CHR Amiens, France, contains two genes : ENO1 and RERE, both disrupted by the rearrangement. 12Laboratoire de génétique chromosomique, CHU Marseille, France, 13Département Expression analysis of these two genes revealed a reduced expression in the de Genetique Médicale, CHU Marseille, France, 14Unité de génétique Clinique, Hopital patient cells, mimicking haploinsufficiency. We performed in situ hybridi- Femme Mere Enfant Bron, France, 15Pole Pédiatrie médico-chirurgicale et Génétique clinique, CHU Rennes, France, 16Laboratoire de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, CHU zation during mouse development to study the developmental expression Lyon, France, 17Consultation de génétique-CLAD Nord de France, CH Arras, France. profile of these two genes. We also studied the consequences of their inacti- vation in vivo using in utero electroporation of shRNAs. These experiments allowed us to define the enolase 1 (ENO1) gene as the most likely candida- Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH array), the first-tier dia- te to explain the brain malformation phenotype of the studied patient and gnosis test for individuals with intellectual disability (ID), allows to describe make it a good candidate for the malformations of the cerebral cortex obser- numerous new microdeletion and microduplication syndromes. However, it ved in patients with 1p36 monosomy. is sometimes difficult to determine whether new Copy Number Variations P S09
.003 (CNVs) are pathogenic or are benign variants because they are not well li- Genetic characterization of blood spot-derived DNA from 209 sted in the databases, their frequency in the general population is unknown individuals known to carry 22q11Del reveals a new nested deletion and, most of the time, associated clinical data are missing. T. Sparsø1, S. Weinsheimer1, W. Mazin1, M. Bertalan1, J. Grauholm2, M. V. Hollegaard2, D. Xq25 microduplication was first described by Bonnet et al. (2009) and M. Hougaard3, D. M. Hougaard3, C. B. Pedersen4, P. B. Mortensen4, L. Olsen1, T. Werge1; 1Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Centre, Sct Hans, Roskilde, Denmark, 2Danish Philippe et al. (2012) who reported a familial case and two sporadic cases Centre for Neonatal Screening, Department for congenital Disorder, Statens Serum respectively. These authors pointed out that the principal gene involved in Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Danish Centre for Neonatal Screening, Department for this duplication was GRIA3. More recently, two publications by di Benedetto congenital Disorder, Statens Serum Institut, Roskilde, Denmark, 4National Centre for et al. (2014) and Yingjun et al. (2014) showed that the critical region invol- register-based Research, Aarhus, Denmark. ved the XIAP and STAG2 loci. We report 11 individuals with Xq25 duplication diagnosed in the ACPA ( 1A 6na 6lyse Chromosomique sur Puce à ADNE)S nHetGwo 2rk0. 1T5hi s| cGohLoArtS cGonOsiWste,d S CODrTieLdA bNloDod, sUpoKt |( DWBSW) sWam.EplSeHs fGro.mO nReGwborn babies are collected world- of 9 males and 2 females. The 11 duplications ranged from 180 to 965 kb.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index wide to screen for diseases. In Denmark, blood spots have been stored since Cytogenetic analysis revealed a 47,XXY karyotype*, while the high resolu- 1981 and combined with the well-characterized clinical information from tion array based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) identified im- the Danish registers, DBS is a valuable research opportunity for genetic portant rearrangements shown below:Important Genes in p ofo p cu opla yt io nn u- mba bs ee rd s at ru iad nie tss (. CT Nh Ve )a ii nm Do Nf Ath dis rs it vu ed dy fi rs t mo e bv loa olu da t se oth tse aq su a wli et ly 1Psot asi bt eio rn o nf P oo fs i lati so tn aberrant region v e o p l Chromosomal ra t comments as to determine phenotypic risk with the known 22q11Del. DNA from 209 region/ size probe aberrant GTF2I, NCF1, GTF2IRD2, probe STAG3 L2
, PM S2
P5 , GATS
L1 , individuals identified from the Danish cytogenetic registry as carriers of a WBSCR16, GTF2IRD2B, 22q11Del was extracted from DBS. Since blood spots contain limited amount NCF1C, LO
C100093631 , of DNA, the DNA extraction step was carried out in parallel with and without DUP 7q11.23; GTF2I
P1 , GATS
L2 , SPDY
E8 P, Microduplication the whole-genome amplification (WGA) step. The samples were genotyped 882.9Kb 74,144,42275,027,348PM
S2 L2
, STAG3 L1
, TRIM74, in the Williams with the Illumina Psych Array and PennCNV was applied for CNV prediction. TRIM73 syndrome region Compared to unamplified genomic DNA, WGA DNA severely increases the DRD4 CNV false positive rate. The true positive rate was not affected for the diffe- DEL 11p15.5; rent versions of 22q11Del. Among the 209 individuals, 170 carried the com- 1.6Mb 383,89 2,014,937 HAR1B, HAR1A, CHRNA4, ADHD** mon 3MB deletion, 15 the short 1.5MB deletion, 5 the atypical nested ~1MB DEL KCNQ2 Psychotic deletion, 2 the atypical distal deletion and 4 carried a novel atypical deletion 20q13.33; 61,632,19662,539,530 behavior, ASD**, *9A07b.e3rKrbations detected with aCGH due to 47XXY karyotype: DUePpi lXepps2y2.33, not previously described. The new deletion spans 6 genes and resides in the 2.7Mb; DUP Xq21.31 - q21.32, 3.9Mb; DUP Yp11.32 - p11.2, 9.96Mb; DUP beginning of the common 22q11Del. This novel 22q11Del showed a similar Yq11.21 - q12, 15.1Mb psychiatric and somatic phenotype as the common deletion. The discovery ADHD ** Autism Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder; ASD: Autism Spectrum Dis- of a novel 22q11Del that does not intersect with the well-studied candidate order genes (TBX and COMT ) underline the complexity of 22q11Del and the asso- This case underlines the utility of aCGH in addition to the routine cytogenetic ciation to somatic and psychiatric diagnosis. analysis in cases with severe psychiatric phenotype for accurate diagnosis and PM09.004 complete genetic counselling. 47, XXY (Klinefelter syndrome): Positive Effects of Early Hormonal Treatment (EHT) in Infancy and Hormonal Booster Treatment (HBT) between 5 and 8 years on Neurodevelopmental and Neurobehavioral PM09.006 Outcome. Genetic overlap between Intellectual Disability and Attention-Deficit/ C. A. Samango-Sprouse1,2,3, P. A. Lawson3, T. Sadeghin2, F. L. Mitchell2, A. Gropman1,4; Hyperactivity Disorder 1George Washington University of the Health Sciences, Washington, DC, United States, 2Neurodevelopmental Diagnostic Center for Children, Davidsonville, MD, United States, M. Klein1, A. van Rens1, M. Hoogman1, T. Guadalupe2,3, Psychiatric Genomics Consortium 3The Focus Foundation, Davidsonville, MD, United States, 4Department of Neurology, ADHD Working Group, H. Brunner4, A. Arias-Vasquez5, B. Franke6; Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Language and Genetics Department, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, Background and Aims: 47, XXY occurs one in 500 live births and may result Netherlands, 4Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, in complex neurodevelopmental and cognitive dysfunction. Three recent Radboud Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Departments of publications have demonstrated positive effects of Early Hormonal Treat- Human Genetics, Psychiatry and Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboud university medical ment (EHT) during infancy. center, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Departments of Human Genetics and Psychiatry, Radboud university medical center, Methods: 42 males prenatally diagnosed with XXY participated in compre- Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands. hensive neurdevelopmental assesments. This retrospective study had three treatment groups: EHT with HBT, HBT-Only, and untreated. Data was analy- zed one year before and one year after treatment. For the untreated group Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a common neuropsych- we used data points within 12 months of the treatment groups. iatric disorder with a complex genetic background. Intellectual Disability Results: The EHT+HBT group showed significantly better perfomance (ID) and ADHD are often co-morbid, suggesting genetic overlap. We inve- than the HBT-Only group on Fine Motor Control(p=.024) and PSI(p=.004). stigated whether genes, affected by rare genetic variations in patients with The EHT+HBT group also showed better performance than the untreated ID, also contribute to ADHD risk. Common single nucleotide polymorphisms group on motor tests; Fine Motor(p=.017), Running Speed(p=.031), (SNPs; MAF>= 1%) in 384 autosomal ID-related genes selected from the Strength(p=.032), the Motor Composite (p=.023), as well as on the WISC- ‘Intellectual Disability Gene Panel’ (downloaded from https://www.rad- VCI(p=.019), PRI(p=.021), and FSIQ(p=.004). The HBT-Only group perfor- boudumc.nl/Informatievoorverwijzers/Genoomdiagnostiek/Documents/ med significantly better than the untreated group on the VCI(p=.020) and ngs-intellectual_disability_panel_181213.pdf) were tested for association PIQ(p=.010). There was a significant drop in PIQ in the untreated group over with ADHD risk, on gene-wide and gene-set level, using ADHD meta-ana- time (p=.033), while the treated groups did not decline. lytic data from of the Psychiatric Genomic Consortium (PGC; N=5,621 ca- Conclusions: Multiple positive effects of Testosterone replacement were ses and 13,589 controls) using KGG v3.5. The ID gene-set was significantly observed in boys with 47, XXY, supporting the need for early identification associated with ADHD in the PGC ADHD meta-analysis (Pgene-set=2.19E-3). and treatment of these boys. The significant results were observed in the Further analysis showed thatM tEhFe2 fCi ndings were due to the inattention EHT+HBT group. The untreated group showed a decline in PIQ over time. symptom domain (Pgene-set=5.00E-3) rather than hyperactivity/impulsivity This suggests that, without treatment, some cognitive functioning may de- in ADHD (PMge En Fe-s 2et C=0.203). The gene showed gene-wide association cline in young boys with 47,XXY. Androgen replacement prior to puberty (corrected for multiple testing) with ADHD risk (PMEF C2
=3.92E-5). Two SNPs may be important not only to improving cognitive function, but to preser- within the locus were assessed on neuroanatomy using voxel-based ving existing function in prepubertal males with XXY. morphometry (VBM) in the Brain Imaging Genetics cohort (BIG; N>1,300) P S09
.005 and one SNP showed bilateral association with gray matter volume in the la- Severe psychiatric phenotype in a child with 47, XYY and multiple teral occipital cortex. This study demonstrates the genetic overlap between rearrangements detected in array CGH ID and ADMHEDF, 2shC owing that common SNPs in genes, known to be affected M. Tzetis1, K. Kosma1, A. Syrmou1, A. Xaidara2, L. Maragoudaki1, T. Korpa3, G. Kolaitis3, E. by rare genetic variations in ID patients, contribute to ADHD risk. We also Kanavakis1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1; 1Dept of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 21st Department of Pediatrics, St. Sophia‘s identified as a novel candidate gene for ADHD. Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Psychiatric Department, “Aghia Sophia Children’s Grants were received from Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research Hospital”, Athens, Greece. (NWO Brain & Cognition Excellence Program (433-09-229)), Vici grant to B.F. (016-130-669), Netherlands Brain Foundation (grant 15F07[2]27), BBMRI-NL (C P2010
-33), and European Community’s Seventh Framework Co-occurrence of 47,XYY syndrome and other molecular rearrangements in Programme (F P7
/2007-2013; 602805). the same individual is extremely rare. We report a boy referred for genetic evaluation at the age of 9 years old when he was admitted to the psychiatric unit of the Children’s Hospital due to extended aggressive behaviour, which attributed to a severe psychiatric phenotype. He had no peculiar phenotypic findings, except for a unilateral iris coloboma. The proband’s family and me- dical history were not indicative oEfS aHnyG a b2n0or1m5a l|i tGy.LASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 167ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S09
.007 A. Ververi1, L. Islam1,2, B. Bewes1, L. Bourdon1, C. Sullivan1, N. Canham1; Association study of DIS C1
 and COMT polymorphisms in Bulgarian 1NW Thames Regional Genetics Service, Harrow, London, United Kingdom, 2West patients with Alzheimer disease. Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom. K. Mihova1, S. Mehrabian2, R. Pavlova2, A. Jordanova1,3, V. Mitev1, L. Traykov2, R. Kaneva1; 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital Angelman syndrome is characterised by global developmental delay, lack „Alexandrovska“, Department of Neurology, Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, of speech, seizures, a characteristic behavioral profile with a happy de- 3VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. meanor, microcephaly, ataxia etc. More than 2/3 of cases are due to a 5 Mb interstitial deletion of the imprinted region 15q11.2-q13, which is usually de novo. The rest are associated with point mutations in UB E3
A gene, im- Background: Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenera- printing defects and paternal uniparental disomy. Small intragenic UB E3
A tive disease characterized by dementia, cognitive impairment, memory and deletions have been rarely described. They are usually maternally inherited, personality disorders resulting in progressive degeneration of the brain increasing the recurrence risk to 50%, and may be missed by conventio- neurons. DIS C1
 (disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1) and COMT (catechol-O- nal testing (methylation studies and UB E3
A gene sequencing). Herein a boy methyltransferase) are associated with the pathogenesis of neurocognitive with Angelman syndrome due to an 11.7 kb intragenic deletion is described. impairment. The Val158Met (rs4680, G>A) polymorphism in COMT and The deletion was identified by array CGH and was subsequently detected in Ser736Cys (rs821616, T>A) in DIS C1
 genes have shown association with his affected first cousin and unaffected maternal grandfather, mother and various neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases. Several studies aunt, confirming the silencing of the paternal allele. The patient had global implicated them in the cognitive impairment and different neuropsychiatric developmental delay, speech impairment, a happy demeanor, microcephaly features. and an abnormal EEG, but no seizures by the age of 4 years. The family was Materials and methods: In this study 218 patients with AD and 125 healthy given a recurrence risk of 50% and prenatal testing was offered. Delineation controls, matched to the patients by age, gender and ethnicity (HC) were of the underlying genetic mechanism is of utmost importance for reasons included. Genotypes were determined using TaqMan assay (Applied Biosy- of genetic counselling, as well as appropriate management and prognosis. stems). Statistical analysis was done using PLINK . Alternative techniques, such as array CGH and MLPA, are necessary when Results and discussion: The Val158Met and Ser736Cys polymorphisms did conventional testing for AS has failed to identify the underlying genetic me- not show significant difference in allele frequency distribution between the chanism. AD and HC group. The common Val158Met alleles of COMT were with al- PM09.010 most equal allele frequencies (p=0.9, OR= 1.02). Ser736 variant of DIS C1
 Genetic diagnosis of ataxia using NGS was more frequent among AD patients, but did not reach significant associa- A. Romera1, D. Valero1, A. Matilla2, C. Collado1, R. Rodríguez-De Pablos1, V. Fernández- tion (p=0.08, OR=1.37). When a subgroup analysis depending on the age of Pedrosa1, V. Felipe1, D. Cantalapiedra1, M. Roca1, G. Hernández1, D. Diego-Álvarez1, C. onset was done, the Ser736 variant of DIS C1
 showed tendency of associati- Baudes1, J. Triviño1, R. Miñambres1, S. Santillán1; on (p=0.055, OR=1.51) 1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain, 2Hospital GermansTrias i Pujol, Barcelona, Spain. Conclusions: Our findings did not show overall association with the studied COMT and DIS C1
 SNPs in Bulgarian patients with AD, probably due to the limited sample size. Further studies in enlarged sample and with cognitive Hereditary Cerebellar Ataxia (HCA) is a slowly progressive disorder cha- measures are needed to elucidate their role. racterized by the presence of abnormal and uncoordinated movements Acknowledgements: This work was supported by Grant: DUNK01/2/2009 that mainly affect walking, speech and eye movement. Its diagnosis is not from National Science Fund, Bulgaria. straightforward, mainly due to the presence of nonspecific overlapping clini- PM09.008 cal symptoms and of genetic heterogeneity. A global approach using massive Analysis of allelic variants in endothelial function and cell death technologies such as NGS could be of great help to improve the diagnosis. related genes in Spanish patients with vascular dementia and We present a dataset of 28 ataxic patients studied in our laboratory using a Alzheimer’s disease NGS targeted re-sequencing panel that included genes associated with Ata- D. Martín-Sánchez1,2, R. Manso Calderón3,2, M. Fernández Prieto1,2, R. González xia [between 1-30 genes]. Coding exons and splice-site regions of the genes Sarmiento1,2; associated with each pathology were analyzed. Enrichment and sequencing 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca., were carried out using SureSelect Enrichment System (Agilent) and SOLiD Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL)., Salamanca, 5500/MiSeq(Life Technologies/Illumina). Mean depth was established at Spain, 3Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. 200x. In 6 out of 28 samples (21%), a genetic cause that justifies the clinical dia- gnosis was found. In 12 out of 28 patients the results were inconclusive. In INTRODUCTION: The two most common causes of dementia are Alzheimer‘s these samples, 41 variants (confirmed by Sanger sequencing) were identi- disease (AD) and vascular dementia (VD). The onset of dementia may be de- fied as variants of uncertain significance (VUS). According to their effect, termined by genetic and environmental factors. Single nucleotide polymor- missense (21), synonymous (13), in frame deletion (2), splice-site (5) mu- phisms (SNPs) of genes encoding VEGF-A and its receptor, VEGFR-2, eNOS tations were found. In 10 out of 28 samples no variants (pathogenic/UV) or T P53
 might modulate the risk of these global health problems. were identified. OBJECTIVES: We have analyzed the relationship of the following SNPs: Based in our experience, we propose that: -460C>T and -2578A>C of VEGFA, -604A>G of VEGFR2, +894G>T of eNOS • NGS is an effective approach for the diagnosis of Ataxias. and Arg72Pro of T P53
 as well as sociodemographic and clinical risk factors • Cosegregation studies and functional analysis are needed to better under- VD develop (and its subtypes) and EA. stand the effect of VUS and could aid in the diagnosis of a significant number We have analyzed 150 patients with VD (corticalVD=74; subcortical VD=76), of patients. 147 patients with AD and 150 controls >70 years that there was no evidence P S09
.011 of clinical or psychometric cognitive impairment. Genotyping was accom- Diagnosing ataxia using a Next-Generation-Sequencing gene panel plished by DNA digestion with restriction nucleases (PCR-RFLP) and PCR J. K. Bickmann1, T. C. Benkert1, M. Synofzik2, S. Maul3, M. Sturm1, F. Lenz1, M. Schulze1, F. with Taqman® probes (qRT-PCR). Harmuth1, I. Krägeloh-Mann4, T. Klockgether5, T. Klopstock6, D. Timmann-Braun7, O. H. RESULTS: Our results showed that VEGFA alleles 460C-2578A (OR:0.625, Riess1, L. Schöls2, P. Bauer1; p=0.042) and eNOS allele +894G (OR:0.606, p=0.037) were associated with 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tübingen, Germany, 2University lower risk of EA in patients older than 80 years. The VEGFR2 allele -604A Department of Neurology, Tübingen, Germany, 3Department of Neurology, Charité, (OR:0.555, P=0.004) was associated with a lower risk of subcortical VD. The Berlin, Germany, 4University Children‘s Hospital, Tübingen, Germany, 5University Pro72 allele of T P53
 gene (OR:0.500, p=0.001) was associated with a lower Department of Neurology, Bonn, Germany, 6University Department of Neurology, risk of AD while the Arg72 allele (OR:1.768, p=0.026) was associated with Munich, Germany, 7University Department of Neurology, Essen, Germany. an increased risk of cortical VD. CONCLUSIONS: The results of our study suggest that polymorphisms asso- ciated with endothelial function and cell death may modulate the suscepti- Introduction: The exact use of escalated genetic testing in a heterogeneous bility to the risk of different subtypes of dementia. group of ataxia patients is unknown. Especially patients with an onset bey- Supported in part by PI13/01741 ond the age of 40 may be underdiagnosed. This is particularly relevant in the light of treatable metabolic defects but also genetic counselling and clinical P S09
.009 work-up require a correct diagnosis.Materials and Methods: 139 patients Angelman syndrome due to a maternally inherited intragenic UB E3
A were sequenced using a Haloplex (Agilent) enrichment of 61 ataxia genes, deletion in a family of Chinese origin 40 metabolic genes associated with ataxia and 17 genes causing mitochon- 168 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOdrTiaLl AdiNsoDrd,e Urs Kon | a W MWiSeWq in.EstSruHmGe.nOt (RIlGlumina, 150 bp paired-end sequen-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index cing).Results: 9% were immediately diagnosed (3x SCAR8, 2x EA2, 2xS- gnalling at membrane. However, further studies are needed to confirm these CA14, SCAR10, SPG7, NPC, SCA28, GM1 gangliosidosis, APBD) (6 with onset findings. before, 7 after 40 years, 2 of which had a negative family history). Another PM09.014 12% of cases were probably solved unless the segregation (not completed) CNVs in the group of the patients with autistic spectrum disorders yields controversial results (13 with onset before, 3 after 40 years; nega- detected by MLPA and SNParray. tive family history in 1). In 39% we found either heterozygous mutations P. Capkova1, V. Curtisova1, M. Godava1, J. Srovnal2, V. Becvarova3, K. Adamova1, H. or likely pathogenic variants in recessive ataxia-related genes or candidate Synkova1; variants in dominant genes facilitating a targeted diagnostic work-up for the 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Palacky University, Olomouc, referring clinicians (25 with onset before, 29 after 40 years, 14 of which Czech Republic, 2Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine of the Faculty of Medicine of Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3Gennet, Centre for Fetal had a negative family history). Conclusions: NGS is powerful in diagnosing Medicine and Reproductive Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic. hereditary ataxias but also provides a large number of variants requiring careful clinical evaluation. As our results indicate it is possible to diagnose even patients with a late onset or negative family history for mutations in Autistic spectrum disorders (ASD) are characterized by simultaneous defi- ataxia-related genes.<br cits in 3 domains of behavior: reciprocal social interaction, communication PM09.012 and stereotyped and restricted behaviors. Submicroscopic CNVs can have a The National Paediatric Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T) Clinic in England causal or susceptibility-related role in heritability ASD. S. Pasalodos1, J. Bhatt1, E. McDermott1, G. Davies2, A. M. Taylor3, M. Suri1; Objective: We performed MLPA and SNP array study focused on detection of 1Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 2Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, United Kingdom, 3University of CNVs in the group of patients with ASD. Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. Method: Samples of DNA were tested by MLPA (SALSA MLPA  P343
 Autism 1, Microdeletions -  P297
,  P245
, Subtelomeres - P070
,  P036
 and  P106
 MRX) and SNP array. A-T is an early childhood progressive multisystem neurodegenerative disor- Results: In the group of the children with ASD (42) three likely pathoge- der characterised by cerebellar ataxia, immunodeficiency, lung disease and nic CNVs were discovered. Microduplication 16p11.2 (576 kb) inherited a high risk of malignancy. Median survival is estimated at 25 years, but seve- from father, microduplication 1q21.1q21.2 (1,3 Mb) de novo, unbalanced rity is variable and management is improving the quality of life and survival. translocation with microdeletion 20q13.33 (1,58 Mb) and microduplication A-T is recessively inherited and caused by mutations in the ATM gene on 22q13.33 (app. 190 kb - covering SHANK3) de novo. In another four cases, chromosome 11q.26. A-T is rare; in the UK and Ireland there are approxi- the inherited variants of unknown significance involving genes: NRXN1, SN- mately 170 cases. RPN, MAPK3, and CD160 were detected. England has a nationally-commissioned Paediatric A-T Clinic based in Not- The microdeletion 16p11.2 (611 kb) was incidentally found in the female tingham and sees children from the UK and overseas. There are two funda- patient with Mayer-Rokitansky -Kuster-Hauser syndrome (MRKHS) without mental aims, to achieve an accurate diagnosis and to manage the patient autistic features. The loss of 1.3 Mb in 15q13.2q13.3 was also discovered by holistically, addressing every aspect of the condition. The Clinical Team MLPA 343 Autism1 in the patient suffered from intellectual disability but comprises over 20 specialists and collaborates with the A-T Society support without ASD. group. Clinic is held 6 times a year and sees 6 children per clinic over 2 days. Conclusion: SALSA MLPA probemix  P343
 Autism1 has proved to be efficient Generally, patients are reviewed every 2 years with ongoing contact with for detection CNVs in the group of children with ASD. However, the simulta- their local Paediatric Teams. We have recently published a guidance docu- neous tests with another probemixes ( P297
, Human Telomere 3 and 5 and ment on diagnosis and clinical care for children with A-T. Involvement in so on) or simultaneous test with SNP or CGH array is recommended espe- research and family education are integral parts of this Service. cially when intellectual insufficiency in the patient is present. The poster will describe the patient pathway, specific medical interventions P S09
.015 undertaken in the clinic and/or arranged through local services as well as Whole exome sequencing identified a novel missense variant clinical outcomes and implications for management. Examples are the un- (c.425C>G or p. P142
R) of the EN2 gene in two unrelated Thai patients derlying ATM mutations, the nutritional status of patients, the prevalence of with autism spectrum disorder skin disease and scoliosis and the results of respiratory, immunological and P. Limprasert1, A. Hnoonual1, T. Sripo1, J. Worachotekamjorn1, R. Roongpraiwan2, T. other investigations undertaken. Sombuntham2, T. Hansakunachai3; 1Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Songkla University, Songkhla, Thailand, 2Faculty of We believe that this Clinic provides a paradigm for the optimal management Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand, 3Faculty of of rare progressive multi-systemic genetic disorders. Medicine, Thammasat University, Pathumthani, Thailand. P S09
.013 Exome-wide association analysis of attention hyperactivity disorder in a genetically isolated population Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodevelopmental disor- D. Vojinovic1, I. Pappa2,3, H. W. Tiemeier3,4, C. M. van Dujin1,5,6, N. Amin1; ders with largely unknown genetic defects. Recently, whole exome sequen- 1Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, cing (WES) has been found to be a powerful technique for identifying new Netherlands, 2School of Pedagogical and Educational Sciences, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Generation R Study Group, Erasmus Medical Center, variants which may help to depict the complex genetics of ASD. Nine un- Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry/Psychology, related Thai patients with ASD and no pathogenic CNV were selected for Erasmus University Medical Center-Sophia Children׳s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, WES study using the SureSelect Human All Exon V4 kit on the Illumina 5Netherlands Consortium on Health Aging and National Genomics Initiative, Leiden, Hiseq2000. To identify potential pathogenic variants in candidate genes of Netherlands, 6Center of Medical Systems Biology, Leiden, Netherlands. ASD, the TruSight Autism gene list (101 genes) and SFARI AutDB database (667 genes) were used for reference databases. Interestingly, a novel hetero- zygous missense variant (c.425C>G or p. P142
R) in exon 1 of the Engrailed 2 Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is highly heritable psych- (EN2) gene, a homeobox transcription factor involved in brain development, iatric disorder with a heritability estimates ranging from 60 to 90 %. To was identified in two patients. In the first family, the G allele was also found identify rare variants associated to ADHD, we performed exome-sequencing in the patient’s older brother with intellectual disability and his normal mo- based association study in a genetically isolated population in the Nether- ther. In the second family, the G allele was transmitted from the patient’s lands. The study included 554 individuals whose exomes were sequenced normal father, but it was not found in a male cousin with ASD. In addition, and who were assessed for inattention, hyperactivity and ADHD index. the variant was absent in the SNP database, the Exome Variant Server (EVS), All single nucleotide (SNVs) variants were tested for association applying the 1000 Genome Project, 100 Thai patients with ASD and 240 normal Thai additive linear modeling adjusting for age, sex and relatedness among the controls suggesting that the new variant is very rare and has never been samples. Moreover Sequence Kernel Association Test (SKAT) was used to reported. Although this variant is predicted by the PolyPhen-2 to be possibly test the joint effect of multiple variants within the gene/region. Significant damaging to the EN2 protein function, EN2 protein function studies of the association of two rare SNVs (MAF = 0.27 %, β = 12.70, p-value = 9.36E-08) p. P142
R are required to determine molecular basis of ASD pathogenesis. mapped to intronic part of multiple  C2
 domains, transmembrane 1 (MCT P1
) gene on chromosome 5 was observed with inattention. Gene-based analy- sis revealed suggestive association of CEACAM19 (p-value = 1.91E-05) and SCY L2
 (p-value = 1.35E-05) to inattention and hyperactivity, respectively. To conclude, present study identifies exome-wide association between ASD and two SNVs within MCT P1
 geEneS, HwGhic 2h 0p1la5y i|m GpLorAtaSnGt rOolWe i,n S CCa2O+T sLi-AND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 169ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM09.016 Federation, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate The autism-associated long noncoding RNA MSN P1
AS regulates a Education, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5The State Educational network of genes involved in neuronal process stability. Institution of Professional Training under the Federal Agency of Health Care and Social Development, Moscow, Russian Federation. J. DeWitt, N. Grepo, D. B. Campbell; University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States. Despite of significant advances in bioinformatics and genomics, analyses of From genome-wide association studies (GWAS), a novel gene wasM dSiNscPo1vAeS- generalized data on copy number variation (CNV) or variome aimed at gene red that has a highly significant association with auMtiSsNmP 1spAeSctrum disorder hunting still represent a major challenge. Here, we have used an approach (ASD). The gene is a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) designated towards identifying genes implicated in autism pathogenesis through eva- (moesin pseudogene 1, antisense). ExpressionM SoNf  P1
AS was increased luation of autistic variome addressed by microarray genome analysis with in the cerebral cortex of individuals with ASD aMnSdN individuals with the ASD- an original bioinformatic technology. To identify the spectrum of CNV, a high- associated genetic marker. Overexpression of in human neuronal resolution SNP-array genome scan (Affymetrix platform) was used. Bioinfor- cells caused decreased expression of moesin ( ) mRNA and moesin pro- matics analysis has represented a complex evaluation of CNV by simulations tMeSinN, Pw1hAiSch is involved in neuronal process stability and immune response. of transcriptional, interactomic and metabolomic activity of candidate genes These data indicate one aspect of the potential contribution of increased using available genome, transcriptome and proteome databases (Iourov et MSN P1
AS expression in ASD. However, there are likely to be additional al., 2014). Pathogenic CNV were found in 38 children with autism from the transcriptomic impacts of this lncRNA. To determine the effecMtsS oNfP a1lAteSred Russian cohort (n=212). Six chromosomal rearrangements were detected: expression on theM nSeNuPro1nAaSl transcriptome, we transfected human deletions at 6p11.2 (PRISM2), 9q21.13 (GDA, ZFAND5, TM C1
), 8p23.3p23.1 neuronal progenitor cells with constructs that overexpressed or (46 genes), Xp22.12 (RP S6
KA3, CNKSR2) and Yq11.223q11.23 duplications. transcriptionally silenced . RNA-MSeSqN analysis indicated altered Furthermore, bioinformatic analysis of CNV and single-gene deletions/du- expression of multiple genes that conMtrSibNuPt1e AtSo altered neuronal process plications has defined following autism candidate genes: CBARA1, KRT83, stability and MimSNmune response, including . However, our data indica- RBFOX1, NDP, AT P6
V1 E1
, CNKSR2, AT P1
A2, FBXO21, ACS L3
, AT P2
B3, IM- te several genes that are impacted by dyMsrSeNgPu1laAtSion more signi- PA1, CNTNA P4
. The latter allowed speculations on potential autistic mole- ficantly than , suggesting a network of genes that contribute to ASD risk. cular pathways involving genome instability, programmed cell death and Ongoing experiments seek to define the role of the gene network axon guidance. Successful delineation of a panel of candidate genes suggests in neuronal process stability. generalized variome analyses as a valuable source for gene hunting. These data supports the idea that additional bioinformatic technologies are able P S09
.017 to give further insights into disease pathogenesis. Thus, a disease variome Expression profile of circulating miRNAs in Autism Spectrum determined by SNP-array genome scan and addressed an original bioinfor- Disorder (ASD) matic technology appears to be an issue for genomic studies. Supported by I. C. Conceição1,2,3, A. C. Rodrigues1, K. Kwiatkowska1, I. Picanço1, C. Café4, J. Almeida4, S. Mouga4, F. Duque4,5,6, F. J. Enguita7,8, G. Oliveira4,5,6, A. M. Vicente1,2,3; Russian Scientific Fund (Grant #14-35-00060). 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Biosystems P S09
.019 and Integrative Sciences Institute (BioISI), Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Identification of a rare deletion encompassing ELMOD3 and CAPG in Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 4Unidade two siblings with Autism Spectrum Disorder Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo, Centro de Desenvolvimento, Hospital Pediátrico, E. Bacchelli1, L. Moi2, A. Fadda2, J. Pinna2, C. Cameli1, R. Fadda2, A. Salvago3, L. Delitala3, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra (CHUC), Coimbra, Portugal, 5Instituto E. Maestrini1, G. Doneddu4, P. Zavattari2; Biomédico de Investigação em Luz e Imagem, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de 1Dept. Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Dept. Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Centro de Investigação e Formação Clinica do HP-CHUC, Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 3Dept. Pedagogy, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisbon, Portugal, 8Faculdade de Psychology and Philosophy, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4Center for Pervasive Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. Developmental Disorders, Azienda Ospedaliera Brotzu, Cagliari, Italy. Introduction: ASD is a genetically complex disorder, highly heterogeneous Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a severe neurodevelopmental condi- and with unclear etiology. In this study we addressed the possible contri- tion with highly complex genetic predisposition. Recent discoveries have bution of epigenetic factors to ASD etiology, focusing on deregulated Mi- highlighted the importance of both sequence and structural rare variations croRNAs (miRNAs) expression. miRNAs are small noncoding RNA molecules in ASD susceptibility. In particular, focusing on rare copy number variants that negatively regulate gene expression. miRNAs are thought to be released (CNVs) has already been highly productive in uncovering an increasing num- from pathological tissues to plasma in illness situations, and the strong ber of specific genes and chromosomal intervals conferring risk to ASD. correlation between circulating and tissue miRNAs indicates that plasma During a genome-wide CNV scan using a multi-algorithm approach on 9 miRNAs may be useful disease biomarkers. multiplex ASD families from SardinCiAaP, wGe identified a rare genic deletion of Methods: miRNA plasma profiles were obtained for patients with ASD and ~E L3
M7 OKDb3, trCaAnPsGmitted from the unaffected mother to both affected siblings. other neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDD), essentially disruptive beha- This deletion includes the entire gene and the last coding exons of vior, language delay and psychomotor delay. Patients were all male, with a . encodes a member of the gelsolin/villin family of actin-re- mean developmental coefficient of 92±18, and no obvious dysmorphisms. gulatory proteins, that might be involved in control of dendritic spine shape. Exiqon human miRNome PCR panels (testing 752 miRNAs) were used for ELMOD3 belongs to the engulfment and cell motility (ELMO) family, with miRNA profiling. recently proposed functional links to sound perception and actin cytoske- Results: We identified 50 miRNAs differentially expressed in ASD vs NDD. leton. Notably, of the 10 miRNAs with higher fold-change (increased 2.5-3.3X), 8 No deletions inCvAoPlvGing thEiLs MgOenDo3m ic region were found in 4768 controls miRNAs had a target gene in common, MM P16
. This gene is expressed at from published high rCeAsoPlGution SNP-EaLrMraOyD d3ata, while other two deletions high levels in the brain, and a balanced de novo translocation in a ASD pati- encompassing and have been reported in two subjects with ent involving MM P16
 has previously been described. ASD, suggesting that and/or haploinsufficiency may have Conclusions: This is the first study of circulating miRNA profiles comparing clinical relevance to ASD. In order to test this hypothesis together with a patients with ASD and other NDDs. The preliminary results suggest that recessive model of inheritance, we first excluded that this deletion is a com- miRNA profilling may eventually improve differential diagnosis. The results mon polymorphism in Sardinia, then we performed expression and muta- also implicate novel pathological pathways in ASD, namely involving metal- tion analysis of both genes in the discovery pedigree, and a further clinical oproteinases. These are crucial molecules for the integrity of the extracellu- evaluation of all family members. lar matrix and consequently for cell migration and regeneration, processes Grant references: Fondazione Banco di Sardegna, Kyulan Family Foundati- thought to be involved in ASD. on PM09.018 PM09.020 Autistic variome: gene hunting through SNP-microarray genome Exome sequencing of two large Cuban families densely affected with analysis and bioinformatics bipolar disorder S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, I. Y. Iourov1,2,4, S. A. Korostelev5, M. A. Zelenova1,2,3, K. S. Vasin1,2,3, A. P. A. Maaser1,2, A. J. Forstner1,2, K. Ludwig1,2, J. Strohmaier3, F. Degenhardt1,2, F. Streit3, Silvanovich1, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3; M. Alblas1,2, K. Keppler1,2, N. Fricker1,2, S. Rausch1,2, A. Hofmann1,2, S. Herms1,2,4, P. 1Mental Health Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian National Hoffmann1,4,5, H. Thiele6, P. Nürnberg6, B. Marcheco-Teruel7, O. Mors8, S. Cichon1,4,5, M. Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Separated Structural Unit Rietschel3, M. M. Nöthen1,2; “Clinical Research Institute of Pediatrics”, Ministry of Health of Russia, Moscow, Russian 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Genomics at the Life and Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Genetic 170 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Epidemiology in Psychiatry at the Central Institute of Mental Health, University Medical PM09.022 Center Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Division of Medical Enhancer variant enrichment analysis in bipolar disorder Genetics and Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, S. Sivalingam1, A. Hofmann1, S. Herms2, K. U. Ludwig1, T. Kaetzel1, T. W. Mühleisen3, M. 5Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine INM-1, Research Center Jülich, Jülich, Germany, Lang4, J. Strohmaier4, M. Rietschel4, P. Hoffman5, S. Cichon2, A. J. Forstner1, M. M. Nöthen1; 6Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7National 1Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University Centre of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Havana, Havana, Cuba, 8Department of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Abteilung für Medizinische Genetik, Departement Biomedizin, of Clinical Medicine at the Aarhus University and Aarhus University Hospital, Risskov, Universitätsspital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; Institute of Human Genetics, Department Denmark. of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, Research Center Jülich, Jülich, Germany, 4Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Bipolar disorder (BD) is a major psychiatric disorder affecting more than Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany 1% of the world’s population. The disease is characterized by recurrent ma- & Division of Medical Genetics, University Hospital and Department of Biomedicine, nic and depressive episodes and shows a high heritability of about 70%. To University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. date several genes contributing to BD susceptibility have been identified. However, the disease driving pathways and regulatory networks remain lar- gely unknown. As the cumulative impact of common alleles with small effect Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe neuropsychiatric disorder and GWAS have may only explain around 38% of the phenotypic variance for BD (Lee et al., robustly identified genetic variants implicated in disease susceptibility. Ho- 2011), rare variants of high penetrance have been suggested to contribute wever, the majority of loci are located in non-coding regions of the genome, to BD risk. thus requiring further functional annotation. In the present study we investigated the role of rare nonsynonymous vari- Enhancers are distal regulatory elements that control the activation of tis- ants in two large Cuban families. The exceptional lifetime prevalence of BD sue- and cell-type specific gene expression. Large-scale identification of in these pedigrees makes them promising candidates for identifying genetic actively transcribed enhancers is performed by different techniques such risk variants of Mendelian-like effects. For this purpose we selected 16 affec- as chromatin immunoprecipitation or cap analysis gene expression coupled ted individuals from both families and performed exome sequencing on the with next-generation sequencing. The Fantom5 enhancer atlas (Andersson HiSeq platform. In addition, all family members with available DNA (n=34) et al. 2014) represents a systematic resource for active enhancers in tissues were genotyped on the Illumina Psych Chip to create polygenic risk-score including human brain. The integration of GWAS signals and these functio- analyses in order to evaluate the contribution of common variants in the nal genomic regions provides novel opportunities to elucidate biological two pedigrees. mechanisms underlying BD. Therefore, we investigated in this study whe- Exome sequencing has recently been completed. Preliminary results of ther brain related enhancers are enriched among top BD GWAS hits. the first family revealed 10 missense variants and two frameshift variants Results from the largest BP meta-analyses comprising a sample of 24,025 shared among all investigated individuals (n=4). Affected genes include AD- patients and controls (Mühleisen et al. 2014) provided the basis for this ana- CY3, a gene that has been suggested to play a role in major depressive dis- lysis. We mapped significant GWAS to brain enhancer regions defined by the order, and SEMA4C required for brain development. Further evaluation and Fantom5 study. Enrichment of associated SNPs in enhancers was assessed interpretation of these results is currently underway and will be presented. by permutation analysis comparing observed overlap for each enhancer to P S09
.021 randomized enhancer regions. Delineation of the mutational spectrum in two susceptibility genes for An enrichment of GWAS hits was observed in neurons (p=0.015) but not in bipolar disorder, neurocan (NCAN) and adenylate cyclase 2 (ADCY2) human brain enhancers suggesting a cell-type specific regulation. A detailed S. B. Fischer1, S. Herms1,2, T. W. Mühleisen3, J. Strohmaier4, M. Attenhofer1, M. Bormann- analysis of several brain regions is currently ongoing and will be presented. Hassenbach5, F. Streit4, A. J. Forstner6, A. Maaser6, M. Albus5, W. Maier7, T. G. Schulze8, M. Overall, our results provide the first systematic integration of brain-related Rietschel4, M. M. Nöthen2,6, S. Cichon1,3,9, P. Hoffmann10,2,6; enhancers in the largest BP GWAS to date and subsequently enable the dis- 1Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute covery of relevant biological processes suitable for further functional stu- of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Juelich, Juelich, Germany, dies. 4Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, P S09
.023 University of Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany, 5kbo-Isar-Amper-Klinikum gemeinnützige Identification of shared risk loci and pathways between bipolar GmbH, Haar, Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, disorder and schizophrenia 7Department of Psychiatry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 8Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, A. J. Forstner1,2, A. Hofmann1,2, J. Hecker3, A. Maaser1,2, T. W. Mühleisen1,2,4, M. Leber5, Germany, 9Division of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Germany, T. G. Schulze6, J. Strohmaier7, F. Degenhardt1,2, J. Treutlein7, M. Mattheisen8,3, S. Meier7,9, 10Department of Biomedicine, Basel, Switzerland. S. Herms1,2,10, P. Hoffmann1,2,10, A. Lacour11, S. H. Witt7, A. Reif12, B. Müller-Myhsok13, S. Lucae13, W. Maier14, M. Schwarz15, M. Bauer16, M. Hautzinger17, S. Moebus18, P. M. Czerski19, J. Hauser19, J. Lissowska20, N. Szeszenia-Dabrowska21, P. Brennan22, J. D. McKay23, A. Wright24,25, P. B. Mitchell24,25, J. M. Fullerton26,27, P. R. Schofield26,27, N. G. Martin28, G. Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a common, genetically complex neuropsychiatric Babadjanova29, M. Alda30, P. Grof31,32, G. A. Rouleau33, G. Turecki34, C. Laprise35, F. Rivas36, disorder with a significant impact on the global burden of disease. Patients F. Mayoral36, M. Kogevinas37, M. Grigoroiu-Serbanescu38, T. Becker5,11, M. Rietschel7, S. suffer from recurrent episodes of strongly elevated (mania) and depressed Cichon1,4,10, H. Fier3, M. M. Nöthen1,2; mood. The life-time prevalence ranges between 0.5-1.5%. Heritability for 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute for Genomic Mathematics, BD estimates between 60-80%. University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine INM-1, We have recently published two large Genome Wide Association Studies Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany, 5Institute for Medical Biometry Informatics (GWAS) that provide strong evidence for an involvement of genetic variants and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 6Department of Psychiatry and in neurocan (NCAN, Cichon et al. 2011) and adenylate cyclase 2 (ADCY2; Psychotherapy, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 7Department of Genetic Mühleisen et al. 2014) in BD. NCAN encodes a glycoprotein that plays a role Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, University Medical in neuronal development. ADCY2 is a key enzyme in cAMP regulated GPCR Center Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 8Department of signalling pathways. Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 9National Centre Register-Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 10Division of Medical Genetics and For GWAS association signals, it is normally unclear whether they represent Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 11German Center the functionally relevant variants or just proxies in linkage disequilibrium. for Neurodegenerative Diseases DZNE, Bonn, Germany, 12Department of Psychiatry Therefore, to uncover the whole mutational spectrum in NCAN and ADCY2 Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, and to detect the putative functional variant underlying the GWAS associati- 13Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 14Department of Psychiatry, on signal, we conducted a Next-Generation-Sequencing based re-sequencing University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 15Psychiatric Center Nordbaden, Wiesloch, Germany, in 960 German BD patients. We designed a custom amplicon panel using 16Department Illuminas TruSeq Custom Amplicon©-Kit and performed the sequencing on a MiSeq© System from Illumina©. Alignment and variant calling was done using the MiSeq reporter tool v2.4 and variant annotation according to Bipolar disorder (BD) is a highly heritable disorder of mood with a lifetime HGVS was conducted in Illumina VariantStudio©. Three exons were separa- prevalence of about 1%. BD shows substantial clinical and genetic overlap tely sequenced using Sanger-Sequencing. with other psychiatric disorders, particularly with schizophrenia (SCZ). Ho- Our preliminary analysis with stringent quality criteria detected 178 unique wever, research has not yet clarified what particular genes form the basis of variants, 78 of them being missense variants. We are currently focussing on this etiological overlap. the in silico functional characterization of the missense variants with the For both disorders several susceptibility genes have been identified. In the results being presented at the conference. case of SCZ, a meta-analysis (36000 patients, 113000 controls) of the Psych- iatric Genomics Consortium (PGC) identified 128 independent genome-wi- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANdDe ,s iUgnKif i|c WantW SNWPs..ESHG.ORG 171ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The aim of the present study was to investigate whether these 128 SCZ-as- typical pathogenic range in brain tissue, and one patient with a repeat from sociated SNPs also contribute to BD development. We conducted associati- 60 to several thousand repeats in blood DNA. These cases, and the genetic on testing in our large GWAS dataset of BD (9747 patients, 14278 controls, counselling challenges they present, exemplify the necessity of performing Mühleisen et al., 2014). In this dataset we combined our data with the BD Southern blotting for  C9
orf72 diagnostic testing, without which the precise GWAS results of the PGC (Sklar et al., 2011). As different reference panels nature of the mutations would not have been identified. were used for the imputation of the genotype data in both studies, we reim- PM09.026 puted the summary statistics of the PGC BD GWAS using a method by Pasa- A 5-year-old boy with progressive epileptic encephalopathy and niuc and colleagues (2014) and performed a meta-analysis using METAL. severe developmental delay caused by novel compound heterozygous Overall, 107 SCZ-associated SNPs could be mapped to our reimputed data. mutations in the CACNA1A gene Our analysis revealed that 42 of the 107 SNPs showed nominally significant K. Reinson1,2, E. Õiglane-Shlik3,2, T. Reimand1,2,4, R. Teek1,2, S. Pajusalu1,4, A. Õunapuu5, Ü. p values, providing further evidence that SCZ-associated loci contribute to Murumets1, K. Õunap1,2; BD development (p<2.2x10-16). Pathway analysis (INRICH, Ingenuity pa- 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, thway analysis) for all 42 shared SCZ-BD SNPs revealed a total of 27 nomi- 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Children’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Institute of Biomedicine and Translational nally significant pathways including calcium and glutamate signaling. Medicine, Department of Biomedicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Neurology Our results may provide clues for new approaches to treatment and preven- Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. tion of BD and SCZ. PM09.024  C9
ORF72-related FTD/ALS: a study of expansion size, gene expression Familial hemiplegic migraine type 1, episodic ataxia type 2, and spinocere- and DNA methylation bellar ataxia type 6 are autosomal-dominant neurological disorders asso- A. G. L. Douglas1,2, M. Varela2, Y. Aoki2, M. J. A. Wood2, K. Talbot3; ciated with heterozygous mutations in the CACNA1A gene. Some patients 1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation may exhibit overlapping phenotypes, which combine various signs charac- Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Nuffield Department of Clinical teristic of these three conditions. The CACNA1A gene encodes the pore- Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. forming α1 subunit of the neuronal voltage-gated calcium channel Cav2.1 mediating the action-potential-evoked neurotransmitter release in central Introduction  C9
ORF72 nervous system. : A hexanucleotide GGGGCC expansion in accounts In the index patient absent eye contact was noticed at the age of 2-months. for up to 40% of familial ALS anCd9 OuRpF t7o2 25% of familial FTD (c9FTD/ALS). Severe muscular hypotonia, arrested development and frequent epileptic The pathogenic Cm9eOcRhFa7n2ism of this disease remains unknown. One possibili- seizures were observed later. At first MRI revealed white matter hypomyeli- ty is that the expansion induces loss-of-function. In support of this, nisation and thin corpus callosum, thereafter diffuse cerebellar and cerebral methylation of promoter DNA has been reported in association atrophy developed. At 5-years, he has profound developmental delay, mu- Mwiatthe drieaclrse aasnedd gMeenteh eoxdpsression. However, the relationship between expan- scular atrophy with rigidity, dysmorphic features and treatment resistant sion size, gene expression, and promoter methylation remains unclear. epilepsy. He is blind. Muscle biopsy showed lipid deposits in muscle fibers.  C9
ORF72 : Fibroblasts from c9FTD/ALS patients were cul- His elder sister died at 5-years due to similar epileptic encephalopathy. Two tured and analysed for hexanucleotide repeat size by Southern blotting. elder sisters and both parents have mild intellectual disability. The mother gene expression was determined by qRT-PCR and digital droplet has also ataxia and cerebellar atrophy. P C9
CORR. FT7h2e degree of promoter DNA methylation was assayed by methyl- Exome sequencing identified novel compound heterozygous mutations in DNA immunoprecipitation with qPCR. The expression of wild-type mouse the CACNA1A gene - a missense mutation c.4315T>A predicted pathogenic Results C o9rOthRoFl7o2gue was also assayed by qRT-PCR across ages from birth and a frameshift deletion c.472_478delGCCTTCC. Sanger sequencing confir- to 1 year. med both mutations in the index patient and his deceased sister. The mother : expansion size in fibroblasts did not coCr9reOlRatFe7 w2ith either and one elder sister carry c.4315T>A, and the father and the second elder gene expression or promoteCr9 mOeRtFh7y2la tion. Surprisingly, there was a positive sister carry c.472_478delGCCTTCC mutation. correlation between degree of methylation and levels of expressi- This is the first description of a patient with a compound heterozygous mu- on. Of the tCh9rOeeR Fd7e2scribed mRNA transcripts, one predominates tation in the CACNA1A gene, which causes severe epileptic encephalopathy. that uses a first exon downstream of the expansion. In mice, brain expres- This work was supported by the Estonian Research Council grant PUT355. sCioonnc oluf sthioen s orthologue was found to be significantlyC 9hOigRhFe7r2 in the P S09
.027 neonatal period. Searching for a gene responsible for cerebellar ataxia and mild : This study demonstrates a wide variability in gene intellectual disability expression and promoter DNA methylation among patient cell lines carrying R. Mavioglu1, B. Kara2, A. Tolun1; pathogenic hexanucleotide expansions. The high levels of expression in neo- 1Bogazici University Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Kocaeli University Medical Faculty Department of Pediatrics Division of Child natal mice suggests a role in neurological development. Neurology, Kocaeli, Turkey. This work was funded by a Wellcome Trust Clinical DPhil Fellowship awar- ded to AGLD. P S09
.025 Introduction: Ataxia is defined as lack of control in voluntary movements. It An audit of two years of diagnostic testing for the  C9
orf72 GGGGCC may affect walking, speaking, and eye movements. It is a neurological conditi- expansion in FTD/ALS on that generally results from dysfunction of the cerebellum. It can be the sole E. E. Mudanohwo; symptom in a patient or can be present with other clinical features. We investi- National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, United Kingdom. gated a consanguineous family with syndromic ataxia. Materials and Methods: Candidate disease loci were detected by linkage ana- lysis using SNP genotype data. Exome sequencing was applied to search for The GGGGCC expansion in the intronic/promoter region of  C9
orf72 was variants at the loci. first described in October 2011 and is the most common monogenic cause Results: The affected sib had ataFxAiaM, i1n6t0elBle1c tual disability, and aggressive beha- of Frontotemporal Dementia and/or Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (FTD/ viour. The maximum multipoint LOD score was 2.15. We identified homozygous ALS). Non-pathogenic alleles are typically 2-20 repeats, and pathogenic ex- nonsense mutation p.Glu39X in in the patient. The mutation trunca- pansions typically several hundred to several thousand repeats in length, tes the protein by 95% and is not present in 302 control samples. The sequence with considerable somatic mosaicism. The smallest pathogenic repeat size of the first 736 of the total 765 amino acids is highly conserved between human is currently unknown. We have offered a diagnostic service for the expansi- and chimpanzee, with a difference of only 5. The function of the protein is yet on at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery since January unknown,unknown and it is shown to be expressed in many different tissues. 2013. We employ repeat-primed and sizing PCRs to detect expansions and The conserved domain has homology to retinoic acid induced proteins. One to size alleles in the non-pathogenic range, respectively. Southern blotting is gene encoding such a protein Retinoic acid-induced 1 (RAI1) is associated with used to confirm and size expansions and to exclude false negatives in pati- several neurological diseasesF. AGMen1e6M0BA1NIA suggests that FAM160B1 interacts ents who are homozygous with no expansion by PCR. Of 242 reports issued with ATXN1, deficit of which is a cause of spinocerebellar ataxia. up to February 2015, 240 were diagnostic, with 2 predictive. Of the diagno- Conclusion: We propose that is most likely the gene responsible for stic tests, 27 were positive (11.25%), this is concordant with the published this novel syndrome. We will perform gene expression studies and screen other frequency of the expansion in FTD/ALS. Among our positive results 24 had ataxia patients for mutations in the gene. a typical expansion. We have also identified one apparent homozygote, one 172 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO(BToLgaAziNci DUn, ivUeKrs it|y W BAWP GWra.nEtS 7H69G5).ORG patient with an expansion of 90 repeats in blood which had expanded to theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S09
.029 P S09
.031 Screening of CHCHD10 in a large French cohort with frontotemporal Recurrent microduplication of chromosome 15q11.2 pinpoints risk dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. genes for neurodevelopmental disorders A. Chaussenot1,2, I. Le Ber3,4, S. Ait-El-Mkadem1,2, A. Camuzat4,3, A. de Septenville4, S. C. Picinelli1,2, C. Lintas1, I. S. Piras1,2, S. Gabriele1, R. Sacco1, M. Verdecchia1, A. M. Bannwarth1,2, E. C. Genin2, V. Serre5, G. Augé1, A. Brice4, The French research network on Persico1,2; FTD and FTD-ALS, J. Pouget6, V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,2; 1Unit of Child and Adolescent NeuroPsychiatry & Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry 1Department of Medical Genetics, National Centre for Mitochondrial Diseases, Nice and Neurogenetics, University „Campus Bio-Medico“, Rome, Italy, 2Mafalda Luce Center Teaching Hospital, Nice, France, 2IRCAN, UMR CNRS 7284/INSERM U1081/UNS, School for Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Milan, Italy. of Medicine, Nice Sophia-Antipolis University, Nice, France, 3National Reference Centre on Rare Dementias, AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 4Sorbonne de novo Université, UPMC University Paris 06, UM75, Inserm U1127, Cnrs UMR7225, Institut du Array-CGH analysis has shown that rare or common Copy Number Variants, Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), Paris, France, 5UMR7592 CNRS, Jacques Monod Institute, Paris Diderot University, Paris, France, 6Department of Neurology, Timone both inherited and , may significantly contribute to the etiology of Hospital, Marseille Teaching Hospital, Marseille, France. neurodevelopmental disorders. A recurrent genomic aberrations asso- ciated with these phenotypes is the duplication of chromosome 15q11.2. Characterizing a cohort of 180 families using the Agilent 180K CGH array Recently, we have identified a heterozygous mutation in the CHCHD10 gene platform, we identified 4 patients carrying a 15q11.2 duplication involving in a large family with a late-onset complex phenotype including frontotem- the 4 genes TUBGC P5
, CYFI P1
, NIPA2 and NIPA1. Two were inherited from poral dementia (FTD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and/or cerebellar the healthy mother, one from an affected mother and one had an unknown ataxia, associated with mitochondrial myopathy and accumulation of mul- parental origin. The duplication was confirmed by qPCR and a significant tiple mtDNA deletions. CHCHD10 encodes a protein located in the mitochon- overexpression of the four duplicated genes was found using quantitative drial intermembrane space and is likely involved in mitochondrial genome gene expression analysis. Two patients were diagnosed with Autism Spec- stability and maintenance of cristae junctions. Given the unawareness about trum Disorder, one with Developmental Delay and one is non-verbal and the exact contribution of CHCHD10 in FTD-ALS spectrum, we evaluated, in has a severe Intellectual Disability (the latter patient carries an additional this study, the frequency of CHCHD10 mutations in a large French cohort pathogenic imbalance on the X chromosome). Strong evidence supports the of 115 unrelated patients with FTD and FTD-ALS phenotypes, including 35 role of this duplication in abnormal neurodevelopment. These four genes familial and 80 sporadic cases. We identified 2 heterozygous variants in 3 are all implicated in axonal growth, neuronal connectivity and morphology, unrelated probands presenting FTD and ALS : the known p.Ser59Leu muta- especially CYFI P1
 which regulates translation at the synapse by binding to tion in a familial case and the p.Pro34Ser variant in two sporadic cases. The FMRP. Phenotypically normal and mildly affected carriers complicate the phenotype of this probands is characterized by early and predominant bul- phenotypic association and/or causality of this aberration. The explanation bar symptoms. A short time ago, many studies confirmed the involvement of of this variability may be found in the reduced penetrance or altered gene CHCHD10 in familial and sporadic ALS cases. However, this is the only study dosage on a particular genetic background. This region likely represents a that demonstrates the implication of CHCHD10 in FTD-ALS spectrum. Alt- strong susceptibility region, as reported for other parts of the genome invol- hough the frequency of mutations is low in this series (2.6%), our work sug- ved in neurodevelopmental disorders. gests that CHCHD10 mutations should be searched particularly in presence PM09.032 of bulbar symptoms at onset, or evocative mitochondrial symptoms. The ZBTB20 mutations in corpus callosum anomalies identification of CHCHD10 mutations in FTD-ALS spectrum opens a novel C. Alby1, D. Héron2,3, S. Thomas1, L. Boutaud1,4, C. Gordon1, M. Rio1,5, V. Cormier-Daire1,5, P. field to explore their pathogenesis and to understand the role of mitochon- Nitschke6, C. Bole7, N. Boddaert1,8, M. Moutard9, L. Mouthon1, C. Depienne1,2, L. Colleaux1, J. Oliveira1, A. Achaiaa4, S. Lyonnet1, Y. Ville10, F. Encha-Razavi1,4, M. Vekemans1,4, T. Attié- drial dysfunction. Further investigations in larger populations with different Bitach1,4; geographic origins are needed. 1INSERM U1163, Institut Imagine, Paris Descartes Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, PM09.030 2Service de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France, 3INSERM U975, Functional studies of an LRSAM1 gene mutation causing Charcot- UPMC, Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 4Service d‘Histologie-Embryologie- Marie-Tooth disease Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 5Service de A. Minaidou1,2, P. Nicolaou1,2, K. Christodoulou1,2; Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 6Plateforme de 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus School of Bioinformatique, Institut Imagine, Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 7Plateforme de Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus. Génomique, Institut Imagine, Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 8Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 9Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 10Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France. Introduction: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common in- herited neuropathy of the peripheral nervous system affecting 1 in 2500 individuals. The LRSAM1 gene has recently been implicated in the CMT Corpus callosum (CC) is the major brain commissure connecting the homo- pathogenesis and very little is currently known about its role. LRSAM1 is logous areas of both hemispheres at the midline. CC malformations (CCM) an  E3
 ubiquitin ligase that has a significant role in endocytic and adhesion are the most frequent brain malformations with an incidence of 1/4000 pathways in neuronal cells and mediates monoubiquitination of TSG101 at newborn often associated with chromosomal anomalies or mendelian syn- multiple sites. This study is focused on the functional analysis of the novel dromes with recessive and dominant inheritance. Recurrence is observed in LRSAM1 c.2047-1G>A dominant splice-site point mutation. This mutation 5%. Children with CCM have an uncertain neuro-developmental outcome. is located in the C-terminal RING finger domain of the encoded protein and Therefore, counseling remains challenging prenatally. leads to premature truncation (p.Ala683ProfsX3). On a cohort of 64 fetuses with CCM as autopsy finding, and 34 children with Materials and methods: Total RNA was extracted from available patient lym- CCM and mental retardation, we used a targeted high throughput sequencing phoblastoid cell lines and the whole cDNA was synthesized. Initially, RNA strategy, Here we report 4 novel ZBTB20 mutations, the recently identified levels of TSG101, the only known substrate of LRSAM1  E3
 ubiquitin ligase causing gene for Primrose syndrome. We describe the clinical and or neuro- activity, were investigated. Moreover, the RNA levels of  E2
 (ubiquitin) and pathological and imaging data of one fetus and 3 patients. The p.Arg613Cys, additional molecules were examined. Selected molecules that possibly in- p.Cys636Arg and p.Cys611Tyr (NM_001164342.1) mutations occur within teract with LRSAM1 were detected using public protein-protein interaction the Cys2His2 zinc finger domains of ZBTB20. Cys2His2 zinc fingers consist databases. of two cysteines and two histidines that co-ordinate a zinc ion, and an alpha- Results: RNA levels of TSG101 and  E2
 were significantly reduced in patient helix that makes sequence-specific contacts with DNA. We predict that these compared to control levels. Furthermore, a statistically significant reduction variants would destabilize the structure of their respective zinc fingers. The of the levels of some of the selected molecules was observed. Western blot p.Val185Ile substitution falls within the BTB domain of ZBTB20 that is pre- analysis to confirm the decrease of these molecules at the protein level is dicted to form homodimers and leads to an apparently milder phenotype . currently underway. These results suggest that a ZBTB20 mutation found in 4/98 individuals of Conclusions: Our results provide more insight into the LRSAM1 pathways our series is a frequent cause of CCM. and molecular mechanisms, based on the alterations/disruptions caused by P S09
.033 the LRSAM1 c.2047-1G>A mutation. Next generation sequencing for cortical brain malformations: two Acknowledgement: This study is funded by the Cyprus TELETHON (Grant years of experience #: 73115). M. Wilke, D. Halley, R. van Minkelen, G. Bolman, J. Kromosoeto, W. de Valk, M. Wijgerde, G. Mancini, M. van Slegtenhorst; Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 173ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Cortical brain malformations (rare disorders of proliferation, neuronal mi- though studies have reported a reduced fecundity in patients with SCZ, the gration or cortical organization) have been associated with mutations in a incidence rate of SCZ remains fairly stable. One hypothesis is that the muta- rapidly growing number of genes. This complicates molecular diagnostics tions that are selected out of the gene pool due to strong negative selection by Sanger sequencing. In order to establish a Next-generation sequencing are replaced by de novo mutations. Therefore, each gene identified to carry (NGS) based work flow for routine DNA diagnostics, we developed a gene a de novo mutation is a potential SCZ candidate gene. panel consisting of 103 relevant genes. The exomes of 40 patients with a DSM-IV diagnosis of SCZ and their parents This workflow involved the design of enrichment arrays (Agilent Sure were analyzed. Exome DNA was captured from genomic DNA using Nimble- Select) for all genes, followed by Miseq sequencing (paired-end, 150bp, Gen in solution based capture and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 Illumina). BAM files are generated with an in-house analysis pipeline and sequencing instrument. The Varbank pipeline v.2.1 and interface were used variant calling is performed using the SeqNext software package (JSI).The for data analysis and filtering. average vertical coverage for exons is about 300; very few fragments fail to Subsequently, additional sources of genetic data were employed to gather reach the minimal required vertical coverage of 30. more evidence for an involvement of the genes implicated: the genes were Furthermore, we were able to detect deletions up to 65 bp, insertions up to screened for the presence of CNVs using our existing genome-wide CNV da- 29 bp and somatic mosaicism. Sanger-sequencing is used to confirm (can- taset comprising of 1 637 patients and 1 627 controls. An association bet- didate) mutations. DNA samples of 168 patients were tested and 6% of the ween common variants in these genes and SCZ was tested in the worldwide cases could thus far be solved, including familial segregation analysis and largest SCZ GWAS published by the PGC Schizophrenia Working Group ana- confirmation of parentage, even in the absence of phenotypic information. lyzing more than 100 000 individuals. However, most of the identified alterations are variants of unknown clinical So far, we have validated 28 different variants using Sanger Sequencing. In- relevance. Despite the use of in silico prediction programs, evaluation of the terestingly, our study is the third to report a de novo mutation in SE C31
A. conservation among species they cannot be judged without additional clini- The combination of our exome sequncing and CNV data as well as the com- cal information and feedback from the referring physician. mon variants will allow us to prioritize the variants identified regarding In conclusion, the targeted NGS-panel for neuronal migration disorders is a their relevance for the development of SCZ. powerful tool for DNA diagnostics. In order to increase the diagnostic yield PM09.036 of cortical brain malformations, close collaboration between laboratory and Clinical utility of gene panel testing: Case study using a 65-patient referring specialist is mandatory. Dementia cohort PM09.034 I. Delon, K. Brugger, H. Martin, O. Spasic-Boskovic, F. Veryard, R. Littleboy, S. Abbs; Long non-coding RNAs FENDRR, RNCR3 and MEG3 are aberrantly Cambridge University Hospital Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge, United Kingdom. expressed in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease A. Matjašič1, E. Boštjančič1, M. Popović2, D. Glavač1; 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, The increasing availability and affordability of whole exome sequencing is University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, challenging the current testing algorithms typically including detailed fami- University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. ly history and clinical characteristics, predicting a decrease for the need of probabilistic prioritisation of genetic testing. To evaluate this prediction, we have assessed a cohort of 65 patients referred for frontotemporal dementia Introduction: Non-coding RNAs, such as miRNAs and long non-coding RNAs (FTD) and compared the diagnostic yield of the initial referrals for single (lncRNAs), are emerging as key regulators oFfE cNelDluRlRar MprEoGc3e sses. RFNunCcRt3io nal gene tests vs. a 16-gene dementia panel test using our clinical exome se- analyses of first lncRNAs revealed their significance in genome regulation quencing pipeline. This 16-gene panel includes mostly autosomal dominant and development. It is suggested lncRNAs , and are rare Mendelian early onset Alzheimer and FTD genes, that despite being involved in brain and neurons development, and function. Regarding lncR- clinically different show a degree of phenotypic overlap justifying the use NAs crucial role in various human diseases, our purpose was to investigate of a panel. their possible involvement also in mechanisms of Creutzfeldt-Jakob (prion) Although this approach has the clear potential to increase the diagnostic disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. rate, we also aimed to determine its usefulness vs. the burden of finding Materials and Methods: We performed qPCR analyses to determine diffe- variants of unknown clinical significance (VUS). Analysis showed a diagno- rential expression of three lncRNAs using autopsy brain tissue samples of stic rate of 6/65 for the initial targeted referrals with 4/65 VUS. Subsequent cerebellum (C) and frontal lobe (FL) of 25 patients diagnosed with Creutz- interpretation of panel data increased this rate to 7/65 for published patho- feldt-Jakob disease (CJD), 20 non-CJD patients and 8 patients without neuro- genic variants and added 19 variants which we are currently assessing for logical disMeEaGse3 (WNDR).N AClRl r3esults were compared to human brain reference pathogenicity, including 3 PSEN2 variants reported in the AD&FTD databa- RNA and statistically evaluated for FsEigNnDifRicRant expression differences. se. Preliminary results on this small FTD cohort indicate that despite the Results: and were strongly down-regulated in all sample complexity of the interpretation of gene panel data, the increase in diagno- groups, especially in CJD samples. was up-regulated in all non-CJD stic rate together with value for money should encourage clinicians to refer and WND samples, and either down- or up-regulated in CJD samples. Stati- for gene panels. stical analyses showed significant over- or under-expression when we cross P S09
.037 compared expression of CJD, non-CJD and WND patients. Moreover, signi- IL-6 and adolescent depression: A Mendelian randomisation ficant expression differences were also obseFrvEeNdD bReRtwMeEenG 3FL andR NCC rRe3gion approach within sample group. H. M. Sallis1,2, G. Khandaker3,4, J. Evans1, L. Paternoster2, G. Davey Smith2; Conclusions: Our findings support lncRNA’s , and in- 1Centre for Academic Mental Health, School of Social and Community Medicine, volvement in development of the prion disease and other neurodegenera- University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, tive disorders, like Alzheimer‘s, and suggest they are necessary for normal School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, brain function. Moreover, our results showed different spatial (cerebellum 3Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, and frontal lobe) distribution that may contribute to the disease develop- 4Cambridgeshire and Peterborough National Health Service Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom. ment. P S09
.035 Exome sequencing identifies SE C31
A as a potenital candidate gene for Cross-sectional studies report an association between increased serum in- schizophrenia terleukin-6 (IL-6), an inflammatory marker, and depression. However, due F. Degenhardt1, F. Schroeder1, J. Strohmaier2, A. Hofmann1, S. Herms1,3, L. Winkler1, F. Neukirch1, A. J. Forstner1, M. Pfohl1, M. Lang2, P. Nürnberg4, P. Hoffmann1,3, H. Thiele4, S. to the nature of cross-sectional data, confounding and reverse causality can- Cichon1,3,5, M. Rietschel2, M. M. Nöthen1; not be ruled out as explanations for this observed association. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genetic Epidemiology in A recent study using data from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Mannheim, Children (ALSPAC) attempted to unpick this issue by investigating the asso- Germany, 3Division of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel and Department ciation between levels of IL-6 at age 9 and depressive symptoms at age 18 of Biomedicine, Basel, Switzerland, 4Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), Cologne, (Khandaker et al., JAMA Psychiatry. 2014). This study found evidence of an Germany, 5Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Structural and Functional association between increased IL-6 at age 9 and greater depressive sym- Organisation of the Brain, Genomic Imaging, Research Centre Juelich, Juelich, Germany. ptoms at 18 (adjusted β=0.06, se=0.03)). We expanded on this study using Mendelian randomisation (MR), an ap- proach largely free from issues such as confounding and reverse causality. Patients with schizophrenia (SCZ) suffer from a variety of symptoms, in- MR uses genetic instruments to proxy a modifiable risk factor and can thus c1lu7d4ing delusions, hallucinations, disorgaEnSizHedG s p2e0ec1h5 a n| dG bLeAhaSvGiorO. EWve,n S CO stT reL nA gtN heD , aU uK l| W nfeW renW ce. E usS inH gG ob.O seR rvG n c sa i ational data.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM09.040 Postnatal microcephaly in Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen syndrome is Allelic risk scores for the IL-6 receptor have previously been developed. Fol- associated with hypomyelination and neuronal trafficking defects lowing a IrLe6cRenTt DgRenDo1m0e-widAeB Oassociation study, we extended the score to S. PASSEMARD1,2,3, N. Dupuis1,2, M. Vermelle-Andrzejewski4, M. Abramowicz5, A. Verloes3, increase instrument strength (F=87.4). The updated score contained 4 SNPs J. Bonaventure6, F. Perez6, Z. Csaba1,2, P. Gressens1,2, V. El Ghouzzi1,2; from the , and genes. 1PROTECT INSERM U1141, Paris, France, 2Univ Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Although the estimate was in a consistent direction with the observational UMRS 1141, Paris, France, 3AP-HP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Service de Génétique Clinique, Paris, France, 4Hôpital Roger Salengro, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Lille, France, 5Hôpital result, we found little evidence of a causal association. This will be expanded Erasme, Medical Genetics Dept, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 6Institut to a meta-analysis incorporating similar studies to improve precision of the Curie, Centre de Recherche, Paris, France. causal estimate. The UK MRC and the Wellcome Trust (092731) and the University of Bri- stol provide core support for ALSPAC. HS was funded by a Wellcome Trust Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen syndrome (DMC, MIM #223800) is a rare inheri- 4-year PhD studentship (WT099871MA). ted dwarfism characterized by spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, postna- PM09.038 tal microcephaly and intellectual disability, and caused by loss-of-function Seizures And Attention Deficit As Unique Clinical Hallmarks In A mutations in the DYM gene encoding DYMECLIN, a Golgi-associated protein Patient With Digeorge Syndrome. involved in intracellular trafficking. Interestingly, both skeletal growth de- J. Juan, A. Lafuente, M. Ortiz, A. Zuñiga; fects and microcephaly develop during childhood and are therefore rarely Hospital De La Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. diagnosed at birth. This suggests that the physiological mechanisms affec- ted in DMC involve postnatal processes. We used Dymeclin-mutant mice to determine the cause of microcephaly and to identify defective mechanisms DiGeorge syndrome (DGS, OMIM 188400) is one of the most common chro- at the cellular level. Brain weight and volume were reduced in all mutant mosomal disorders, with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 4 000-6 000 live mice from postnatal day 5 onward. Mutant mice displayed a narrowing of births. It is actually a well-defined primary immunodeficiency disorder the frontal cortex, although cortical layers were normally organized. Intere- classically associated with abnormal facial appearance, congenital heart de- stingly, the corpus callosum was markedly thinner, a characteristic we also fects, hypoparathyroidism with hypocalcaemia, as well as cognitive, beha- identified in three unrelated DMC patients carrying the p.Gln483Ter non- vioral and psychiatric problems. Pathological hallmarks include conotrun- sense mutation. Consistent with this, the myelin sheath was less compact cal abnormalities and absence or hypoplasia of the thymus and parathyroid and not properly rolled, while the number of mature oligodendrocytes and glands. The facial appearance of patients with DGS is characterized by hy- their ability to produce myelin basic protein were significantly decreased. pertelorism, micrognathia, short philtrum with fish-mouth appearance, an- Finally, cortical neurons from mutant mice and primary fibroblasts from timongoloid slant, and telecanthus with short palpebral fissures. However, DMC patients displayed substantially delayed endoplasmic reticulum to not all patients with DGS show these typical dysmorphic findings and the Golgi trafficking, that could be fully rescued upon Dymeclin re-expression. diagnosis can be delayed for many years. It has been reported that children These findings indicate that Dymeclin is crucial for proper myelination and and adults with DGS have high rates of behavioral, psychiatric and commu- anterograde neuronal trafficking, two processes that are highly active du- nication disorders. Here, we report the case of a patient that was 11 year- ring postnatal brain maturation. old boy born to unrelated healthy parents. Initially, he was admitted to the This study was supported by INSERM, CNRS, the Paris 7 University, the DHU Neuropaediatric Department by seizures, attention deficit and socialization PROTECT and the French National Research Agency (project ANR-09-GE- problems. The brain computed tomography CT revealed calcification loca- NO-007 to VEG). ted in the left basal ganglia. The EEG was abnormal due to generalized inter- P S09
.041 mittent slow waves without any epileptiform discharges. Genetic analysis Molecular genetic investigations of a Norwegian dystonia cohort by by MLPA technique ( P245
 MCR-Holland) showed a microdetion in 22q11 gene-panel based next generation sequencing affecting to G P1
BB, CLDN5 and SNA P29
 probes, associated to a DiGeorge Z. Iqbal1, J. A. Koht2, L. Pihlstrøm1,3, F. Hussain1, S. P. Henriksen1, M. Toft1; Syndrome. Clinical absence of the typical hallmarks of this syndrome should 1Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of not exclude this disease due to variable phenotypes. Continuous efforts to Neurology, Vestre Viken Hospital Trust, Drammen, Norway, 3Faculty of Medicine, define diverse clinical manifestations of this syndrome will lead to proper University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. evaluation and intervention for patients. P S09
.039 DNA methylation of CACNA1C in bipolar disorder Dystonia is a group of clinically heterogeneous neurological disorders cha- A. Starnawska1,2,3, A. Mcquillin4, D. Demontis1,2,3, A. Pen1, A. Hedemand1,2,3, M. racterized by involuntary movements and prolonged muscle contraction, Johannesen1,2, F. Lescai1,2,3, T. Als1,2,3, J. Grove1,2,3, N. Staunstrup1,2,3, A. Nielsen1,2, A. Jarram4, which may involve the entire body or only an isolated area. Several genetic N. O‘Brien4, O. Mors2,5, A. Børglum1,2,3, M. Nyegaard1,2,3; forms of dystonia have been identified, but genetic testing has been limited 1Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 2iPSYCH, The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative by time-consuming and costly procedures. However, using next generation for Integrative Psychiatric Research, Aarhus, Denmark, 3iSEQ, Centre for Integrative sequencing technology, it is now possible to develop inexpensive tests by Sequencing, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 4Molecular Psychiatry Laboratory, Division of Psychiatry, University College London, United Kingdom, London, United which multiple genes can be screened in parallel. Kingdom, 5Department of Clinical Medicine-Psychiatry, Aarhus University, Aarhus, We designed a paent eall including the coding sequences of 17 genes implicated Denmark. in different forms of dystonia, using a similar method as described previous- ly (Pihlstrøm L, ., Ann of Hum Genet, 2014). We screened these genes CACNA1C in 116 clinically well-characterized Norwegian dystonia patients as well as Introduction: Genome-wide levels of association between bipolar disorder 120 ethnically matched controls. The sequencing yielded high quality data (BPD) and schizophrenia (SZ) have been reported with the gene. with average 98% bases covered aAbNoOve3 8 C0
IZx1 inG CthHe1 taNrKgXe2te-d1 iPnNteKrDvaPlsR. ROTu2r This gene encodes the pore-forming unit of L-type voltage-gated calcium bSGioCiEnfoTrOmRa1tAics pipeTlHine identified 11 variants for further validation and con- channels. The associated SNPs are located in a clCuAstCeNr Ain1 Cintron 3, however firmation. We identGifCieHd1 varianCtIsZ 1in , , , , , , the functional effects of the associated SNPs remain to be determined. In , , and . Out of these, two confirmed variants are truncating this study we investigated if DNA methylation of in blood differed changes located in and . After the ongoing validation analysis, we betweeCnA BCPNDA 1pCatients compared to healthy control subjects. will be able to establish a molecular diagnosis in a subset of patients. Material and methods: DNA methylation status of five CpG islands (CGIs) Our approach of gene-panel based next generation sequencing will be able in the gene waCsA iCnNvAes1tCigated using Sequenom EpiTYPER in 630 to gauge the potential of the method used and will point towards future di- bipolar disorder patients and 340 control subjects. rections for targeted screenings in such heterogeneous neurological disor- Results: Four out of five CGI islands were either fully methylated ders. Moreover, such fast, cost-effective, and robust screening methods will or fully unmethylated. In contrast one CGI showed intermediate methylation help improve molecular diagnosis, genetic counseling, and therapeutics. levels with substantial intra-individual variation. Follow-up analysis of this PM09.042 CGI identified a significant difference in DNA methylation levels between the Next Generation Sequencing in neurogenetics - our experience BPD cases and healthy controls. FurthermCAoCreN Ath1eC methylation status of this I. Novakovic1, V. Dobricic2, A. Maver3, M. Stojiljkovic4, K. Kacar5, I. Petrovic1,2, S. Pavlovic4, CGI was highly correlated with the genotypes of the BPD and SZ risk SNPs. B. Peterlin3, V. Kostic1,2; Conclusion: The functional effects of the GWAS risk alleles may be 1Faculty of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Neurology Clinic CCS, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute mediated through changes in methylation status of intron 3. of Medical Genetics, CC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4IMGGE, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Institute of Cerebrovascular Diseases „Sveti Sava“, Belgrade, Serbia. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 175ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) methods transform our approach in ge- phic discharges on the function of the developing brain. Early Infantile Epi- netic testing of neurological disorders, particularly in the area of single gene leptic Encephalopathies (EIEE) are EE with onset before age 3-4 months. diseases. NGS helps us to improve diagnostics of well known disorders, to Etiologies are heterogeneous and whole-exome sequencing (WES) techni- detect rare mutations in genetic heterogeneous diseases, and to discover ques can help to clarify their etiopathogenesis. new disease causing genes. Growing number of experiences indicate huge Patients&Methods: Patients were retrospectively selected based on their cli- NGS benefits, as well as some method limitations. nical and electroencephalographic diagnosis of EIEE, registered at the Epi- We describe here results of NGS method implementation in three different lepsy Clinic of our Tertiary Hospital from 1995 to 2013. Exclusion criteria single gene/familiar diseases in patients from Serbia. We have analyzed: 1. were: brain injury secondary to hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, trauma, one family with early onset dystonia - parkinsonism, negative for common stroke, infection and intracranial hemorrhage. We performed a descriptive DYT and PARK mutations, 2. one family with cerebral congenital cavernous analysis concerning demographics, epileptic phenotype and investigation. malformation, negative for CCM1 gene mutations, 3. one sporadic case of Selected patients without diagnosis are under WES analysis using TruSeq Wilson disease with only one heterozygous AT P7
B mutation (H1069Q) de- capture followed by sequencing on a HiSeq2500. tected by screening of five mutation - prone exons. Mentioned DYT, PARK, Results: From the 27 selected patients, median age for first manifestation CCM1 and AT P7
B analyses were performed in Genetic laboratory of Neu- was 45 days [1day-4months]. Six patients had electroclinical syndromes rology Clinic CCS, Belgrade, by Sanger’s sequencing of targeted regions on (four Ohtahara syndrome; two early myoclonic encephalopathy). The ma- ABI3500 Genetic Analyzer. NGS was performed on Illumina MiSeq platform jority had severe DD. Brain MRI of 22 patients was diagnostic in nine (eight using TruSight One panel. After bioinformatic analysis of NGS data we detec- had malformation of cortical development, MCD). Six (22%) patients died. ted novel GIGYF2 (PARK11) gene variant (p. E531
V) in dystonia - parkinso- Ten patients (37%) had a confirmed molecular diagnosis (six metabolic di- nism family and novel CCM2 gene variant (p.Y118X) in family with congeni- seases, three genetic syndromes, one MCD). All were sporadic situations. tal cavernous malformation. Both changes are confirmed by Sanger sequen- NGS analysis’ results of eight patients will be presented at the Conference. cing and recognized as likely pathogenic by software’s prediction. However, Conclusion: Our work reflects the metabolic etiology‘s impact in this group in the case of Wilson disease, NGS confirmed known mutation but did not of EE, their clinical and etiologic heterogeneity. Children with EIEE have ele- detected second AT P7
B gene change. Our results are good illustration of po- vated mortality (22%) and morbidity (100%) rates. An accurate etiologic wer and challenges of NGS methods. diagnosis for such disorders is helpful for an effective individual manage- P S09
.043 ment, genetic counselling and sometimes therapeutic intervention. Detection of disease-causing mutations in cases of unexplained early- P S09
.045 onset ataxia by using panel based next-generation sequencing Massively Parallel Sequencing in the Epilepsies: New gene pathways F. Harmuth1, M. Synofzik2,3, J. Wolf2,3, M. Sturm1, L. Schoels2,3, P. Bauer1; and challenging clinical dogma 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Department L. M. Dibbens1, B. L. Hodgson1, I. E. Scheffer2, S. Mandelstam3, D. E. Crompton4, L. of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tuebingen, Licchetta5, F. Bisulli6, P. Tinuper5, S. F. Berkovic2, M. G. Ricos1, S. E. Heron1; Germany, 3German Research Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tuebingen, 1University of South Australia, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Adelaide, Germany. Australia, 2University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Florey Neuroscience Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 4University of Melbourne,, Melbourne, Australia, 5University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6University of Bologna, Bologns, Italy. Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) in patients with an onset age under 30 years (early-onset ataxias, EOAs) are mostly caused in autosomal recessive genes and show a wide range of clinical symptoms. Due to the large variability Purpose: and overlap of phenotype and the rapidly increasing amount of (often very We set out to find the genetic cause of focal epilepsy in a family with indi- rare) ataxia related genes, it is challenging to find a molecular diagnosis in viduals with lesional and non-lesional focal epilepsy, as detectable by MRI these patients. analysis. The family showed autosomal dominant inheritance and genome The study cohort of 131 cases with EOA was negatively screened for do- wide linkage analysis failed to identify a linkage region. minant repeat expansion SCAs and FRDA. Patients with a genetic mutation Methods: sufficient to explain the ataxia or with neurodegenerative disease in more We carried out exome capture and massively parallel sequencing on two than one generation were excluded beforehand. Samples were processed individuals from the family who were affected with focal epilepsy and ana- with a custom-built ataxia specific HaloPlex panel (Agilent) for 132 genes lysed the data using an in-house bioinformatics pipeline. Candidate causa- and sequenced on a MiSeq (Illumina) followed by bioinformatics analyses tive genetic variants were validated by direct Sanger sequencing and were using our in-house pipeline. analysed for co-segregation with affected status and assessed for likely pa- By this approach, on average, >95% of the target region was covered ≥20x thogenicity. DEPD C5
 with a mean cSoAvCeSrage PoLf A225G76 ± 71P rNePaLdAs.6 The NanPaCl1ysis oSfY fNilEte1red variants Results: DEPD C5
 identified 18 patients (14%) with clear pathogenic biaSllEeTliXc mSYuNtaEt1ionITs PinR 19 We identified a mutation in as being causative of lesional and non- KgeIFn5eCs (SeA.gC.  S7
xT TPA , 1x , 1x , 2x , 2x ), 8 patients lesional focal epilepsy in theD EfaPmDiCly5. We then identified mutations (6%) with probably pathogenic mutaItTiPonRs1 inP R6K gCeGneSsP T(BN2, CACNA1, A , in additional families with mutation-positive individuals with lesional and , , ) and additional 8 patients (6%) with a potential de-novo non-lesional focal epilepsy. -associated malformations include bot- mutation in a dominant ataxia gene ( , , , ). tom-of-the-sulcus dysplasia and foDcaElP sDuCb5cortical band heterotopia. Disease specific panel sequencing thus enables a highly effective, cost-ef- Conclusion: ficient and fast detection of underlying mutation which could facilitate the- We have found that mutations in cause familial cases of focal epi- rapeutic treatment of symptoms or precise prediction of the course of the lepsy associated with structural brain lesions as well as in cases with no disease. structural brain abnormalities. We have therefore shown that lesional and non-lesional epilepsy can have a shared genetic aetiology. This challenges PM09.044 the long held view that lesional and non-lesional epilepsy are distinct cli- Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathies - a Center Audit R. Oliveira*1, C. Pereira*2, M. L. Almeida1, N. Francoeur3, A. Beleza-Meireles4, L. Diogo5, I. nical entities with different causes. DEPD C5
 nDegEaPtDivCe5ly regulates the mTOR Fineza2, P. Garcia5, L. Ramos1, J. Sá1, M. Vasconcelos2, X. Xu3, M. Venâncio**1, D. Pinto**3, C. pathway which plays a key role in cell growth and metabolism. The clinical Robalo**2, J. M. Saraiva**1,6; and radiological phenotypes associated with mutations share fea- 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico - CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Epilepsy Clinic, tures with the archetypal mTORopathy, tuberous sclerosis, raising the pos- Centro de Desenvolvimento da Criança, Hospital Pediátrico - CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal, sibility of new therapeutic avenues for patients. 3Departments of Psychiatry, Genetics and Genomic Sciences, the Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment and the Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, PM09.046 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 4Centre de Mouse Neuronal epileptic phenotype analysis using MEA platform. Génétique Humaine, Cliniques universitaires St. Luc, Université Catholique de Louvain, F. La Carpia1, R. S. Dhindsa2, S. Gelfman1, S. S. Bradrick3, D. B. Goldstein1; Brussels, Belgium, 5Metabolic Unit, Centro de Desenvolvimento da Criança, Hospital 1Institute for Genomic Medicine - Columbia University Medical Center, New York, Pediátrico - CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal, 6University Clinic of Pediatrics, Faculty of NY, United States, 2Duke University School of Medicine - Center for Human Genome Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. Variation, Durham, NC, United States, 3Duke University Medical Center - Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, New York, NY, United States. * shared authorship ** contributed equally in supervision of different parts Epilepsy is a neurological disorder that affects about 3% of the population Introduction: Epileptic encephalopathies (EE) are specific age-related brain and is characterized by sudden and violent seizures (focal or generalized). c1o7nd6itions with a detrimental effect of coE nS tinH uG in g2 s0 ei1 zu5 r e| sG aL ndA eS leG ctO roW gra, -SCODiTffLerAenNt Dca,u UseKs h |a Wve WbeeWn a.EssSoHciaGte.dO wRiGth epileptic disorders (brain injury,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index stroke or brain damage at the time of birth) and in recent years, several ge- in the research cohort. This analysis revealed numerous rearrangements, nes mutations have been implicated in this complex disorder. However the most of which were inherited from the healthy parents, although they had mechanisms that connect many honf RthNeP Uidentified mutations/genes to epi- not previously been reported in genomic variant databases. Several patho- lepsy are stidlle u nnokvnoown. genic rearrangements were also found including submicroscopic deletions We focused our attention on the gene in which two different loss- of STBX P1
, MEF2C, WDR45 and SCN2A. These results, together with our of-function mutations (chhrn1R:2N4 P5
U019921 CATTTGTCTTT/C INDEL; current strategy aiming at increasing the diagnostic yield, will be detailed chr1:243086781 C>T) have been identified in two different patients affec- at the conference. ted by epileptihc neRnNcePpUhalopathy. has an important role in mRNA P S09
.049 processing, transcription and splicing. To better understand the neurobio- Testing epileptic encephalopathy candidate genes in additional logical role of in epilepsy we used a Micwroil-de-lteycpteode array (MEA) samples shows paucity of recessive hits platform that is able to record the field potential of electrichanllRyN aPcUtive cells C. G. F. de Kovel1, E. H. Brilstra1, R. van ‚t Slot1, R. Moller2, A. Suls3, S. Weckhuysen4, I. from 768 electrodes simultaneously. We plated mouse cortical Helbig5, EUROEPINOMICS-RES, B. P. C. Koeleman1; neurons on MEA plates and used the shRNA to knock-down gene in 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, a half of the tested cells. Next, we constructed a tool to analyze the complex 3Universiteit Antwerpen, Antwerpen, Belgium, 4Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Universitaet Kiel, Kiel, Germany. multi-dimensional output of the MEA recordings. ThhinsR eNnaPbUled us to observe a general effect of decreased expression on neuronal activity of treated neu- Aim rons. Preliminary results specifically show that the knock-down re- sults in characteristic changes in neuronal activity, where treated cells have : In recent studies of mutations underlying epileptic encephalopathies, prolonged bursts activity with increased firing rate compared to the wild, nMuemtheoroduss genes have been identified with unsufficient statistical support. revealing a neuronal phenotype activity that can be compared with what is We sought to increase support for at least some of those genes. observed in-vivo in epileptic seizures. : samples from 362 patients with epileptic encephalopathy were Internal Funds tested on a panel of 370 known and candidate genes. Thirty-eight patients had similarly affected sibs, 37 sporadics had consanguineous parents, 287 P S09
.047 sporadics had no known parental relatedness. The genes had been collec- Microelectrode array analysis captures seizure-like activity due to ted from literature and earlier experiments in our labs. Eighteen genes had down-regulation of microRNA-128 OMIM-annotations for epileptic encephalopathy; 66 genes were expected K. McSweeney1,2, A. Gussow1,2, S. Bradrick2, S. Petrovski1, D. Goldstein1; 1Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, 2Duke University, Durham, NC, United tRoe bsue lrtescessive, 288 dominant, 13 X-linked, the remainder unknown. In the States. first screen, no parents were included. We looked for novel coding variants. : Thirty-eight patients had probably pathogenic variants in OMIM- annotated genes. One inbred patient wNaFsA hSoCmozygous for a recessive can- Microelectrode arrays (MEAs) are powerful tools for detecting spontaneous didate gene, four sporadic patients were compound heterozygous for reces- neuronal activity. MEAs have been used to detect the response of primary sive candidate genes. Some genes, e.g. , had more n.ovel hits than ex- dissociated neurons to neurotoxins and are emerging as reliable drug scree- pected from its lenCgOthL,7 wAh1ile somFReE gMen2es with a known connection to severe ning platforms. Recent studies indicating the involvement of microRNAs in epilepsies were NOT overrepresented relative to gene size Of the genes with epilepsy phenotypes encouraged us to investigate the effect of modulating Cexocnecslsu nsioovnesl hits and are known causes for the recessive microRNA-128, on neuronal activity. Mice deficient in microRNA-128 are diseases Epidermolysis bullosa and Fraser syndrome respectively. prone to fatal seizures. Modulating microRNA-128 in the MEA system allo- : Despite a likely enrichment for recessive forms of epileptic wed us to directly test whether MEAs are useful to screen other microRNAs encephalopathy, through inclusion of multiplex and inbred families, very that influence risk of seizures. In particular, we sought to evaluate whether few patients had homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in re- down-regulation of microRNA-128 results in clear excitability phenotypes cessive candidate genes, suggesting that recessive epileptic encephalopathi- by MEA analysis. We used primary cortical neurons from wild-type post- es are very rare. Sequencing of our patients’ parents and further analysis natal day zero  C57
B L6
 mice and a lentivirus delivered microRNA sponge to will sort out new EE-genes. target the mature microRNA-128. Sponges are competitive microRNA inhi- PM09.050 bitors which express tandem repeats that are partially complementary to A genetic study of Primary Familial Brain Calcification and the microRNA sequence. We recorded neuronal activity on the MEA for 15 Paroxysmal Kinesigenic Dyskinesia minutes each day to collect spike, burst, and network synchronicity data. G. Iannello1,2, M. Gagliardi1, M. Morelli2, G. Nicoletti1, P. Perrotta1, A. Gambardella2, A. Our data show that down regulation of microRNA-128 by inhibition with a Quattrone1,2, G. Annesi1; 1Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, National Research Council, Section sponge results in significantly increased neuronal activity. These features of Germaneto, Catanzaro, Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, Department of Medical and are consistent with the previous observations that microRNA-128 deficien- Surgical Sciences, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. cy promotes neuronal excitability. These experiments illustrate the utility of the MEA platform in evaluation of microRNAs in regulation of network phenotypes. Introduction: Primary Familial Brain Calcification (PFBC) also known as PM09.048 Fahr’s disease is a rare genetic disorder including heterogeneous and pro- Molecular characterization of a cohort of 352 patients sheds light on gressive neurologic dysfunction, caused mainly by calcification in basal gan- genetic heterogeneity in early onset epileptic encephalopathy. glia. Thus far, 3 genes have been identified to be involved in Fahr’s disease, M. Milh1,2,3, C. Lacoste4, P. Cacciagli4,2,3, C. Mignon-Ravix2,3, J. Sutera-Sardo1, C. Badens4,3,2, SL C20
A2, PDGFRB and PDGFB. Recent evidence suggests that SL C20
A2 L. Villard2,3; might be associated with Paroxysmal Kinesigenic Dyskinesia (PKD). 1Pediatric Neurology, La Timone Children‘s Hospital, Marseille, France, 2Inserm, UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 3Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France, 4Medical Genetics, La Materials and methods: We performed a SL C20
A2, PDGFRB and PDGFB Timone Children‘s Hospital, Marseille, France. gene analysis of 4 families with Fahr’s disease and a SL C20
A2 screening of a PKD family. The genomic DNA was extracted, genes amplified and then sequenced. We have studied a cohort of 352 patients suffering from early onset epi- Results: Screening for SL C20
A2 detected a novel missense mutation leptic encephalopathy. This cohort was studied either in a diagnostic or in c.1618G>A in heterozygous form in two affected members of a PFBC fami- a research setting. All patients had epilepsy beginning before 3 months of ly. This mutation leads to a Gly540Arg substitution in a highly conserved age, abnormal interictal EEG, no brain abnormality and a normal metabo- residue in transmembrane domain IX. A novel SL C20
A2 deletion in hetero- lic screening. They all had abnormal neurological development. Globally, zygous state c.21_21delG (p.Leu7Fs*10) was found in a patient of a second among the 352 patients, we identified 75 probably damaging mutations PFBC family. (21,3%). As a first step, all patients were screened for mutations in the Conclusion: As predicted the first mutation causes a loss of function of the KCNQ2 or STXB P1
 genes. We identified 33 mutations in KCNQ2 (9,3% of the protein while deletion causes a frameshift generating a truncated protein. cohort) and 19 mutations in STXB P1
 (5,4% of the cohort). If we consider the SL C20
A2 gene mutations shape the impairment of the uptake of Pi. In con- diagnostic cohort only (189 patients) the yield is 17,4% for KCNQ2 and 10% clusion our study confirms that SL C20
A2 mutations are mainly responsible for STXB P1
 mutations. All mutations in these two genes were de novo but for PFBC. two, which have been inherited from mosaic carriers. 1. Nicolas G, Pottier C, Charbonnier C, et al. Phenotypic spectrum of probable In the research cohort (163 patients), we found mutations in the KCNT1, SC- and genetically-confirmed idiopathic basal ganglia calcification. Brain 2013; N8A, TB C1
D24, SCN2A, KCNQ3, SL C13
A5, GABRG2, CDK L5
 and GRIN2A ge- 136:3395-3407 nes. High resolution arrayCGH anE alS ysH isG w a2 s0 a1 ls5 o p| e G rfoL rA mS edG fO orW 10, 9 S pC atO ieT ntL sA N2D. M, UinK Z h|u W, XWuanW Z.hEuS, HHuGi .WOaRn,G Daojun Hong. Familial IBGC caused b1y 7S L7
-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM09.054 Friedreich ataxia and Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A  C20
A2 mutation presenting as paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia. Parkin- segregating in a single pedigree from Bulgaria sonism Relat Disord. 2014 Mar; 20 (3):353-4 A. Todorova1,2, S. Tincheva3,2, T. Todorov4, V. Mitev2; P S09
.051 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico- Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Medical University Sofia, Sofia, A modulatory trans-effect on age-at-onset in familial amyloid Bulgaria, 4Genetic-Medico Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Sofia, Bulgaria. polyneuropathy (FAP) ATTRV30M in Portugal M. Alves-Ferreira1,2, A. Azevedo1,2, T. Coelho3, D. Santos1,2, J. Sequeiros1,2, I. Alonso1, A. Sousa1,2, C. Lemos1,2; FXN 1Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (I3S); and UnIGENe, IBMC – Institute Friedreich ataxia (FRDA, MIM 229300) is an autosomal recessiGveA Aform of for Molecular and Cell Biology, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Porto, ataxia, caused by mutations in the gene (MIM 606829), localized at Portugal, 3Unidade Corino de Andrade, HSA-CHP, Porto, Portugal. 9q21.11. Typically, the disorder is associated with an instable trinu- cleotide expansion in intron 1. Homozygous expansion accoFuXnNts for 98% of the cases of FRDA. However, about 2% of the FRDA patients are compound Introduction: Early and late-onset forms of familial amyloid polyneuropa- heterozygous for the expansion and a point mutation in the gene. thy (FAP) ATTR V30M (aka Val50Met) are not separate entities: they may Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy Type 2A (LGMD2A, MIM 253600; Cal- coexist in the same family, with offspring often showing anticipation of age- painopathy) is another autosomal CreAcPeNss3ive neuromuscular disorder pre- of-onset (AO). Our aim was to identify modifiers closely linked to the TTR sented with progressive proximal (limb-girdle) muscle weakness. LGM- locus that may in part explain the wide variability in AO. D2A is caused by mutations in the gene (MIM 114240) localized at Methods: Eight variants at the TTR locus were analysed, in a sample of 722 15q15.1. individuals (588 V30M carriers). An intensive in silico analysis was perfor- Here we report a single pedigree affected by these two different recessi- med to study a possible regulation of gene expression. ve neuromuscular disorders, namely FRDA and LGMD2A. The molecular Results: Haplotype A was the most common in our population. Noteworthy, genetic testing showed thaFt XinN this family FRDA is caused by an expanded haplotype C was more frequent in early-onset carriers than in late patients GAA repeat in compound heterozygous state with FaX nNovel point mutation (p=0.012). When we compared allelic frequencies of each SNP of haploty- c.442C>T, p.Gln148* in the gene. This represents the first report of Bul- pe C between very early (≤30yrs) and late-onset cases (≥50yrs), we found garian FRDA caCseA PcaNr3rying a point mutation in the gene. The LGMD2A a significant association of the A allele of rs72922947 with early-onset affected individual was found to be compound heterozygous for the two (p=0.009), which remained significant after a permutation-based correc- most common mutations for the Bulgarian population (c.550delA, tion. Also, the GA genotype was associated with a decrease in mean AO of p.Thr184Argfs; c.967G>T, p.Glu323*). 8.6 yrs (p=0.014). To the best of our knowledge we are reporting the first Bulgarian family We also found interesting, unreported results in the in silico analysis. Sever- with two neurological disorders caused by mutations in genes on different al alterations in the mechanism of splicing, transcription factors binding and chromosomes and segregating independently in the family. This single pedi- miRNAs binding were observed. gree with four different mutations is an example for the high genetic hetero- Conclusions: We found a common haplotype linked with V30M mutation geneity of the Bulgarian population. and, importantly, a possible modulatory effect on AO by a genetic variant P S09
.055 present in the normal chromosome. These putative mechanisms of regulati- Fast detection of genetic variations in frontotemporal dementia using on of gene expression, within the TTR gene, could be potential therapeutical next-generation sequencing-based on a custom AmpliSeq™ panel and targets. Ion Torrent PGM sequencing. PM09.052 I. Manna1, M. Morelli2, L. Citrigno3, D. Mendes Oliveria3, C. Marinaro3, A. Fratto2, G. Familial Fatal Insomnia in a large Portuguese family Viglietto3, A. Gambardella2, A. Quattrone1; P. Louro1, L. Ramos1, I. Santana2, I. Baldeiras2, A. Massano2, G. Cordeiro2, C. Bento2, O. 1CNR-1Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology (IBFM), Section of Germaneto;, Rebelo3, H. Ribeiro4, R. Almeida4, J. M. Saraiva1,5; Catanzaro, Italy, 22Institute of Neurology, Department of Medical Sciences, University 1Medical Genetics Unit, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Magna Graecia,, Catanzaro, Italy, 33Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Portugal, 2Neurology Unit, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, University Magna Graecia,, Catanzaro, Italy. Portugal, 3Anatomic Pathology Unit, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5University Clinic of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a syndrome characterized by profound Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. behavioral changes and degeneration of the frontal and anterior temporal cortex and it is a clinically, pathologically and genetically heterogeneous dis- order. Many candidate genes are associated with FTD. To set up a fast and Fatal familial insomnia (FFI) is a rare human prion disorder, clinically cha- comprehensive assay in order to determine genetic diagnosis in FTD, we racterized by progressive insomnia and dysautonomia preceding motor and employed the standard next-generation sequencing (NGS) workflow. We de- cognitive deterioration. FFI is linked to the mutation D178N in the PRNP signed a custom AmpliSeq™ panel for sequencing the most prevalent FTD- gene and to the presence of a methionine codon at position 129 of the mu- causing genes (PSEN2, TARDBP, PSEN1, FUS, GRN, MAPT, APOE, PRNP, and tant allele (D178N-129M haplotype). APP) using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) Sequencer. We report the case of a 49-year-old man presenting with insomnia, attenti- Our AmpliSeq custom panel allowed us to efficiently explore 99% of targe- on deficits and sexual dysfunction. The following month he started having ted sequences. Few patients with a clinical diagnosis of FTD was screened to unsteady gait, behavioral changes and was unable to work due to executive identify the disease-causing mutations. Using adjusted alignment settings, dysfunction. Over the subsequent months he became agitated, with stereo- all genetic variants present in covered region were readily identified. We typed behavior and vocalizations, and rapidly deteriorated, dying 10 months found in a patient two heterozygous mutations in two genes (Cys139Arg in after onset. GRN gene, and Glu318Gly in PSEN1 gene) previously described pathogenic. In the investigation, EEG showed bursts of frontal slow waves, but no pe- In all patients we identified the common genetic variant in the 3‘ untransla- riodic activity was detected, and polysomnography revealed a normal pat- ted region (3‘UTR) of GRN gene (rs5848; c.*78C>T), associated with spora- tern with the presence of sleep spindles and K complexes; MRI revealed dic FTD, and several synonymous variants, classified not pathogenic, in the mild fronto-temporal atrophy; CSF analysis was negative for 14-3-3 protein; other genes. In conclusion, these results suggested that our NGS approach necropsy study revealed a mild fronto-temporal atrophy, severe neuronal based on an ampliseq custom panel is a highly efficient, and can readly iden- loss and astrogliosis in the thalamic nuclei, but no spongiform degenerati- tify FTD-causing mutations that are associated with high phenotypic varia- on; Western blot analysis for protease-resistant prion protein did not detect bility. the presence of the abnormal protein in frontal cortex. Finally, PRNP gene PM09.056 sequencing revealed a heterozygous D178N mutation associated with a ho- Mutations in PGRN, MAPT and  C9
ORF72 in Polish patients with mozygous methionine polymorphism at codon 129. frontotemporal lobar dementia This patient’s family has an autosomal dominant pedigree with several car- M. Berdyński1, T. Gabryelewicz1, A. Barczak1, M. Kobryś1, E. Narożańska2, M. riers and affected members, although with a phenotypic variability related, Barcikowska1, C. Żekanowski1; at least partly, to the specific polymorphism at codon 129 of the non-mutant 1Mossakowski Medical Research Centre Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, allele of PRNP gene. 2Department of Neurology, St. Adalbert Hospital, Gdańsk, Poland. Introduction 178 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOFrToLntAotNemDp,o UraKl l o|b War WdeWgen.EerSaHtioGn .(OFTRDG) is the second most common formABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of presenile dementia. FTD, is clinically, pathologically and genetically hete- developmental milestone was delayed from early infancy. She cannot waDlke rogeneous disorder. Up to 40% of FTD patients report family mePmGRbNersM wAiPtTh anloovnoe. She showed severe intellectuGaAl BdRisGa2bility (ID) and autism spectrum FTD Cs9uOpRpFo7rt2i.ng the important contribution of genetic factors. Seven genes disorder (ASD). Microcephalus and dysmorphic features were noted. are linked to FTD, with the most prevalent mutations located in , heterozygous mutation in the gene (p.A106T) was identified. and EEG showed sporadic spikes. Epileptic seizure was not observed. Materials and Methods Patient 2 The study group comprisMedA 1 P3
T8 FTDP pGaRtiNents (mean age of onset 56,3±11,8; This 5 year-old boy was born to nonconsanguineous healthy parents His 57 patients with familial FTD) and coCn9trOoRl Fg7ro2up consisted of 257 neurolo- developmental milestone was delayed from early infancy. He cannot sit or gically healthy persons. and were direct-sequenced. Hexanu- wDea lnko. vHoe showed severe ID and generaliGzAedB RepGi2leptic seizures. He constantly cleotide repeat expansion located in was analyzed using repeat– moved his extremities. Microcephalus and dysmorphic features were noted. primed PCR. heterozygous mutation in GthAeB RG2 gene (p.R270G) was identi- RMeAsPuTlts PGRN,  C9
ORF72 fied. GABRG2 In the group of FMTADP pTatients PfiGftReNen putative pathogPeGnRicN mutations (six in We suppose that mutations in the gene may be responsible for ID , four in and five in ) were identified including three and ASD. Patient 1 lacked seizures. Clinical spectrum of mutation novel mutation: G55R, D317fsX11, and  P439
_R440fsX6. was expanded. Mutation in three analyzed genes are responsible for 11% of all analyzed PM09.060 FTD cases and 31% of familial cases. The emerging utility of genetic testing in clinical psychiatry Conclusions A. Kievit1, C. Bouwkamp1,2, L. van Zutven1, R. van Minkelen1, I. Sterrenburg-van de Although the mutations in the analyzed genes are responsible for a signi- Nieuwegiessen3, V. Bonifati1, S. Kushner2; ficant percentage of FTD cases from the Polish population, it is recommen- 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Dept. of ded to apply new generation sequencing methods (NGS) to detect mutations Psychiatry, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Delta Psychiatric Centre, Poortugaal, Netherlands. in the remainder FTD cases. P S09
.057 Progranulin levels in repeated blood withdrawals and cerebrospinal There is ample evidence that psychiatric disorders have a strong genetic fluid in (pre)symptomatic frontotemporal dementia caused by basis. Family history is the strongest predictor of increased disease risk. In- progranulin mutations creasing knowledge about the genetic architecture in a substantial subset H. H. Meeter1, E. G. P. Dopper1, H. Patzke2, J. C. van Swieten1; 1ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2FORUM Pharmaceuticals, Watertown, MA, of patients with severe mental illness urges revising the clinical standard of United States. care. We inform the field about the state of the art of clinical genetics applied to psychiatric practice. Furthermore, we present our findings in a cohort of patients with severe mental illness and comorbid mild to moderate intel- Introduction: Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is GthReN s,econd most common lectual disability, where in a considerably number of the cases a molecular form of presenile dementia characterized by progressive behavioral and/ diagnosis was provided, and give clinical guidelines as to when it is useful or language disorders. Mutations in progranulin ( autosomal dominant to request a clinical genetic evaluation in the setting of psychiatric care. Cli- inheritance), are causative for this disease in 5 -10 percent of cases, leading nical genetic testing and counselling is warranted in patients with complex to reduced levels of progranulin protein levels due to haploinsufficiency. psychiatric syndromes, and especially in those with mental retardation and/ Upcoming therapeutic trials focus on enhancing progranulin production. To or multiple congenital abnormalities and/or a positive family history. be able to correctly interpret effects of these agents, knowledge of natural P S09
.061 variability and correlations between progranulin levels in blood and cere- Clinical and molecular-genetic characteristics of two Gerstmann- brospinal fluid are eGsRsNential. GRN Straussler-Scheinker patients. Methods: We studied the variability of progranulin levels in 42 subjects (4 E. L. Dadali, A. A. Stepanova, O. A. Sh’agina, A. V. Polyakov; FTD patients GwRitNh mutation, 19 presymptomGRaNtic carriers and 19 Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. healthy controls). We performed lumbar punctures in 28 subjects (3 FTD patients with mutation, 16 presymptomatic G RcaNrriers and 9 healthy controls). p Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease is the rare autosomal-dominant Results: Progranulin levels are significantly lower in carriers compared disease with a prevalence of 1 in 10 million. We herein present a description to healthy controls (mean 7866 pg/mL versus 27473 pg/mL, =0.00). Pro- of clinical and molecular-genetic characteristics of two unrelated probands granulin levels in plasma are remarkably stable ovepr time (meanp variability with Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome in three generations. per subject is 11%). Presymptomatic versus symptomatic carriers show Patient 1, a 35 years old man, complained at constrained muscles, change of equal median progranulin levels and variability (p=0.29 resp. =0.26). In speech, memory impairment. By 34 years dysarthria and memory impair- CSF, progranulin levels are also significantly lower in carriers (median 334 ment became evident. EEG showed moderate violation of bioelectric activity pg/mL) compared to controls (pmedian 761 pg/mL, =0.00). Plasma progra- of a brain in the form of dysfunctions the diencephalic structures. MRI of a nulin levels show a good correlation with CSF progranulin levels in the total brain didn’t show significant changes. Similar symptoms were observed in cohort (Spearman’s rho=0.82, =0.00). the proband‘s mother and brother, who died at the age of 37 and 38 years, Conclusions: Peripheral GpRroNgranulin levels are stable and correlate well respectively, 3 years after of the first symptoms. DNA - analysis identified with central levels, therefore plasma progranulin levels are a promising bio- the previously described mutation Ala117Val in the PRNP gene. marker for subjects with mutations. In Рatient 2, a 43 years old women, the first symptoms of deasease noticed In collaboration with FORUM pharmaceuticals. Fellowship grant HHM by in 40 years when the severe ataxia revealed. In the neurologic status sym- Alzheimer Nederland. ptoms of static and dynamic cerebellar ataxy in combination with pyramidal symptoms were dominat. There was no expressed cognitive frustration, the P S09
.059 patient complained only at reducing of memory on the current events. EEG Expanding the Clinical Spectrum of GABRG2 Mutations N. Okamoto1, R. Fukai2, N. Miyake2, H. Saitsu2, N. Matsumoto2; and MRI of a brain didn’t show significant changes. Similar symptoms were 1Department of Medical Genetics, observed in the patient‘s mother and grandmother who died during 5 and 7 years, after the first symptoms were discovered. DNA- analysis identified the 2 Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute previously described mutation Pro102Leu in the PRNP gene. for Maternal and, Osaka, Japan, Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City These results confirm the opinion of many authors about so-called „telence- University Graduate School of, Yokohama, Japan. phalic“ type of disease at patients with a mutation Ala117Val in contrast to Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors are a family of proteins invol- the „atactic“ type observed at Pro102Leu mutation. ved in the GABAergic neurotransmission of thGeA bBrRaGin2. GABRG2 is a member PM09.062 of the GABA-A receptor gene family of heteromeric pentameric ligand-gated Genetic characteristics of hemiplegic migraine in Finnish migraine ion channels. Heterozygous mutations in the gene have been found families in the patients with childhood absence epilepsy, familial febrile seizures, M. E. Hiekkala1, P. Vuola1,2, E. Häppölä1, E. Cuenca3,4, S. Paavonen2, V. Artto2, M. Färkkilä2, and generalized epilepsy with FS plus. WGAeB aRnGa2lyzed whole exome sequen- E. Hämäläinen5, A. Palotie4,5,6, M. Wessman1,5, M. A. Kaunisto1,5, M. Kallela2; cing in patients with neurodevelopmental disorders. We report two patients 1Institute of Genetics, Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of with atypical manifestations with novel mutations. Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Wellcome Trust Patient 1 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 179 This 5 year-old girl was born to nonconsanguineous healthy parents. HerABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Mohamed3, E. E. Bushara3, A. Alnour9,10, F. Ba1,2, E. Mundwiller1, D. Bouteiller1, K. H. EL- 4Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Department of Psychiatry, HACHIMI1,2, K. Bouya1, M. I. Elbashir3, M. E. Ibrahim11, A. Durr1, A. Brice1, A. E. Ahmed3,4,5, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5Institute for Molecular G. Stevanin1,2; Medicine FIMM, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Neurology, 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. 06, Inserm U1127, CNRS UMR7225, F-75013, Paris, France, 2Neurogenetics team, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, ICM, F-75013, Paris, France, 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan, 4Royal College of Physicians, London, United Kingdom, 5Sudan Medical Council, Neurology, Khartoum, Introduction: Hemiplegic migraine (HM) is a rare subtype of migraine with Sudan, 6Faculty of Madicine, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan, 7Department aura. Typical HM attacks are characterized by fully reversible motor wea- of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine , University of El Imam EL Mahdi, Kosti, Sudan, kness that is associated with visual, sensory or speech symptoms. Further- 8University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan, 9Police Hospital, Khartoum, Sudan, 10Alamal more, attacks may occur with basilar-type symptoms, prCoAloCnNgAe1dA h, AeTmPip1Ale2- Hospital, Khartoum, Sudan, 11Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Endemic gia, cSoCnNf1uAsion, coma, fever or seizures. To date several mutations have been Diseases, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan. identified for HM locating in three ion-transporter genes: and . Materials and Methods: In order to study the involvement of the three HM Spinocerebellar neurodegeneration results in a spectrum of clinically and genes in the Finnish HM patients we have exome sequenced (Agilent/Illumi- genetically heterogeneous syndromes that frequently impose a diagnostic na: Sanger Institute) 303 patients from 252 families fulfilling the criteria for dilemma. Pure forms of hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) and hereditary HM. The mean sequence depth of the target exome was 86. The minor allele ataxias (HA) represent both ends of the spectrum. Screening of 74 known frequencies of exonic variants were checked against The Exome Aggregation spasticity culprit genes was performed on 51 patients from 21 extended Su- Consortium (ExAC) and 1000G project data. Validation and segregation ana- danese families with multiple consanguinity loops. Genetic diagnosis was lyses of all novel and rare exonic and splice site variants are ongoing. established in 5 families with autosomal recessive complex spastic ataxia. Results: Exome sequencing analyses revealed 43 potentially functional, SPG11 nonsense [exon 34: c.6349G>T / p.Glu2117*, exon 21: c.3568A>T uCAnCknNoAw1An, low or rare frequency variants in the three FHM genes. One of / p.Lys1190*] and frameshift [exon 36: c.6709del / p.Ala2237Gln*7] mu- the identified variants was the well-known mutation - p.Thr666Met - in tations were identified in 3 families with HSP with atrophy of the corpus . The variant was found in one family segregating perfectly. callosum. Two other families carried homozygous mutations in SACS gene Conclusions: Most of the so far studied variants do not seem to segregate [exon10: c.7739G>A / p.Trp2580*] and in SPG57/TFG gene [exon 2: c.64C>T with the HM phenotype. Hence, after validation and segregation analyses / p.R22W]. we will study whether different variant composition including e.g. several The c.6709del SPG11 mutation was previously reported in one Somalian less deleterious variants, could predispose to HM susceptibility. In addition, patient with spastic ataxia but with slightly different clinical presentation the exome data will be screened genome-wide to identify whether variants including the age at onset (2 years versus 10-17 years in Sudanese patients). in other genes could contribute to HM. All other 4 mutations were novel. P S09
.063 The family with TFG missense mutation (p.R22W/ PB1 highly conserved do- Uniparental disomy causing hereditary spastic paraplegia: Paternal main) is the second SPG57 family worldwide. It presented with motor rather disomy in FA2H causing homozygous SPG35 in two non-consanguine than the visual impairment presentation of the first SPG57 Indian family families (p.R106C / coiled-coil domain). The Sudanese SPG57 family had multiple T. W. Rattay1,2, A. S. Soehn3, K. N. Karle1,2, S. Wiethoff1,2, J. Reichbauer1, M. Döbler- MRI abnormalities (and uniquely hemorrhages in one patient) as seen in Neumann4, U. Gaiser4, P. Bauer3, S. Züchner5, R. Schüle1,2, L. Schöls1,2; collagen disorders. 1Hertie-Institute and Center for Neurology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, This study shows the great genetic heterogeneity of HSP in Sudan and de- 2German Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, Germany, 3Institute monstrates that more genes will come in the future to explain the nosology of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, of these diseases. 4Department of Neuropediatrics, Tübingen University School of Medicine, Tübingen, Germany, 5Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller School of P S09
.065 Medicine, Miami, FL, United States. TFG mutation hot spot causes varied hereditary spastic paraplegia phenotypes G. V. Harlalka1,2, M. E. McEntagart2, N. Gupta3, B. Chioza1, R. C. Trembath4, M. A. Patton1, Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are degenerative diseases of upper A. Sreekantan-Nair1, A. Pereira5, H. Modarres5, H. Moore-Barton2, M. A. Simpson4, M. Kabra3, A. H. Crosby1; motor neurons characterized by a progressive spastic gait disorder. They 1Level 4, RILD Building, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, are genetically highly heterogenous. SPG35 is an autosomal-recessive (AR) 2Medical Genetics Unit, Floor 0, Jenner Wing, St. George‘s, University of London, London, HSP caused by mutations in the fatty acid 2-hydroxylase (FA2H), which is United Kingdom, 3Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Old O.T. Block, All India essential for maintenance of the neuronal myelin sheath. Thus far approx. Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 4Division of Genetics and Molecular 20 mutations have been described in 13 SPG35 families with 36 affected Medicine, King‘s College London School of Medicine, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United patients. Kingdom, 5Department of Neurology, Atkinson Morley Wing, St. George’s Hospital, Genetic screening was performed by whole exome sequencing in patient #1 London, United Kingdom. and by a HaloPlex assay providing high coverage of all known HSP genes (“HSP panel”) in patient #2. MLPA was used to screen for FA2H deletions and microsatellite marker analysis by PCR to identify uniparental disomy The hereditaryspastic paraplegias (HSPs) are a clinically and genetically (UPD). heterogeneous group of degenerative motor neuron disorders in which the We detected different novel homozygous FA2H mutations in two non-rela- cardinal clinical feature is progressive lower limb spasticity. This feature may ted non-consanguine families. Segregation analysis revealed both fathers occur in isolation (‘pure’ HSP), or be accompanied by other neurological or being heterozygous mutation carriers whereas both mothers did not carry non-neurological clinical features (‘complicated’ HSP). We investigated the FA2H mutations. We presumed a maternal macro deletion within SPG35 to genetic basis of disease in two unrelated families, one with pure HSP, and be causing a hemizygous genotype, but a MLPA assay failed to confirm our the second with a complicated HSP associated with optic atrophy and neu- hypothesis. Finally, a microsatellite array revealed paternal disomy in both ropathy. Genome-wide SNP mapping in both families identified a single no- families leading to homozygous SPG35 mutations. table region of homozygosity peculiar to affected family members on chro- UPD has rare been described as causative mechanism in neurodegenerative mosome 3q12.2, indicating that the disease gene was likely located in this diseases. This is the first report of UPD as a cause for HSP. Interestingly, we region in eTaFchG family. Exome sequencing in an affected individual from the identified this rare mode of inheritance in two families with the rare geno- pure HTSFPG family identified a homozygous missense mutation (p.Arg106His) type SPG35. We are not aware of any mechanism how SPG35 mutations may within the gene, located within the mapped region. Subsequent analysis trigger UPD. of the gene in the complicated HSP family revealed another sequence Since UPD seems to be a relevant factor in AR HSP we recommend segre- alteration, again affecting arginine 106, although this time resulting in its gation analysis especially in non-consanguine homozygous index cases to substitution with cysteine (p.Arg106Cys). Thus both sequence alterations unravel further UPD cases in this field. result in the substitution of the highly conserved arginine 106 residue with two different amino acids with distinct chemical properties, indicating that PM09.064 the clinical severiTtyF Gof disease may relate to the differing chemical proper- Identification of the first Sudanese families carrying novel mutations tTiFeGs of the substituted amino acid. Taken together, our findings confirm a in SPG11, SPG57 and SACS genes causative role of mutation in HSP and identify residue arginine 106 of L. E. O. Elsayed1,2,3, I. N. Mohammed3, A. A. A. Hamed3, M. A. Elseed3, H. S. Mohamed4,5, M. N. Idris3,5, S. M. El-sadig6, M. Mairey1,2, L. Raymond1,2, M. Coutelier1,2, C. Tesson1,2, A. as a mutation hotspot to be considered for diagnostic screening in both K. Ahmed3, A. M. A. Babai3, H. M. O. Malik3, H. B. Eltahir7, R. A. Siddig8, M. E. Koko3, A. Y. pure HSP as well as complicated forms of HSP. This research is supported by MRC grant G1002279. 180 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM09.066 Spastic paraplegia: massive sequencing of 74 genes reveals a world of missing genes to uncover In our experience, these families present different counselling challenges S. Morais1,2,3, M. Mairey3,4, L. Raymond3,4, A. Durr3, A. Brice3, P. Coutinho1, J. Leal de to those encountered in families already known to be affected by HD. For Loureiro1,5, J. Sequeiros1,2, I. Alonso1,2, G. Stevanin3,4; example, adult children of a person diagnosed with HD in later life may 1UnIGENe, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC) and Instituto de perceive HD as a benign condition affecting only older people, even when Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Instituto de genetic anticipation has been explained. When a new diagnosis is made in Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, an older adult, not only has the tested individual completed their family, but 3Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, often their own offspring are in the midst of child-bearing or have comple- INSERM, UMRS_1127, CNRS 7225, F-75013, Paris, France, 4Ecole pratique des Hautes Etudes, F-75014, Paris, France, 5Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar de Entre o ted their families too. This can mean that decisions about predictive testing, Douro e Vouga, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal. reproductive choice, and disclosing information about the diagnosis may be faced over a shorter time period than in people who have grown up with the knowledge of their HD risk. Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSPs) are a heterogeneous group of neu- Here we present our data and discuss the challenges created by making a rodegenerative disorders characterized by lower limb spasticity and wea- new diagnosis of HD in a family. kness. Genetically, HSPs are complex with four modes of inheritance descri- P S09
.069 bed and with >60 genes identified. Approximately 60% of the families per- Association analysis of narcolepsy without cataplexy and idiopathic sist without molecular diagnosis reinforcing their genetic heterogeneity. hypersomnia In Portugal, a cohort of 98 families with spastic paraplegia remained wit- T. Miyagawa1, S. Khor1, H. Toyoda1, H. Kojima2, T. Futagami2, M. Yamasaki1, H. Saji2, K. hout molecular diagnostic. In order to identify the disease-causing muta- Mishima3, Y. Honda4, M. Honda5, K. Tokunaga1; tion in these families, 2 custom sequencing kits were developed to search 1Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 2HLA Foundation Laboratory, Kyoto, Japan, 3Department of for mutations in known genes, covering 34 and 74 genes, respectively, that Psychophysiology, National Institute of Mental Health, National Center of Neurology and included some genes causing a similar phenotype and some candidate and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan, 4Japan Somnology Center, Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, newly identified genes found by the SPATAX partners. Tokyo, Japan, 5Sleep Disorders Project, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral In these 98 families we identified the responsible gene in 22, resulting in Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan. a frequency of 22,5%. This low frequency could be explained by the fact that these families were the ones remaining after the exclusion of the most frequent HSP genes. Variants with unexpected inheritance modes and phe- Narcolepsy without cataplexy (NA w/o CA) is a lifelong disorder characteri- notypes were found in known genes. Our results show the importance of zed by excessive daytime sleepiness aHnLdA R-DEQMB s1l*e0e6p: 0a2bnormalities, but does testing families with all modes of inheritance for the same set of genes and not exhibit cataplexy. Several studies have reported that NA w/o CA is asso- also, the importance of testing genes causing overlapping phenotypes. ciated with human leucocyte antigen similar to narcolepsy These results suggest that there is still a large set of genes responsible by with cataplexy (NA-CA). The sample sizes of the studies were small because spastic paraplegia and probably more mechanisms leading to the disease NHALA w-D/QoB  C1
A is an infrequent condition. We have therefore formed a colla- to be uncovered. borative reseaDrQcBh1 g*r0o6u:0p2 to promote the study. In this study, we examined P S09
.067 in 146 Japanese patients with NA w/o CA and 1,418 controls. The Genetic testing for Huntington’s Disease in consanguineous families frequency of in the pDaQtBie1n*t0s6 w:0a2s significantly hig-H7heLrA -tDhQanB 1that J. Campbell, G. Karbani, S. Coulson, E. Hobson; in the controls (allele frequency: 16.8% vs. 7.6%, P = 1.6×10 , OR = 2.40). Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United Kingdom. After controlling for the effect of , distributions of al- leleHsL wA-eDreQ Bco1mpared betDwQeBe1n* 0N6A: 0w2/o CA and NA-CA to assess whether the genetic backgrounds of the two diseases have similarities. The distribution The Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service has contact with all patients who of HLA-DQ aBl1leles in -nega-7tive NDAQ Bw1/*o0 6C:0A2 was significantly undergo predictive and diagnostic genetic testing for Huntington’s Disea- different from tHhaLtA i-nD QNBA1-CA (P = 8.4×10 ). On the other hand, the patterns se (HD) within the NHS in North, East and West Yorkshire, as well as some of the alleles were similar between -positive NA w/o areas of Northern Lincolnshire. HD occurs in all ethnic groups, but is more CA and NA-CA. analysis wDaQsB a1ls*o0 6p:e0r2formed in 171 Japanese pa- prevalent in the European population. tients with idiopathic hypersomnia (IHS). No significanDt QaBss1o*c0i6a:t0io2ns were Our local population includes a significant proportion of individuals of observed. The findings suggest that -positive NA w/o CA has an South Asian origin. Genetic counselling and genetic testing in families from autoimmune pathogenesis in common with NA-CA, but -negati- this group present different challenges to those encountered in other popu- vDeQ NB1A* 0w6/:o0 2CA and IHS might be unique from NA-CA. We also performed a lations. In a recent study of our Bradford population, 28% of babies were genome-wide association study to identify genetic markers associated with born to consanguineous parents (18% were born to parents who were first -negative NA w/o CA and IHS. We will discuss the results of the cousins). In consanguineous families there is a risk that individuals with HD study. may be homozygous for the disease-causing CAG expansion. Homozygous PM09.070 expansions do not significantly alter the clinical phenotype in HD, but if Exome sequencing identifies a novel SNX14 mutation and confirms a detected on genetic testing this would significantly affect the offspring risk new syndrome with intellectual disability and cerebellar atrophy (which would be 100% for developing HD rather than the 50% expected fol- A. Bertoli Avella1, M. Alfadhel2, M. Weiss1, D. Trujillano1, R. Abou Jamra1, A. Rolfs1,3; lowing autosomal dominant inheritance). A homozygous result would also 1CENTOGENE GA, Rostock, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, King Saud bin Abdulaziz confirm that both parents of the proband are at risk of HD, when perhaps University for Health Sciences, King Abdulaziz Medical City Riyadh, Riyadh, Saudi only one parent is aware of their diagnosis. Arabia, 3Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Medical University Rostock, We present examples of consanguineous families where at least one indivi- Rostock, Germany. dual has been diagnosed with HD. We will discuss the genetic counselling issues raised, and the approach taken to the reporting of genetic testing in individuals at risk of being homozygous for an HD expansion. Clinical exome sequencing has open possibilities for diagnosis of previously unrecognized genetic disorders. Here we describe a consanguineous family PM09.068 with two children presenting with global developmental delay and subtle Making a new diagnosis of Huntington‘s Disease; the experience of a dysmorphic features, accompanied by cerebellar atrophy and small vermix, UK regional genetics service. originating from Saudi Arabia. H. E. Musgrave, J. Campbell, E. Hobson; Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Leeds, United Kingdom. By whole exome sequencing and family analysis we identified a novel muta- tion in the SNX14 gene (c.2722C>T, p.Gln908*), which introduces a prema- ture termination codon in exon 27 of the gene. This mutation is located in The Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service has contact with all patients who the PX associated domain C (PXC) of the SXN14 protein and will likely cause undergo genetic testing for Huntington’s Disease (HD) on an NHS basis in a loss of function or lead to nonsense mediated decay. This novel mutation North, East and West Yorkshire, and parts of North Lincolnshire. This cohort was found in homozygosis in both affected children and the parents were includes patients, referred by neurologists or psychiatrists, in whom a dia- confirmed to be heterozygote carriers. Two unaffected siblings were also gnosis of HD is suspected on clinical grounds but who have no known family heterozygote carriers of this mutation confirming co-segregation of the di- history of the condition. sease and the p.Gln908* mutation. We have reviewed the data of individuals tested over the last 10 years and Recently, Thomas et al. described a new syndrome in three consanguineous noted an increase in the number of people diagnosed with HD in the absence families from Portuguese and Turkish descent in whom homozygous mutati- of a known or assumed family hisEtoSrHy oGf t2he0 c1o5nd |i tGioLn.ASGOW, SCOTLANoDns, wUeKre | i dWenWtifWied. EinS tHheG SX.ON1R4G gene. The mutations (partially) remov1e8 th1eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S09
.073 Identification of a novel locus for large-vessel ischemic stroke: a RGS, PX or PXC domains and were shown to lead to loss of function which is genome-wide association study also the pathogenic mechanism suspected in our family. Our results confirm J. Wu1, T. Lee2, T. Ko1, C. Chen1, Y. Chen1, M. M. Lee1, Y. Chang2, C. Chang2, K. Huang2, T. that homozygous mutations in the SNX14 gene cause a new syndrome with Chang2, J. Lee3, K. Chang4, J. Yang3, M. Wen2, C. Wang2, Y. Chen1, C. Hsieh1, S. Chou2, Y. Liu1, intellectual disability and cerebellar atrophy. Retrospective exome analysis H. Chen1, H. Chen1, H. Liao1, C. Wang1, S. Chen1, L. Lu1, Y. Chen1; of cases with this specific phenotype is recommended. 1Inst. of Biomedical Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou Medical Center, and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan, P S09
.071 3Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi Branch, and Chang Gung University College of New genetic makers in young ischemic strokes Medicine, Chiayi, Taiwan, 4Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical Center, S. Redon1,2, S. Timsit1,2, T. Ronzière3, B. Guillon4, C. Breuilly5, C. Blanchard6, V. Golfier7, C. and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Vaduva7, G. Taurin8, M. Guillaume9, S. Debiais10, C. Bergot11, C. Férec1,2; 1INSERM U1078, Brest, France, 2CHRU, Brest, France, 3CHU Ponchaillou, Rennes, France, 4Service neurologie - CHU, Nantes, France, 5CHU Cornouaille, Quimper, France, 6HIA, Background: Ischemic stroke is a major cause of death and disability in the Brest, France, 7CH Yves Le Foll, Saint-Brieuc, France, 8CH Saint-Malo, Saint-Malo, France, 9CH, Angers, France, 10CH, Tours, France, 11Centre d‘Investigation Clinique 0502, Brest, world. A major ischemic stroke subtype (large artery atherosclerosis [LAA]) France. has been suggested to have some genetic components in individuals of Eu- ropean ancestry. However, whether genetic predisposition to LAA varies by ethnicity remains unknown. Strokes are today one of the leading causes of mortality, as well as of subse- Methods and Materials: We sought to identify novel genetic variations that quent serious long-term physical and mental morbidity, among patients in predispose individuals to large-vessel ischemic stroke by using a genome- many different countries all over the world. Ischemic stroke (IS) is a com- wide association study (GWAS) in 444 individuals with LAA and 1,727 plex genetic disorder caused by a combination of multiple genetic and en- controls in a Han Chinese population residing in Taiwan. We replicated the vironmental factors and incidence rates for IS increase exponentially with study in an independent Han Chinese population comprising an additional increasing age but 10-15% of patients are under 45 years of age. When athe- 319 cases and 1,802 controls. We identified five SNPs, including rs2415317 rosclerosis is the leading cause of strokes in the elderly, there are multiple (P = 3.10 × 10−8), rs934075 (P = 4.00 × 10−9), rs944289 (P = 3.57 × 10−8), etiologies in young (arterial,cardiac,genetic...) and nearly half of strokes is rs2787417 (P = 1.76 × 10−8), and rs1952706 (P = 2.92 × 10−8), at one novel of unknown cause. The aim of our work is to search risk and genetic sus- locus on chromosome 14q13.3 within PTCS C3
 (encoding papillary thyroid ceptibility factors contributing to the occurrence of IS in a french young po- carcinoma susceptibility candidate 3) that were associated with large-vessel pulation (300IS<40 years) compared with 300 young controls. First results ischemic stroke at genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10−8). show that hypertension, migraine, tobacco and drugs are significant risk Conclusions: The newly identified SNPs within PTCS C3
 gene for LAA are not factors for ischemic strokes in our young population (OR=35, 3.8, 4 and 2.8, only found for the first time to reach genome-wide statistical significance respectively). Then, we tried to identify genomic susceptibility loci using but also locate in a risk locus correlated with papillary thyroid carcinoma array-CGH approach. Some copy number polymorphisms (CNP) observed, (PTC), which strongly suggest the need of future studies on the association a deletion may be candidate for a protective role in IS. We also observe un- between LAA and PTC. Our findings provide insights into the genetic basis of common CNV, some of them being particularly reccurent in patients or al- large-vessel ischemic stroke and identify a novel pathway that might be ap- ready associated with strokes like ALOX5AP ou PRKCE. We also applied a plicable for future therapeutic intervention. Grant support: Academia Sinica candidate-gene approach on coagulation genes and a significant association Genomic Medicine Multicenter Study, Taiwan (40-05-GMM). was found for the  C677
T in the MTHFR gene (5,10-methyltetrahydrofolate) PM09.074 and young IS (OR=2.39, p=0.02 for TT genotype). In conclusion, this study The hunt for genes in undetermined Leukodytrophies confirmed the implication of environmental and genetic factors in ischemic I. Dorboz1,2, F. Renaldo1,3, H. Fettah1,3, J. Masliah-Planchon1,4, D. Tonduti1,5, E. Eleonore6, S. strokes before 40 years and suggests new genetic risk factors for IS. Samaan4, S. Kuzbari4, M. Elmaleh7, D. Rodriguez8, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,3; 1INSERM, Paris, France, 2European Leukodystrophy Association (ELA), Paris, France, PM09.072 3Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 4Genetic Department; Robert Debré Hospital, A comprehensive molecular diagnostic service for Joubert syndrome Paris, France, 5University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 6Department of Cytogenetic, Clermont- and related disorders Ferrand, Clermont Ferrand, France, 7Departement of Pediatric Radiology, Robert Debré E. Packham1, J. Williams1, M. Shanks1, P. Clouston1, H. Matten1, A. Nemeth2, J. Vogt3, J. Hospital, Paris, France, 8Department of Neuropediatrics, Armand Trousseau Hospital, McGaughran4, A. Seller1; Paris, France. 1Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4Genetic Health Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. Leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of orphan genetic diseases that affect the white matter (WM) and its main component, the myelin. Despite the large number of mutations and disease-related genes identified, 60% of Joubert syndrome (JS) is an autosomal recessive ciliopathy characterised by families remain without genetic marker. We performed Exome sequencing the molar tooth sign on MRI, hypotonia and developmental delay with or wi- in 75 patients selected from consanguineous family, non-consanguineous thout oculomotor apraxia and breathing abnormalities. Joubert syndrome family with more than one affected children and few sporadic cases with and related disorders (JSRD) describes individuals with JS and additional specific clinical presentation We identified disease-causing mutations in clinical features including retinal dystrophy, renal disease, hepatic fibrosis 56% of cases. Our cohort was subdivided in three groups 15% genes alrea- and polydactyly. JSRDs are genetically heterogeneous with at least 27 cau- dy known in leukodystrophies, 9% genes known in leukoencephalopathy sative genes described that encode proteins of the primary cilium or cen- with atypical clinical presentation and 32% potential candidate variants, trosome . TMMoEleMc6u7lar diagnosis enables accNuPrHatPe1 p, RroPgGnRoIsPi1sL a nd dCisEePa2s9e0 ma- functional analysis are currently performed. For the remaining 44% of ca- nagement based on known genotype-phenotype correlations; e.g. hepatic ses the variants identified need further analysis. This study underlines the fibrosis( ) or nephronophthisis ( and ). role of Exome sequencing in the diagnosis of leukodystrphies by resolving Our diagnostic service for JSRD has evolved from a targeted Sanger Sequen- diagnostic confusion arising from atypical or incomplete presentations and cing and MLPA screen in 6 genes to a NGS approach using Agilent’s Haloplex identification of new disorders. Targeted Enrichment system to capture all known JSRD genes. This capture system is very flexible; the initial NGS panel of 18 genes was increased to 21, P S09
.075 and currently comprises 27 genes. Next generation sequencing is underta- A novel mutation in LGI1 gene found in a series of consecutive ken on Illumina’s MiSeq platform. epileptic patients with auditory aura F. Kesim1, S. Ugur Iseri1, G. Altiokka Uzun2, E. Yucesan1, F. Tuncer1, O. Ozdemir1, N. Of the 100 patiAeHntIs1 thAaRtL h1a3vBe uCn5dOeRrFg4o2neC tCe2sDti2nAg aC mEPo2le9c0ulaINr PdPia5gEnoNsPisH hPa1s Bebek2, U. Ozbek1, B. Baykal2; ObeFeDn1 mRaPdGeR IinP 14 L2
%TC. TPNa1thTogCeTnNi2c mTMutEaMtio2n3s1 haveT bMeEeMn 6id7entified in the fol- 1Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul lowing genes: , , , , , , , Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Clinical Neurophysiology Unit, Istanbul, , TCTN, 2 , , and . Turkey. A service update and a seleNcPtiHonP 1of interesting cases will be presented. The- se include a single exon deletion identifiedT MusEiMng6 7NGS coverage data, a Joubert patient with two frameshift mutations and 2 cases that em- Introduction: Autosomal Dominant Lateral Temporal Epilepsy (ADLTE) is ployed RNA analysis to support pathogenicity of splice variants. characterized by focal seizures with a typical involvement of auditory aura. Auditory symptoms occur during seizures that are produced by the primary or association auditory cortices within the lateral temporal lobe. The disea- se may onset both in juvenile and adult terms, where good management is 182 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOusTuLalAlyN acDco, mUpKli s|h WedW thWrou.EghS HanGtie.pOilRepGtic drug treatments. Mutations inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index LGI1) leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 ( geLnGeI1 have been implicated in ADT- Results: the indirect study by genotyping revealed the presence of a homo- LE both in familial and sporadic forms. zygous haplotype associated with the disease among all affected children in Material and Methods: All coding exons of were screened for mutations the two families. Discussion and conclusion: The diagnosis of MLC is based in a cohort of 26 individuals affected with ADTLE. Physical and neurological on a combination of clinical and radiological features and requires a gene- examinations were performed and detailed information on family history tic confirmation. The indirect study by genotyping is important to show the was collected for all affected individuals. type of haplotype transmission among patients. This is expected to be fol- Results: A heterozygous novel variant resulting in a missense change within lowed by sequencing of ML C1
gene looking for variation. This MLC genetic the LRR (Leucine rich repeats) domain of LGI1 protein was detedcete ndo vino study could be important for prenatal diagnosis and mental deterioration one individual with a negative family history for epilepsy. This variant was prevention by therapy development. not present in his parents and two unaffected sisters suggestinin sgi liac o PM09.078 change. The pathogenicity of our novel variant is supported by its evolutio- MicroRNA expression profiling of methamphetamine dependence in nary conservation, its absence in 28 L9
G Ic1o ntrol individuals and prote- rat hippocampal tissue in prediction tools. M. Sim1, I. S. Parhar2, T. Soga2, P. Vijayapandi1, Z. Mohamed1; Conclusions: Identification of rare gene mutations in sporadic cases is 1Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, espLeGcIi1ally important for genetic counseling, supporting diagnosis, therapeu- Malaysia, 2Brain Research Institute, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash tic decisions and understanding the pathogenesis of the disease. Screening University, Sunway, Malaysia. of in independent patient series is required in order to establish geno- type-phenotype correlations that will assist relevant diagnostic testing. This study supported by IU-BAP and TUBİTAK (Project numbers 26263 and Metamphetamine is a highly addictive psychostimulant that induces beha- 113 S331
.) vioral changes, the hippocampus being the part of the brain that plays the important role in these changes, especially in drug addiction. However, little PM09.076 is known about the underlying mechanisms of methamphetamine effects Is the MACROD2 gene a potential risk factor for developing ASD? on global miRNA expression. The objective of this study was to determine A. Battaglia, R. Igliozzi, G. Scarselli, F. Apicella, R. Milone, R. Tancredi; Stella Maris Clinical Research Institute for Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, Pisa, the global miRNA profiling of the methamphetamine dependence from the Italy. rat hippocampal tissue and to identify the miRNAs which are associated with methamphetamine use and dependence. The study comprised of 18 male rats which were divided into 3 groups: continuous methamphetami- Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are common, affecting 1% of cMhiAldCrReOnD in2 ne treatment (0.5,1,2,3,4,5,5.5mg/kg), single dose acute methamphetamine the US population with a 4:1 male to female ratio,and have a strong gene- treatment (5.5mg/kg), and a control group. Addiction behavior was deter- tic basis; yet the cause of about 70-80% ASDs remains unknown. mined using Conditioned Place Preference task. The analysis of the miRNA gene, on chromosome 20p12.1, is one of the several genes previously asso- profiling was performed using Affymetric microarray GeneChip® System. ciated with risk for autism (Anney et al., Hum Mol Genet 2010, 19: 4072- For behavior test, we found that the addiction behavior only occur with 4092). We report on two brothers aged 8ys3m and 9ys6m, respectively continuous treatment of methamphetamine, but not in acute treatment. Dif- meeting the DSM-5 clinical criteria for Autism Spectrum Disorder. Both ferential profiling of miRNAs indicated that 30 miRNAs were significantly were assessed on the ADI-R and the ADOS-2. Each child underwent a cogni- up-regulated and 1 down-regulated when the acute treatment was given; tive assessment by the Wechsler Intelligence Scales, depending on the age. 40 miRNAs were up-regulated and 1 down-regulated in the continuous Both had a low average total IQ, and did not show congenital malformations methamphetamine treatment group. Comparing between acute treatment or minor anomalies. An array-CGH showed, MinA bCoRtOhD, a2n interstitial deletion without addiction and the continuous treatment with addiction, 29 miRNAs on the short arm of chromosome 20 (20p12.1), sizing 72 Kb, with paternal were up-reguplated with 1 down-regulpated for addiction phenotype. The segregation. The deletion encompassed the genReP. T S1
h5isA w P3
a4s asso- miRNAs were selected when there are more than 2 times fold changes, ANO- ciated in the younger brother with an interstitial duplication on 16q21, si- VA test with <0.05 and FDR test with >0.05. Conclusion, our results sug- zing 366 Kb, with paternal segregation, encompassing the gene; gest that dynamic changes occur in the expression of miRNAs, which may be and, in the older one, with an interstitial deletion on 7p21.2, sizing 135 Kb, associated with the methamphetamine use and dependence. with maternal segregation, encompassing no genes. The father reported si- *Research University Grant RG443/12HTM from University of Malaya gnificant impairments in verbal and non-verbal communication and social P S09
.079 interactions with his peers during childhood and adoMleAscCeRnOcDe;2 associated Molecular and clinical delineation of the 2p15-16.1 microdeletion with specific difficulties in mathematics. syndrome and proposal of a new candidate gene for microcephaly Our observation seems to strengthen the role of the gene as a J. LEVY1, A. COUSSEMENT2, C. DUPONT1, F. GUIMIOT1, C. BAUMANN1, G. VIOT2, Y. CAPRI1, potential risk factor for developing ASD. S. DRUNAT1, C. LEROY1, B. BENZACKEN1, J. DUPONT2, A. TABET1; 1Genetic departement, Robert Debré hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2Cytogenetic unit, P S09
.077 Cochin hospital, AP-HP,, Paris, France. Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (van der Knaap disease): study of two families W. Manoubi1, A. Mili1, A. Ayadi2, A. Mlika3, S. Sassi1, A. M’sakni1, I. Ben Charfeddine1, A. Amara1, I. Chatti1, A. Gdissa1, R. Ben Sghaier1, D. Hmida1, a. Saad1, M. Gribaa1; Interstitial 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion is a rare microdeletion syndrome pre- 1Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology viously reported in 14 patients. It is characterized by moderate to severe in- Farhat Hached University, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Pediatrics,Tahar Sfar tellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, microcephaly, short stature, University Hospital, Mahdia, Tunisia, 3Department of Pediatrics, Farhat Hached dysmorphic features, structural brain anomalies and multiple congenital or- University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. gans defects. It is considered a contiguous gene syndrome involving deletion of several genes. Deletions previously reported are variable in size (from 203 kb to 6.9 Mb) and have non recurrent breakpoints. We report here three Introduction: Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy (MLC) with subcor- additional patients carried a 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion shown by SNP-array tical cysts is an infantile-onset inherited autosomal recessive disease. Pa- analysis (Cyto12-SNP, Illumina) : a prenatal case and two postnatal cases. tients typically show macrocephaly, motor abnormalities, seizures, and The prenatal and one of the postnatal cases share an overlapping 2p15p16.1 almost constant late-onset mild mental deterioration. Brain magnetic re- deletion of 105 kb including only XPO1 and the distal end of US P34
. Both pa- sonance imaging (MRI) reveals specific patterns in the anterior temporal tients presented features overlapping the clinical spectrum of the 2p15p16 and frontoparietal regions. The ML C1
 gene is responsible of this disease. microdeletion syndrome including dysmorphic facial features and brain Mutations in this gene have been identified in families from different ethnic structural abnormalities. We confirm that one or both genes are probab- backgrounds. ly involved in facial dysmorphic features, cognitive impairment and brain Objective: In this context, we report two Tunisian families having children structural abnormalities observed in 2p15p16.1-deletion syndrome. affected with MLC. Indirect genetic analyzes showed a transmission profile The third patient we reported on is a 4 years-old male with an heterozygous for the mutant ML C1
 gene. Patients and methods: It is about two Tunisian de novo a 427 kb deletion at 2p16.1 (chr2:60624940-61051867) containing consanguineous families. The first family shows a girl and a boy with ma- BC L11
A and PAPOLG and a phenotype characterized by speech delay, auti- crocephaly, seizures, ataxia and MRI confirmation. The second family has stic traits and stereotyped behavior but without microcephaly. four daughters; of which, one had clinical and radiological signs for MLC. Considering previous deletions in the 2p15p16.1 region and our three new Genotyping by analysis of four microsatellite markers surrounding or inside cases, we precise the genotype-phenotype correlation of the microdeletion the ML C1
 gene, helped to establish the haplotype of each individual and to syndrome. Moreover we suggest that the REL gene could be considered as a follow the transmission of haplotE ypS eH aG sso 2 ci0 at1 e5 d w| iG thL tA heS dG isO eaW se., SCOTLAN cD an, dU idK at e| W genW e fW or. mES icH roG ce. pO haR lyG . 183ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM09.080 A new dominant form of microcephalic primordial dwarfism V. El Ghouzzi1,2, S. Drunat1,3, P. Gressens1,2, A. Verloes1,2,3, O. Boespflug1,2,3, S. ronmental factors. We report on the incidental observation of two variants Passemard1,2,3; in the NR3 C2
 gene, involved in type 1 pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA), in 1Inserm, U1141, PROTECT, Paris, France, 2Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, young MS patients and investigated whether NR3 C2
 might be a susceptibili- Paris, France, 3AP-HP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Département de Génétique Clinique, Paris, ty gene for MS and autoimmune disease. France. Case 1 is a male 12 years-old MS patient harboring a 112-181 kb deletion in NR3 C2
. He had no symptoms of PHA but serial blood investigations confir- med a mild elevation of aldosterone. Segregation analysis revealed that his Primary microcephaly (PM) is a rare and heterogeneous group of affections mother and maternal aunt, both of which developed autoimmune thyroidi- characterized by a reduction in brain volume and intellectual disability. In tis, carried the same microdeletion. some circumstances, PM is also associated with primordial dwarfisms (mi- Case 2 is the mother of a child with PHA. She presented at age 28 with MS and crocephalic primordial dwarfisms, such as Seckel, MOPD2 and Meyer Gorlin was known to carry the same NR3 C2
 splice-site mutation (c.1757+1G>C) as syndromes). Interestingly, all microcephalic primordial dwarfisms reported her daughter. The mother had elevated aldosterone levels. to date are recessively inherited and genes identified so far encode centro- In an independent cohort of 100 MS probands, NR3 C2
 sequencing detected somal proteins. However, they account for less than half of cases in Europe, a loss-of-function mutation (p.Ser585X) in a single patient with early-onset indicating that other genes remain to be identified. MS and a positive familial history. She had no symptoms of PHA but a mild Here, we report on a new form of microcephalic primordial dwarfism with reproducible elevation of aldosterone. an autosomal dominant inheritance, in which no known PM gene was found Our data suggest that NR3 C2
 loss-of-function variants may associate with to be mutated. a predisposition for developing autoimmune disease, particularly for MS. The father (25 years old) and his daughter (3 years old) shared common Though further validation of our findings in a larger cohort is necessary, the features in their medical history: Intrauterine growth retardation followed involvement of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in the pathogene- by postnatal growth failure (length -4 SD), microcephaly (-5 SD), and dys- sis of MS may have important implications in counseling and management morphic features including microretrognathia, hypotelorism, shortening of of patients with NR3 C2
 mutations and opens novel perspectives for MS fore-arms and legs and muscular hypertrophy. In addition, the father had a treatment. micropenis, a hypoplasia of the scrotum and developed an early onset ca- P S09
.083 taract at the age of 7. The daughter had a cleft palate, and feeding difficulties Increased first exon usage of THEMIS in resting CD4+ T-cells is that needed nutritional support until the age of 2. Her cranial MRI showed associated with a genotype that is protective against the development isolated microcephaly. of multiple sclerosis This case report enlarges the frontiers of microcephalic primordial dwar- J. Davies, M. Ban, H. Kaur Sandhu, S. Thompson, S. Sawcer, A. Coles, J. Jones; fism to dominant forms that are likely linked to impairments of new specific University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. PM genes. This study was supported by PHRC ( P100128
) and ANR (ERAR E2
-2013). Verloes A et al. Am J Med Genet 1997;68: 455-460 Genome wide association studies and subsequent fine mapping have iden- Verloes A et al. GeneReviews® 2013 tified a number of loci containing genetic variants associated with suscep- P S09
.081 tibility to multiple sclerosis (MS), including the THEMIS/PTPRK locus on A functional miR-124 binding-site polymorphism in IQGA P1
 affects chromosome 6q. At this locus, associated SNPs are predominantly interge- human cognitive performance nic, suggesting that they may have a role in the regulation of gene expressi- L. Yang1, R. Zhang1, M. Li1, X. Wu1, J. Wang1, L. Huang1, X. Shi2, Q. Li3, B. Su1,4; on. Both THEMIS and PTPRK are indispensable for the thymic production of 1Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China, CD4+ T cells, a process known to be defective in MS. The aim of this study 2Department of Biochemistry, Qujing Normal University, Qujing, China, 3College of Life was to investigate the functional mechanisms underlying SNP rs13204742, Science, Liaoning Normal University, Dalian, China, 4Yunnan Key Laboratory of Primate Biomedical Research, Kunming, China. identified in the fine mapping Immunochip study as being the most signi- ficantly associated SNP at the THEMIS/PTPRK locus. PBMCs were isolated from 73 genotyped, healthy individuals, obtaining near-equivalent numbers from each genotype at SNP rs13204742. The bio- As a product of the unique evolution of the human brain, human cognitive logical significance of this variant was investigated by studying genotypic performance is largely a collection of heritable traits. Rather surprisingly, effects on both total and isoform-specific expression of THEMIS, PTPRK and to date there have been no reported cases to highlight genes that under- R P11
-103 C16
.2 (an antisense gene to PTPRK), in ex vivo and stimulated went adaptive evolution in humans and which carry polymorphisms that CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells by quantitative PCR. Genotypic effects on thymic ac- have a marked effect on cognitive performance. IQ motif containing GTPase tivity were determined by measuring sjTRECs and circulating CD4+ recent activating protein 1 (IQGA P1
), a scaffold protein, affects learning and me- thymic emigrants (CD4+CD45RA+CCR7+CD31+ T-cells). mory in a dose-dependent manner. Its expression is regulated by miR-124 In ex vivo CD4+ T-cells, there was a significant decrease in THEMIS first exon through the binding si tes in itnh vei t3r’oUTR, winh veirveo a SNP (rs1042538) exists in usage with an increasing genetic load of the risk allele at SNP rs13204742 the core-binding motif. Here we showed that this SNP can influence the (p=0.0055, ANOVA). This difference was absent upon T-cell stimulation. Al- miR-target interactionboth and . Individuals carrying the de- ternative first exon usage is a mode of regulating gene expression in a cell rived T alleles have higher IQGA P1
 expression in the brain as compared to specific manner. Therefore our findings suggest that SNP rs13204742 may the ancestral A allele carriers. We observed a significant and male-specific influence the risk of developing MS by affecting CD4+ T-cell specific THEMIS association between rs1042538 and tactile performances in two indepen- expression. dent cohorts. Males with the derived allele displayed higher tactual perfor- mances as compared to those with the ancestral allele. Furthermore, we PM09.084 found a highly diverged allele-frequency distribution of rs1042538 among Results of targeted NGS strategy for the diagnosis of NBIA in a cohort world human populations, likely caused by natural selection and/or recent of 71 patients population expansion. These results suggest that current human populati- S. Moutton1,2, P. Macquere1, N. Houcinat1, A. De Pindray1, C. Plaisant1, J. Deforges1, D. ons still carry sequence variations that affect cognitive performances and Lacombe1,2, B. Arveiler1,2, C. Goizet1,2, P. Fergelot1,2; 1Service de génétique médicale - CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 2Laboratoire that these genetic variants may likely have been subject to comparatively MRGM: Maladies Rares, Génétique et Métabolisme, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, recent natural selection. France. PM09.082 Variants in the NR3 C2
 gene as possible genetic predisposition for the development of multiple sclerosis In the expanding field of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation H. Verhelst1, G. Mets2, P. Verloo1, M. D‘Hooghe3,4, A. Symons3, G. Nagels3,4, B. Menten2, J. (NBIA), the development of sensitive brain imaging played a major role to Debruyne5, R. Van Coster1, O. M. Vanakker2; characterize iron-related damages in patients. In the past years, new genes 1Department of Paediatric Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Center have been identified allowing genotype-phenotype correlations. However, for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3National Multiple Sclerosis Center, Melsbroek, Belgium, 4Department of Neurology, University Hospital, overlapping phenotypes and non-informative pedigrees are still sources of Center for Neurosciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 5Department of delayed diagnosis. Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. For these reasons, a Next Generation Sequencing analysis was developed and tested in our series of 71 patients, comprising 32 patients in addition to the 39 patients previously analysed for FTL and PANK2 mutations by M 1u 8l 4tiple Sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmunEeS dHisGea s2e0 o1f 5th e| GceLnAtraSl GneOrvWou, sS COSa Tn Lge Ar Nse Dqu , e Unc Kin |g W, in Wclu Wdi .n Eg S 3 H F GTL .O an Rd G 2 PANK2 diagnosed patients. Se- system caused by a complex interaction between multiple genes and envi- ven additional NBIA genes (AT P13
A2, CP,  C19
orf12, DCAF17; FA2H, PLA2G6ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and WDR45) were included in a custom panel of 35 genes dedicated to our gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was used to cluster genes routine molecular diagnosis platform. Two libraries of amplicons were de- into co-expression modules. The overrepresentation of NBIA transcripts signed with the AmpliSeqTM technology. Sequencing was performed on a in basal ganglia modules (substantia nigra and putamen hereby studied) PGM. The Torrent Suite (Life Technologies), SeqNext (JSI) and AlamutTM was assessed. Six NBIA-containing modules were found for the substantia interface (Interactive Biosoftware) were used for read alignment, variant nigra, but none was significantly overrepresented. Two putamen modules calling and interpretation respectively. Workflow analysis was validated on were significantly enriched for NBIA transcripts, namely the brown (PANK2, FTL and PANK2 positive patients. Recurrent artefacts were not considered. AT P13
A2,  C19
orf12, COASY; P= 0.003) and green (FTL, DCAF17, FA2H; P= In silico, AmpliSeq design covered 99% of NBIA genes targeted regions, of 0.021) modules. Enrichment analysis of these two putamen modules re- which 98% were sequenced at least 40X. Uncovered regions were sequen- vealed an overrepresentation of gene ontology terms and KEGG pathways, ced using Sanger technology. including: brown module - synaptic vesicle endocytosis and axon cargo Among the 32 additional patients, 1 CP and 1 PANK2 patients were dia- transport (biological processes), synaptic membrane (cellular component), gnosed. and synaptic vesicle cycle KEGG pathway; green module - ensheathment NGS is a powerful and cost-effective tool to search for mutations in hetero- of neurons, neuronal action potential and oligodendrocyte development geneous genetic disorders but analysis effectiveness of known genes still (biological processes), myelin sheath (cellular component), and cadherin remains disappointing in NBIA (10% molecular diagnosis, n=7/71). binding (molecular function). Our data suggests shared processes and pa- PM09.086 thways in NBIA gene networks. Neurodegeneration with iron accumulation in brain (NBIA): Clinical PM09.088 assessment and genetic characterization by a means of a Spanish Neurodegeneration and Brain Iron Accumulation: Clinical and genetic multi-center research network heterogeneity in the Hungarian population C. Espinos1,2, V. Lupo1,2, C. Tello1, A. Darling3,4, M. Serrano3,4, A. Decio5, S. Aguilera6, I. R. Bencsik1, Z. Grosz1, P. Balicza1, A. Gal1, V. Harsfalvi1, G. Tamas2, P. Ács3, P. Klivenyi4, B. Gastón-Zubimendi6, M. Tomás-Vila7, M. Madruga8, M. Pujol9, D. Quadras10, A. López11, M. Kalman5, J. Molnar1; Martí12, L. Martorell3, B. Pérez-Dueñas3,4; 1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 1Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 2CIBER de Hungary, 2Department of Neurology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, 3Department of Neurology, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 4Department of Neurology, Spain, 4CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 5Instituto Mondino, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 5Markusovszky County Hospital, Szombathely, Pavia, Italy, 6Complejo Universitario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 7Hospital U. i P. La Hungary. Fe, Valencia, Spain, 8Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Valencia, Spain, 9Hospital Santa Maria, Lleida, Spain, 10Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 11Asociación ENACH, Barcelona, Spain, 12Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) comprises a group of disorders characterized by progressive motor symptoms and co- gnitive decline. The genetic background of NBIA is heterogeneous. Not only Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is due to several the number of genes associated to the disease is increasing continuously, genetic defects causing movement disorders and brain iron deposition in but the variety of the presenting clinical is increasing too. children, PKAN (pantothenate kinase associated neurodegeneration) being Aim: The identification of the phenotype and genotype correlation of Hun- the most common one. Despite advances in the research of novel therapies garian NBIA patients in order to understand the dysfunction of proteins for PKAN, validated international disease rating scales (DRS) to be used in which are associated with NBIA and to collect genetic epidemiology data of clinical trials are lacking. We aim to identify and genetically characterize the Hungarian NBIA patients. the Spanish population with NBIA and to design and validate a quantitative Patients and Methods: We examined 20 patients having different extrapy- method for clinical assessment of PKAN patients within a cross-sectional ramiPdAaNl Ksi2g, nPsL Aan2dG 6c,e MrePbArNal braiCnP iron accumulation confirmed by MRI (9 multi-center project. male, 11 female, mean age 35.1 years). The entire coding regions of the ge- To date 43 NBIA patients from 20 Spanish hospitals have been recruited nes MPAN and were sequenced with SangPerL Am2eGt6h od in and assessed according to a new DRS for PKAN (PKAN-DRS) and genetic the patients andP iAnN tKh2eir family members. CP testing of the most frequent genes (PANK2, PLA2G6 and  C19
orf12) involved Results: Pathogenic gene mutations were verified in 6, gene in NBIAs have been performed. Twenty-three patients have been diagnosed mutations in 3, gene mutations in 5, gene mutation in 3 patients. as PKAN and 11 patients carry mutations in the PLA2G6 gene. Moreover, 13 The NBIA syndromes were characterized by remarkable clinical hetero- PKAN patients (median age 33 years) have been evaluated according to the geneity. The clinical symptoms varied from the mild ParkinsMonPiAsNm over the PKAN-DRS (range 29-71). It is striking that the six Gypsy patients included isolated torticollis to severe dystonia. in this research harbor the PANK2 p.T528 mutation in homozygosis which Conclusion: In the Hungarian population the mutations of gene are suggest a founder effect in our population, and present with lower PKAN- more frequent compared to other populations. The symptoms caused by DRS scores for all subscales when compared with the group of patients with particular mutations of the single genes are not specific, although the extra- other mutations. pyramidal motor dysfunction with various degrees was observed in almost This cross-sectional multi-center has helped us to improve the diagnosis of all cases. Both biallelic and heterozygous dominant mutations of the MPAN NBIA patients. The proposal of a PKAN-DRS seems to be a reliable method gene may result in clinical symptoms. mainly targeted to the evaluation of the neurological symptoms associated This work was supported by the project KTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6 to PKAN. P S09
.089 Funds: Fundación La Marató de TV3. Diagnostic yield of next generation sequencing in neurodegenerative P S09
.087 diseases Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA): insights R. van Minkelen, M. Wilke, D. J. J. Halley, J. N. R. Kromosoeto, R. van de Graaf, G. M. from gene coexpression networks Bolman, M. van Tienhoven, P. Elfferich, W. G. de Valk, A. M. W. van den Ouweland, G. M. S. C. Bettencourt1, S. Wiethoff1, P. Forabosco2, J. Botia3, U. UK Brain Expression Consortium4, Mancini-Verheijen, A. J. A. Kievit; J. Hardy1, H. Houlden1, M. Ryten5,1; Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 1UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 2Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Cittadella Universitaria di Cagliari, Monserrato, Italy, 3King‘s College London, London, United Kingdom, 4UCL Institute of Neurology/ King‘s College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Neurodegenerative diseases are hereditary or sporadic disorders which are characterized by progressive nervous system dysfunPcAtiRoKn 2( e.g. dementias, Parkinson, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis). Molecular diagnostics by Sanger sequencing is limited to testing common genes (e.g. for Parkinson) Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) constitutes a (there are too many rare genes to offer by Sanger testing). Therefore we de- group of neurodegenerative diseases characterized by a prominent extra- veloped a Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) based workflow for DNA dia- pyramidal movement disorder, intellectual deterioration and a characte- gnostics for several neurodegenerative diseases (Ataxia: 49 genes; Demen- ristic iron deposition in the basal ganglia. Ten genes have been identified tia: 44 genes; Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation: 10 genes; so far, but limited information exists regarding expression and function of Parkinson: 43 genes; Paroxysmal dyskinesia: 5 genes). This workflow was these genes within the human brain. To address possible relationships bet- based on enrichment arrays (Agilent Sure Select) for all 151 genes and Mi- ween known NBIA genes, predict their functions, and identify overlapping seq sequencing (paired-end, 150bp, Illumina). BAM-files are generated with pathways, we used a systems-biology approach based on whole transcrip- an in-house analysis pipeline and variant calling is performed using SeqNext tome gene expression analysis. As part of the UK Human Brain Expression (JSI). The average vertical coverage for exons is ~300, very few fragments Consortium (UKBEC), we analysed the expression profiles of 101 neuropa- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANfDail, tUo Kre a| cWh tWheW m.inEiSmHalG re.qOuRirGed vertical coverage of 30. We were ab1le8 5to thologically normal individuals (10 distinct brain regions each). WeightedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM09.092 Genetic Disorders in Arab Societies of Israel and the Palestinian detect deletions up to 65bp, insertions up to 29bp and somatic mosaicism. Authority Sanger-sequencing was used to confirm the identified variants. Additionally, M. Schulze1, H. Hengel2, A. Mayer3, M. Sturm1, A. Söhn1, R. Sharkia4, A. Azem5, G. MLPA and repeat expansions tests were performed. We consider 12% of the Balousha6, H. Marzouqa7, S. Ayesh8, B. Wissinger3, L. Schöls2, P. Bauer1; cases solved (e.g. pathogenic PLA2G6 mutation and PLA2G6 exon 5-8 dupli- 1(1) Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Eberhard-Karls-University, cation). In 52% of the individuals an “unclassified variant” was found. Despi- Tübingen, Germany, 2(2) Department of Neurology and Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, German Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Eberhard-Karls-University, te the use of in silico prediction programs, classification is difficult without Tübingen, Germany, 3(3) Institute of Ophthalmic Research, Centre for Ophthalmology, additional clinical information, further patient/family studies and functio- Eberhard-Karls-University, Tübingen, Germany, 4(4) Triangle Regional Research and nal tests. In conclusion, the NGS-panels for neurodegenerative diseases are Development Center (TRDC), Kfar Qari, Israel, 5(5) Department of Biochemistry, Faculty a powerful approach for DNA diagnostics. In order to increase the diagnostic of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 6(6) Department of Pathology, yield, close collaboration between laboratory, clinical geneticist and refer- Faculty of Medicine, Al-Quds University, Eastern Jerusalem, Palestinian Territory, 7(7) ring specialist is required. Caritas Baby Hospital, Bethlehem, Palestinian Territory, 8(8) Al-Makassed Islamic Charitable Hospital, Eastern Jerusalem, Palestinian Territory. PM09.090 Estimating risk for neurofibromatosis type 1 among individuals with isolated café au lait spots Rare inherited diseases often show complicated phenotypes and thus im- S. Ben-Shachar1, T. Dubov2, H. Toledano-Alhadef3, S. Constantini4, L. M. Messiaen5; 1The Genetic Institute, The Gilbert Israeli Neurofibromatosis center, affiliated to Sackler pose a relevant medical challenge. In Middle Eastern societies consanguini- Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv university, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel ty is a deeply rooted cultural trait. This predisposes these societies for the Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3TheThe Gilbert Israeli Neurofibromatosis center, The occurrence of rare diseases with recessive traits. This study is an ongoing Pediatric Neurology Unit and Child Development center, affiliated to Sackler Faculty collaboration between physicians and scientists from Israel, the Palestinian of Medicine, Tel Aviv university, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4The Gilbert Israeli Neurofibromatosis Authority, and Germany aiming to investigate the molecular background of center, Pediatric Neurosurgery Department, affiliated to Sackler Faculty of Medicine, rare inherited diseases. Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 5Medical Genomics Laboratory (MGL), Department of Patients were selected for inherited forms of neurological or ophthalmolo- Genetics, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, United States. gical disorders in 79 consanguineous families. Homozygosity mapping was performed using Agilent 250 K SNP arrays when applicable. Whole exon NF1 sequencing (WES) was done mainly using Agilents Sure Select All Exon V5 Background: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is caused by heterozygous enrichment on an Illumina HiSeq2500 sequencer. Data analysis was accom- mutations in the gene. Isolated café-au-lait spots (CALS) are usually plished using an in house bioinformatics pipeline. the first sign of NF1. However, not all individuals with isolated CALS will Exome sequencing results in a large number of variants (>25.000), filtering eventually be diagnosed with NF1. We aimed to estimate NF1 risk among for rare variants (Inhouse NGS database; 1000g; ES P6500
) and for func- individuals with isolated CALS. tional relevance reduced this count to <1.200. Due to the consanguineous Methods:Individuals with isolated CALS undergoing follow-up till age >6 background of the families, this amount could be further reduced compa- years in a specialized NF center were included. NF1 status was determined ring against mapping data or focusing on homozygous variants. An evalua- based on mutation detection in blood and/or meeting the NIH disease cri- tion of the WES performance showed high coverage (~80% cov 20X) and teria. target enrichment (~80X depth on target) parameters. Several disease cau- Results: Of 74 individuals with isolated CALS followed up in specialized NF sing mutations could be identified resolving the molecular background in center, 17 (23%) were eventually diagnosed with N F1. None had <6 CALS 23 (~29%) families. For 16 families (~20%) promising candidate genes are or atypical CALS at initial visit, as opposed to 67% and 33% respectively, under investigation. amongst individuals without established diagnosis(P<0.001). Older pater- WES offers an affordable and fast possibility to screen patients for disease nal age (>40 years) was associated with NF1, while younger age (<30 years) causing variants. A consanguineous family background allows the discove- was associated with non-NF1 (P<0.05). Genetic analysis performed in blood ry of mutations for neurodegenerative diseases in a high proportion of the of children with isolated CALS at the MGL revealed disease causing mutati- patients. ons in 168/421 (40%). Among them, only 4.1% had <6 CALS compared with Grant: DFG trilateral project (Reference number SCHO 754/5-1) 28% among these without mutations (P<0.001). Mean age at testing was much younger among these with detected mutations: 1.47 years compared P S09
.093 to 6.3 years for mutation negative patients (P<0.001). In addition, reported The contribution of Niemann-Pick SMPD1 mutations to Parkinson atypical CALS by referring physician was 6 times more common among the- disease in Ashkenazi ‎Jews ‎ se with detected mutations. E. Dagan1, I. Schlesinger‎2,3, M. Ayoub‎4, A. Mory4, M. Nassar2, J. ‎Peretz-Aharon 2‎,3, R. Gershoni-Baruch4,3; Conclusions: Estimation of risk for NF1 may be refined for individuals with 1Department of Nursing, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 2Department of Neurology isolated CALS based on clinical parameters and the Cognitive Neurology Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 3The thus, may help with earlier management and follow up. Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute of ‎Technology‎, P S09
.091 Haifa, Israel, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel. Whole genome sequencing and brain imaging of extreme phenotypes of Neuroticism in Korean women H. KIM1, H. Kang2, S. Kim1, Y. Chang3, S. Ryu3, H. Shin3, D. Lee2, H. Kim1; Objective: To evaluate the prevalence of Ashkenazi three founder mutati- 1Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea, ons in the ‎sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1 (SMPD1) gene in Ashkenazi Republic of, 2Department of Nuclear Medicine, Seoul National University College of patients diagnosed with ‎Parkinson‘s disease (PD); and their impact on PD Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3Center for Cohort Studies, Total Healthcare Center, phenotypic expression. Mutations in ‎SMPD1 cause Niemann-Pick disease.‎ Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, School of Medicine, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea, Methods: A case (n=287) control (n=400) study was undertaken following Republic of. Institutional ‎Review Board approval at Rambam Health Care Campus. All patients underwent physical, ‎neurobehavioral, and neurologic examinati- ons that incorporated the Unified Parkinson’s ‎Disease Rating Scale. Genetic Neuroticism is a personality trait that has been associated with several psych- testing for the three Ashkenazi mutations in SMPD1 gene ‎was undertaken. iatric disorders, and considered one of the risk factors for developing major The contribution of SMPD1 mutations to Parkinsons’ clinical ‎characteristics depression and anxiety disorders. It is a multifactorial trait influenced by was studied on its own and elaborated subject to the presence of Ashkenazi the interaction between environmental and genetic factors. The aim of this ‎founder mutations in the glucocerbrosidase (GBA) and the leucine-rich re- study is to identify genetic variants contributing to Neuroticism using next- peat kinase 2 ‎‎(LRRK2) genes, both known to be associated with PD. ‎ generation sequencing (NGS) technology, and associations between the gene- Results: Nine (3.1%) PD patients compared to two (0.5%) individuals from tic variants and variations of brain structure. We used an extreme phenotype the control ‎group were found to carry one of the three Ashkenazi SMPD1 study design to discover genetic variants and variations of brain structure for founder mutations (c.996delC ‎‎(fs P330
), p. L302
P and p.R496L) (p=0.007). Neuroticism. We performed a whole genome sequencing and structural MRI The overall clinical characteristics of PD ‎patients carrying SMPD1 mutations of brain in 10 participants with two extreme of Neuroticism. Highly neurotic were similar to those of PD patients with no mutations ‎in either of SMPD1, individuals showed decreased-volumes in the right dorsal premotor cortex GBA and LRRK2 (n=189). ‎ and the left inferior frontal cortex comparing to lowly neurotic individuals. Conclusion: We maintain that disruptive mutations in SMPD1 constitute a Whole genome analysis is in progress. We are going to link genomics with risk factor for ‎PD. ‎ neuroscience to find individual differences in Neuroticism traits. This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea, funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2013R1A1A2062702 and NRF- 186 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 2014R1A2A2A04006291).ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM09.094 Krejcirikova, J. Böhmova, H. Filipova, R. Kratochvilova; Molecular Analysis of Saudi Patients with Parkinson’s Disease University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. B. R. Mubarak1, S. Boholega1, T. Alkhairallah1, A. Magrashi1, E. Naim1,2, B. Al Younes1,2, M. AlTurki1, B. AlTawil1, H. Abou Al-Shaar1, M. ElKalioby1,2, A. Tahir1, M. Abouelhoda1,2, D. Monies1,2, N. Al Tassan1,2; Introduction: 1King Faisal specialist hospital and Research center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Parkinson‘s disease (PD) can be caused by genetic changes in many genes. Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. The effect of these changes is determined by the nature of the mutation and ranges from weak associations to pathogenic mutation which leads to loss of protein function. Our study is based on epidemiological data which show During the past two decades, a significant research effort was focused on significantly increased prevalence of PD (2.9%) in an isolated population of dissecting the genetic architecture of complex neurodegenerative disorders South-Eastern Moravia in the Czech Republic. including Parkinson’s disease (PD). Linkage analysis and next-generation Objective: sequencing, facilitated identification of disease-causing mutations in more Using MPS technology to compare our findings in DNA from 28 PD pati- than six genes, while genome-wide association studies revealed several ents in the genes responsible for Parkinsonism (ADH1C, AT P13
A3, EIF4G1, genetic susceptibility factors. Research into the genetics of PD was main- FBXO7, GBA + GBA P1
, GIGYF2, HTRA2, LRRK2, MAPT, PARK2, PARK7, PINK1, ly conducted on American, European and Asian populations, whereas such PLA2G6, SNCA, UCH L1
 and VP S35
) to: research in Arab populations (excluding North African Arabs), specifically 1) Already been described pathogenic mutations in Saudis, is lacking. This study aims to explore the genetic causes of SPNDC iAn 2) Twelve control DNA samples from isolated population SPaAuRdKiIsN. AP ItNotKa1l oDfJ -815 LPRDR-Kca2s es (sporadic and familial) wereU CreHcLr1uitGeIdG YaFn2d Method of data assessment: FscBrXeOen7eVdP fSo3r 5p otential pathogenic mutations in PD-established genes; , MPS data processing and trimming from FASTAQ through BAM to VCF files , , , and other PD-associated genes; , , was done parallel by Ion Reporter and NexGene software. PINK1, using direct sequencing. Surprisingly, among the 105 variants Variants were than filtered using following parameters: AQ˃20; Read cove- detected, only a single potentially pathogenic mutation was identified in rage ˃20; MAF˂0,002; SIFT: 0 - 0,1; PolyPhen: 0,15 -1; Grantham 6-215 in two affected siblings. This is intriguing, as recessive monogenic- Results: causes of the disease are anticipated to account for a significant portion of After filtering out, there were found three missense mutations in LRRK2 familial cases, given the consanguineous nature of the Saudi population and gene: rs33995883 in 6/1 patient/control (p/c), rs33958906 in 1/1p/c, the high percentage (40%) of familial cases reported here. However, ab- undescribed p.Ser633Phe in 3/0p/c, one missense mutation in MAPT gene sence of potential pathogenic mutations in the ORF of the screened genes by rs63750072 in 6/1p/c and one mutation in HTRA2 rs72470545 in 3/1p/c. no means exclude the possibility of gene expression/dosage alteration nor Conclusion: does it eliminate the possibility of the involvement of novel genes. We there- Our findings together with detailed clinical characteristics of patients could fore, performed whole-exome sequencing on a subset of patients’ samples. contribute to further understanding of PD molecular pathogenesis and to The analysis revealed a number of novel high priority candidate genes har- creating a clinically applicable diagnostic procedure. boring potential pathogenic mutations, currently undergoing further vali- Supporting grant: study is supported by IGA MZ CR-14407-3 NT / 2013 dation. P S09
.097 P S09
.095 The PCSK6 intronic region associated with handedness controls Genetic mutations in early-onset Parkinson‘s disease in Hungarian expression of a novel shorter isoform patients R. J. Shore1, K. Pettigrew1, R. Diaz1, Y. Xu1, E. Wootton1, L. Covill2, W. Brandler2, J. B. A. Illés1, A. Kékesi1, P. Balicza1, A. Gál1, B. Bereznai1, A. Takáts2, P. Klivényi3, G. Dibó3, E. Talcott3, D. F. Newbury2, A. Monaco2, J. Stein4, S. Paracchini1; Hidasi4, I. Balogh5, M. J. Molnár1; 1School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome 1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3School Hungary, 2Department of Neurology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, of Life and Health Sciences, Aston University, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4Dept of 3Department of Neurology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 4Department of Physiology, Anatomy & Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Neurology, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 5Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical and Health Science Center, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. We recently reported the first gene, PCSK6, associated with handedness at PARK2, PINK1 genome-wide significance level (P< 0.5*10-8, Brandler et al. 2013). A Va- DJ- LRRK2 riable Number Tandem Repeat (VNTR) within the same PCSK6 locus has Background: Mutations and copy number changes in , and been found to be associated with degree of handedness in an indepen- 1 have been associated with autosomalP rAeRceKs2s,i vPeIN, K1 wLiRthR Kau2tosomal dent study (Arning et al. 2013). Interestingly, PCSK6 is known to activate dominant early-onset Parkinson‘s disease. NODAL, a morphogen involved in a highly conserved pathway known to Aims: The estimation of the frequency of and mutati- regulate left/right body axis determination. Our previous data suggest ons in Hungarian patients with early-onset Parkinson’s disease. these pathways controlling development of LR asymmetry in the body are Patients and methoPdAsR: K1240 HuPnIgNaKri1an patients with early-onset Parkinson’s reused for brain midline development, which in turn influence functional disease were analyzLedR R(mK2en:women rate is 1:1, average age is 54). The com- asymmetries such as handedness (Brandler and Paracchini 2014). All pre- plete sequences of and gPeAnReKs 2and theP IhNoKt 1spots (28% of the co- vious most significant associations fall within a linkage disequilibrium (LD) ding regions) of the gene were directly sequenced byL SRaRnKg2er method. block containing a secondary promoter our data show to be bidirectional Exon dosage was determined in the and genes by multiplex in nature and controlling transcription of both a novel PCSK6 isoform and ligation-dependent probe amplification. The most common mutation a long non-coding antisense RNA. Taking forward previous GWAS findings, ( S1647
T) has been excluded by PCR-RFLP methPoAdR.K2 we have conducted a detailed functional analysis using a combination of Results: The presence of Q34R and R275W mutations in hetLeRroRzKy2gous geno- further genetic analysis, in-silico predictions, and molecular assays. Our type wereL RfoRuKn d in 2 unrelated patients in the gene. The I803T mu- functional studies support an allele-specific effect on transcription factor tation was found in heterozygous genotype in 1 patient in gene. The binding affinity for a previous top-associated SNP rs11855425 however our common G P2
IN0K191S mutation was not present in the Hungarian patients, genetic data could not find any evidence supporting a VNTR role. With this but a modifying factor ( S1647
T) was present in homozygouPsA gReKno2type in 11 study we have dissected the molecular mechanisms underlying the PCSK6 patients. In the gene no pathogenic mutation was detected. association with handedness, indicating the regulatory effect the region Conclusion: The prevalence of heterozygous mutations in observed has on specific RNA isoforms. Future work will focus on understanding the in our cases support the concept that single heterozygous mutations in re- function of the novel shorter PCSK6 isoform and confirming the identity and cessive Parkinson‘s disease genes may play a pathogenic role in the Hun- role of the transcription factors binding at the secondary promoter.Neuro- garian patients as well. The analysis of the prevalence of the mutation fre- dys018696, WT090532/Z/09/Z, MRCG090074791070, G1000569/1 and quencies of different genes associated to early onset Parkinson disease have MR/J003719/1. important implications for genetic counseling of Hungarian patients with Parkinson’s disease. PM09.098 Grant: Hungarian Brain Research Program - Grant, No. KTIA_13_NAP-A- De novo mutations in sporadic Finnish patients with PEHO-like III/6 features A. Laari1,2,3, M. Muona1,4,3, A. Anttonen1,5,6, M. Somer7, A. Palotie4,8,9, A. Lehesjoki1,2,3; PM09.096 1Folkhälsan Research Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Neuroscience Algorithms of MPS data evaluation in patients with Parkinsonism Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Research Programs Unit, Molecular from genetically isolated population Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Institute for Molecular Medicine R. Vodicka, R. Vrtel, P. Kanovsky, M. Godava, K. Mensikova, M. Kaiserova, P. Otruba, E. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 187ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Medical and Clinical of Neurology, General Central Hospital, Bolzano, Italy. Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 7Norio Centre, Rinnekoti Foundation, Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 8Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute Bilateral accumulation of calcium in the brain, most of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States, 9Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts commonly in the basal ganglia, but also in the cerebellum, thalamus, and General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. brainstem can be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and is then referred to as primary familial brain calcifications (PFBC). PFBC is a clini- cally and genetically heterogeneous disorder. Despite prominent calcifica- PEHO syndrome (Progressive encephalopathy with Edema, Hypsarrhythmia tions some indivSidLuCa2l0sA r2emPaDinG FaRsyBmptomPaDtGicF Bwh ile others become severely and Optic atrophy; MIM 260565) is an autosomal recessive inherited pro- affected by motor, cognitive and psychSiLatCr2ic0 Asy2mptoms. To date, mutations gressive infantile encephalopathy. The main features of PEHO syndrome are in three genes ( , , and )have been linked to PFBC. hypotonia, infantile spasms and hypsarrhythmia, psychomotor retardation, Interestingly, a whole gene deletion of has recently been identified absence or early loss of visual fixation, edema of the face and limbs, and typi- indicating that copy number variations may play a role in the pathogenesis cal dysmorphic features. A founder mutation in a novel gene underlies PEHO of PFBC. SL C20
A2 in 30 Finnish patients. A number of patients present with many, but not all, We screened eleven PFBC patients (four sporadic cases and sevenS pLaCt2i0enAt2s clinical features of PEHO, but are negative for mutations in the novel PEHO PfrDoGmF RfoBur famPilDieGsF)B for exonic deletions or multiplications in the SL C20
A2 gene. This group is clinically heterogeneous suggesting genetic heterogenei- gene. All patients were tested negative for point mutations in , ty. To characterize the genetic background of these PEHO-like patients, SL C20
A2, and . The presence of copy number variations of SL- we performed exome sequencing for 27 sporadic patients. In 4 cases also w C2
a0sA i2n vestigated by quantitative real-time PCR. Each of the eleven SeLxCo2n0sA o2f the parents were exome sequenced. As the group clinically overlaps with was tested. A sample carrying a heterozygous deletion of all early-infantile epileptic encephalopathies, where new mutations account exons was included as a positive control. Quantification of for a substantial proportion of patients, we focused on analysis of de novo revealed a large deletion encompassing exons six to ten in one patient from mutations. Utilizing the Finnish exome database SISu, which included data an Italian family. No additional alterations were found in the other screened from 3200 individuals, we were able to significantly restrict the number of individuals. SL- candidate variants. We have identified a likely pathogenic mutation in 16 T C2
h0isA r2esult further underlines the importance of copy number variations in individuals, of whom 13 were exome sequenced without parents and three the etiology of PFBC. In conclusion, quantitative mutational screening of with parents. Of the 16 identified mutations 14 were validated to be de novo is warranted in affected families without pathogenic small sequence by Sanger sequencing in full trios. Four of the validated de novo mutations changes in known PFBC genes. were in genes previously not associated with disease. Our data imply that P S09
.101 exome sequencing combined with an ethnically matched reference database Expanding the PNKD mutation spectrum is an efficient method for identification of de novo mutations and does not R. W. Labrum1, S. McCall1, A. Gardiner2, M. Athanasopoulou2, J. Hayward1, J. Polke1, M. G. necessitate sequencing of full trios. Sweeney1, B. Turner3, H. Houlden1,2; 1University College London Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2University College P S09
.099 London, London, United Kingdom, 3London Bridge Hospital, London, United Kingdom. PRX-related neuropathy with cataract: expansion of the clinical spectrum of perxiaxin associated neuropathies and identification of a novel mutation. Paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) is an autosomal dominant C. Vinkler1,2, D. Lev3,2, I. Nezer-Kaner4, M. Michelson4, E. Leshinsky-Silver5, T. Lerman movement disorder characterised by attacks of dystonia, chorea and athe- Sagie6,2,7, M. Ginzberg8,2; 1Institute of Clinical Genetics, Holon, Israel, 2Metabolic Neurogenetic Clinic, Wolfson tosis. To date, 3 mutations in the mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS) Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 3Institute of Clinical Genetics Wolfson Medical Genetics, of the PNKD gene account for all the cases in the literature. We describe a Holon, Israel, 4Institute of Clinical Genetics Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, family in which the proband presented with a ‘stroke-like’ episode aged 43. 5Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 6Pediatric Symptoms, including cognitive dysfunction and impaired motor function, Neurology Unit, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 7Sackler Medical School, Tel Aviv subsided after 2 hours leaving the patient with a severe headache. Exten- University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 8Pediatric neurogenetic unit Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, sive investigations showed no evidence of a stroke. The patient’s father has Israel. had over 50 episodes of weakness, labelled ‘strokes’, from a young age but without residual deficit. In light of this, screening for ‘hemiplegic migraine’ was requested. Sequencing using a next generation sequencing (NGS) panel Hereditary neuropathies are a heterogeneous group of congenital neurolo- of 11 genes encoding brain ion channel proteins detected a deletion of a C gical disorders. The gene encoding the periaxin protein (PRX) is responsible nucleotide in the last exon of the PNKD gene, c.1022delC p.(Pro341fs), in for autosomal recessive early onset demyelinating neuropathy: Charcot-Ma- the patient and her father. This deletion results in a premature stop codon 3 rie Tooth disease 4F (CMT4F) or its severe form Dejerine Sottas neuropathy amino acids downstream and a slightly truncated protein. While it is unlike- Periaxin protein is essential for maintenance of the peripheral nerve myelin. ly that the protein will undergo nonsense mediated mRNA decay (functional It also functions as a scaffold protein that plays a role in lens membrane work is ongoing to confirm this), the function of the hydroxyacyl glutathio- organization . We present a boy diagnosed with hereditary neuropathy and ne hydrolase domain may be disrupted leading to the build-up of the toxic cataract carrying a novel homozygous mutation mutations in the PRX gene. metabolite methylglyoxal and related compounds which may reasonably be The proband is a 5 year old boy with normal cognition he had delayed mo- assumed to cause the phenotype. This case report expands the PKND mu- tor milestones and subcapsular cataract. His healthy parents are of Muslim- tation spectrum, resolves the diagnosis for this family and emphasises the Arab origin and unrelated. He has experienced frequent falls since early age, usefulness of NGS in a diagnostic setting. however, his motor deficiencies tend to ameliorate with time. Neurological PM09.102 examination revealed: weakness of the distal lower limbs muscles and ab- tRNA processing defects in pontocerebellar hypoplasia sence of deep tendon reflexes. NCV demonstrated dramatic symmetrical re- B. Appelhof, V. R. C. Eggens, T. van Dijk, A. L. M. A. ten Asbroek, M. A. J. Weterman, F. duction of sensory and motor velocity of the lower limbs, compatible with a Baas; demyelinating process. Whole exome sequencing of the boy‘s DNA revealed Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. a novel homozygote frameshift mutation, c.418-419insG (p.M149 fs) in the PRX gene, confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The parents are heterozygote carriers of the mutation. Hence this seems to be the disease causing mutati- Introduction: Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) represents a heterogeneous on in this boy. This is a new clinical manifestation of PRX-related hereditary group of neurodegenerative disorders with a prenatal onset. Symptoms are neuropathies. Lens abnormality caused by mutations in the PRX gene were hypoplasia and/or atrophy of the pons and cerebellum and patients suffer shown only in knock out mice. It is suggested that careful eye examination from severe cognitive and motor defects. Aberrations in different tRNA pro- should be done in patients with congenital neuropathy in order to rule out cessing genes, e.g. the tRNA splicing endonuclease (TSEN) genes and cleava- PRX associated hereditary neuropathy. ge and polyadenylation factor 1 subunit 1 (CL P1
), have been associated with PM09.100 PCH. However the disease mechanism remains elusive. Our research focuses Partial deletion of SL C20
A2 as a rare cause of PFBC on further revealing the link between PCH and tRNA processing. For this, K. Freimann1, C. B. Volpato2, K. Lohmann1, A. Hicks2, C. Klein1, P. Pramstaller2,3, A. we select genes of the tRNA processing pathway and assess their possible Westenberger1; involvement in the PCH disease mechanism 1Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 2Center for Material and methods: Exome sequencing was performed in 25 PCH pati- Biomedicine, European Academy Bozen/Bolzano (EURAC), Bolzano, Italy, 3Department ents and 5 trios. Candidate genes were knocked down in zebrafish using 188 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOmTorLpAhoNliDno,s U anKd |r eWsuWltinWg p.EhSenHotGyp.OesR wGere analyzed using ISH and TUNELABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Estonia. assay. Results: On the bases of its function we selected RNA 3’-terminal phosphate Mutations in the CO L4
A1 gene have been found to cause autosomal-domi- cyclase (RtcA) as an essential part of the tRNA processing pathway. Knock- nant porencephaly and leukoencephalopathy. Additionally infantile hemi- down of RtcA results in microcephaly, aberrant movement and abnormal plegia, migraines, seizures, intracerebral hemorrhage, ischaemic stroke, brain development in zebrafish. Exome sequencing revealed a homozygous hematuria, arrhytmias may occur. We report here a family with a novel CO- missense mutation at the active site of RtcA in a PCH2 patient.  L4
A1 gene mutation and different clinical phenotype. Conclusion: RtcA is possibly involved in the same pathway as other PCH Our index patient is a 50-year-old woman, who has had migraine like hea- associated genes and invigorates the involvement of the tRNA processing daches during last 5 years, hypertension since she was 30, microhematu- pathway. ria and unspecified eye damage since childhood. Last year she had transi- P S09
.103 torial ischaemic attack. Brain MRI showed left frontal horn porencephalic Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type III caused by nonsense mutation in enlargement of the lateral ventricle, leukoencephalopathy and small T-2 PCLO hyperintensities in area of basal ganglia. A novel heterozygous mutation B. A. Chioza1, M. Y. Ahmed1, A. Rajab2, K. Schmitz-Abe3, A. Al-Khayat4, S. Al-Turki5, E. L. (c.1826G>A, p.Gly609Asp) was identified in CO L4
A1 gene. This mutation Baple1, M. A. Patton1,6, A. Y. Al-Memar7, M. E. Hurles5, J. N. Partlow3, R. Hill3, G. D. Evrony3,8, has not been described previously, but is predicted pathogenic because Gly S. Servattalab3, K. Markianos3, C. A. Walsh3,8, G. H. Mochida3,8, A. H. Crosby1; substitution hampers the formation of the triple helix. Patient´s daughter 1University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2National Genetic Center, (25y) had congenital hydronephrosis, no other symptoms and nonspecific Muscat, Oman, 3Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United MRI findings. Patient´s son (20y) had a subclinical stroke in perinatal period Kingdom, 6St. George’s, University of London, London, United Kingdom, 7St. George’s and an episode of supraventricular tachycardia at age 2 months. His physical Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 8Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. and mental development is normal. His MRI is similar to mothers. He has ar- rhythmic episodes, frequent epistaxis and he becomes easily tired. Patient´s sister (30y) has had severe headaches during last 10 years. Patient´s mother Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) is a group of disorders that share a com- died from cerebral infarction at age 69. Their genotypes have not been in- mon feature of an abnormally small cerebellum and pons. Involvement of vestigated. the cerebrum, such as progressive microcephaly, is also common. It is highly It is noteworthy that our patient´s phenotype is quite mild and her daughter heterogeneous, and eight subtypes on clinical and genetic basis have been has no complaints, however she carries the same mutation. Consequently known. PCH type III (PCH3) is one of the subtypes we reported in an Oma- clinical picture among CO L4
A1 gene mutation carriers can be very variable. ni pedigree and mapped to chromosome 7q11-21. We have extended the PM09.106 study of this pedigree performing genetic analysis including genome-wide Report on two families with inherited PTEN associated white matter SNP genotyping, linkage analysis and whole-exome sequencing identifying lesions and neuropsychiatric disease presentation a homozygous nonsense mutation in the gene Piccolo (PCLO) as the cause T. B. Balci1,2, J. Davila3, E. Sell4, J. Richer1, D. C. Lewis5, A. Boafo5, E. Tomiak1,6, M. A. of PCH3. The variant was predicted to eliminate the PDZ and  C2
 domains Lines7,6, S. L. Sawyer1,6; in the C-terminus of the protein. PCLO is a component of the presynaptic 1Department of Medical Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 3Department of Medical Imaging, cytoskeletal matrix. It localizes to the synaptic active zone, and is thought to Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 4Division of Neurology, be involved in regulation of presynaptic proteins and synaptic vesicles. Our Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 5Department of Psychiatry, findings suggest that PCLO is crucial for the development and survival of a Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 6Children‘s Hospital of wide range of neuronal types in the human brain. Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 7Division of Metabolics, Supported by grants from the Medical Research Council (G1002279) and Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada. Newlife Foundation for Disabled Children. PM09.104 Mosaic uniparental disomy of chromosome 15q in an atypical PCH Recently, white matter (WM) lesions have been identified in patients with patient PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS). It is unclear how/if these fin- T. van Dijk1, B. Appelhof1, V. R. C. Eggens1, A. D. C. Paulussen2, J. C. F. M. Dreesen2, A. L. M. dings correlate with the neurocognitive features associated with PTEN mu- A. ten Asbroek1, M. A. J. Weterman1, P. G. Barth1, B. Poll-The1, F. Baas1; tations, such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or developmental delays. 1AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2MUMC, Maastricht, Netherlands. We report two families with PTEN mutations and WM changes on their brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The first family presented with neuro- psychiatric features, and the second with developmental delays in the child. Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) describes a heterogeneous group of All have macrocephaly and WM hyperintensities on their MRIs in varying neurodegenerative disorders with a prenatal onset. Common features are degrees and localizations. The father in the first family has an adult onset in- hypoplasia/atrophy of the cerebellum and ventral pons, progressive micro- termittent movement disorder (other possible causes ruled out) and no re- cephaly and severe mental and motor retardation. Ten subtypes (PCH1-10) ported developmental difficulties, with a remote history of bipolar disease. are described based on differences in phenotype and/or genotype. The ma- His MRI shows multifocal leukoencephalopathy with subcortical and peri- jority of the PCH genes are involved in RNA processing. In about 40% of ventricular confluent areas of signal abnormality. His daughter has obsessi- patients a mutation in one of the PCH related genes is identified, in 60% the ve compulsive disorder and a mild learning disability. Her MRI shows much genetic cause remains unknown. One of the goals of our research is to iden- smaller bilateral subcortical WM lesions. The father in the second family tify new candidate genes involved in PCH. Here we describe an atypical PCH presented with macrocephaly and penile freckling, and has subcortical and patient with a neuronal migration disorder. A SNP array and read number periventricular WM lesion s, in keeping with the WM lesions seen in patients analysis of exome data was suggestive of a mosaic paternal uniparental di- with PTEN mutations. His son has motor delays and has similar periventri- somy (UPD) of chromosome 15q24.2- 15qter, which was confirmed by sin- cular changes on his MRI. Previous reports identified a static WM disease gle cell genotyping. 34% of cells were homozygous for the paternal allele in in children with PHTS and developmental delay. A correlation between the this region and 64% of cells were heterozyPgOoLuGs. The supposed mechanism extent of WM changes, reduced PTEN expression and cognitive function in is a somatic recombination. Upon re-examination of the exome variants, a ASD has been proposed. Clinical features in our patients with PHTS suggest deleterious heterozygous mutation in the gene was identified on the an expanded PTEN phenotype spectrum, including previously unreported maternal allele. POLG is essential for the replication of mitochondrial DNA neuropsychiatric disease with possible progression in some individuals. and homozygosity for this mutation is supposed to be lethal. This probably P S09
.107 explains the absence of cell homozygous for the maternal 15q allele. Ten- Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy in Bulgarian dizygotic twins: a novel tatively, we would like to hypothesize that this cell line existed but died at mutation in the ALDH7A1 gene some point during fetal development, leading to the brain phenotype in this S. Tincheva1,2, T. Todorov2, A. Todorova1,2, I. Yordanova2, T. Kadiyska2, I. Litvinenko3, V. patient. Mitev1; P S09
.105 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Child Familial porencephaly - clinical and neuroimaging manifestations in neurology clinic, Department of pediatrics, University Pediatric Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. persons with CO L4
A1 gene mutation. K. Simenson1, Ü. Krikmann2, T. Tomberg3, Ü. Murumets1, N. Tõnisson1, K. Õunap1,4; 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Neurology Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Radiology Clinic, Tartu Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy (PDE, MIM 266100) is rare autosomal re- University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, cessive disorder clinically characterized by a combination of various seizure ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANtDyp,e Us. KTh |e W seWizuWres.E uSsuHaGlly. OprResGent in the first hours of life and can n1ot8 b9eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index controlled with conventional antiepileptic medications but respond both We present a genetic study of patients using RTT -like New generation se- clinically and electrographically to large daily supplements of pyridoxine quencing (NGS) . (vitamin B6). The dependencAeL DisH p7eAr1manent, and the interruption of daily We have designed a gene panel of 17 genes related to the RTT -like clinic pyridoxine supplementation leads to recurrence of seizures. The disease is presentation by HaloPlex Target technology. Enrichment System, for Illumi- caused by mutations in the gene (MIM 107323) which is locali- na Sequencing. Sanger sequencing was used in exon not well covered and zed at 5q23.2 and encodes antiquitin, an alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde MLPA was done by causative RTT genes (MEC P2
, CDK L5
 and FOXG1). dehydrogenase. We studied patients with clinical RTT without genetic diagnosis and RTT Here we report a dizygotic twin pair with classical fAoLrDmH o7fA  P1
DE. Two hours patients with negative results by Sanger and MLPA of MEC P2
, CDK L5
 and after birth the infants presented with multifocal clonic seizures, resistant FOXG1 genes. to anticonvulsive therapy. Direct sequencing of the gene revealed NGS results have been verified by Sanger sequencing and studied the origin one novel (c.297delG, p.Trp99*) and one already repAoLrtDeHd 7A(c1.328C>T, of the mutation in the parents. p.Arg110*) mutation. This represents the first genetically proven PDE case We have detected mutations in RTT-like patients in RTT genes and genes that in Bulgaria. Our study enriches the spectruAmL DoHf o7bAs1erved mutati- do not cause RTT pathology, but overlap some features of RTT patients. ons presenting a case with one novel single nucleotide deletion, located in The genetic study by NGS allows to study a larger number of genes asso- exon 3 outside this “hotspot” region of the gene containing ~60% ciated with RTT simultaneously, significantly reducing response time and of the reported mutations. the cost of the study. It also allows us to study other related clinical RTT and We emphasize that in patients with clinical diagnosis of PDE, even from thus to redirect the clinical diagnosis to another disease genes. CAaLuDcHa7sAia1n origin, it is necessary to examine the whole gene in order to con- Verification by Sanger of the progenitors of the mutations detected by NGS firm the diagnosis on molecular level. The increased number of described remains essential for their characterization. mutations and genetically proven cases would help determining PM09.110 the real PDE frequency. RNA-seq based co-expression networks on human substantia nigra The study was supported by the project No 146/12.01.2015, Medical Unver- and putamen sity Sofia, Bulgaria. J. A. Botía1,2, P. Forabosco3,2, J. Vandrovcova1,2, S. Guelfi1,2, K. D‘sa1,2, M. Matarin1, V. 1 Varghese2, D. Trabzuni1, A. Ramasamy1,2,4, The UK Brain Expression Consortium (UKBEC), J. A. Hardy1, M. Ryten1,2, M. E. Weale2; PM09.108 1Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Network analysis of Parkinson’s disease genes identifies a novel Kingdom, 2Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King‘s College, London, United function of RAB39B Kingdom, 3Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Cittadella Universitaria di Cagliari, J. Vandrovcova*1,2, P. Forabosco*3,2, D. Trabzuni*1,4, A. Abramov1, H. Plun-Favreau1, J. A. Sardinia, Italy, 4Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Botía1,2, S. Guelfi1,2, K. D’Sa1,2, M. Matarin1, V. Varghese2, A. Ramasamy1,2,5, C. Smith6, The UK Brain Expression Consortium (UKBEC), J. Hardy1, M. E. Weale2, M. Ryten1,2; 1UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King‘s College, London, United Kingdom, 3Istituto di Ricerca Genetica The substantia nigra and putamen are key brain regions implicated in the e Biomedica, Monserrato, Italy, 4Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital pathogenesis of Parkinson’s Disease, one of the most common neurodege- and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, nerative disorders. We used Weighted Gene Coexpression Network Analysis Oxford, Austria, 6MRC Sudden Death Brain Bank Project, University of Edinburgh, (WGCNA) to identify common and private gene modules in these brain re- Department of Neuropathology, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. gions. As part of the UKBEC project, we analysed RNA-seq data from 134 neuropa- thologically normal controls to construct co-expression networks (signed Gene coexpression network analysis assumes no prior biological know- correlation, soft threshold =11) separately for each tissue using gene level ledge, making it a very powerful tool for the identification of novel pathways expression. Gene expression values (GC-corrected normalised RPKM) were and gene interactions. In Parkinson’s disease (PD) more than 40 genes and corrected for batch effects and other biases using 9 PEER axes. We analysed loci have been identified so far, but how their disruption leads to a single cli- ~16k Ensembl annotated genes for both brain regions, with per-gene QC nically identifiable disorder remains to be elucidated. As part of the UKBEC filters of RPKM>0.05 and missingness<20%. project, we used Weighted Gene Coexpression Network Analysis (WGCNA) Our substantia nigra and putamen networks revealed 73 and 56 modules to explore the brain transcriptomes of 101 neuropathologically normal in- containing between 33-1316 and 33-1171 genes respectively. We studied dividuals to investigate the biological relationships between known PD ge- enrichment with ToppGene and found enrichment for similar Gene Ontolo- nes and PD-associated loci. In substantia nigra, the region most affected by gy terms in both tissues, including brain-related terms like neuronal signal- PD pathogenesis, we identified two modules; one significantly enriched for ling, development of nervous tissue, neurotransmitters, oligodendrocytes Gene Ontology terms related to mitochondrion and oxidative phosphoryla- and glial cell formation. We also found enrichment for relevant pathways, tion, and the other for synapse related terms. We then assessed the predic- including axon guidance, and for diseases including epilepsy, neuroticism, tive power of this analysis by using the network constructions to investigate and substance related disorders. the function of RAB39B, a recently identified cause of X-linked intellectual We investigated the putative biological function of the 613 lincRNAs that disability and early onset Parkinson’s disease and a member of Rab family were expressed in our data. We found that 18 and 30 were highly associated of proteins known to be important for regulation of vesicular trafficking. As with 3 and 6 modules in the substantia nigra and putamen networks respec- predicted by RAB39B’s membership within the module related to oxidative tively, providing immediate hypotheses for their previously unknown regu- phosphorylation, we show that RAB39B disruption in vitro leads to mito- latory function. Our results demonstrate the utility of performing RNA-seq chondrial complex 1 inhibition and decrease in mitochondrial membrane based gene coexpression network analysis in the human brain. potential supporting the role of RAB39B in regulation of mitochondrial P S09
.111 function. Our work validates the use of gene coexpression networks to pre- SHANK3 variants confer risk for schizophrenia and indicate a genetic dict novel biological functions, and provides new insights into molecular overlap with autism spectrum disorders pathways and interactions of PD genes and loci. S. Berkel1, A. de Sena Cortabitarte1, F. Degenhardt2, B. Weiss1, R. Roeth1, M. Rietschel3, M. P S09
.109 Noethen2, G. Rappold1; Genetic diagnosis of Rett syndrome by New Generation Sequencing: 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, our experience. Germany, 3Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, Germany. E. Gerotina Mora1, N. Brandi Tarrau2, S. Vidal Falcó1, M. O‘Callaghan Gordo2,3, À. Garcia- Cazorla2,3, M. Pineda Marfa1,3, J. Armstrong Morón2,3; 1Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, The SHANKs are Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 3CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. postsynaptic scaffolding proteins at glutamatergic synapses in the brain that SHANK are essential for proSpHeAr NsyKn1apSsHeA fNorKm2ation SHANK3 Rett syndrome (RTT) is an early-onset neurological disease that almost ex- and maintenance. The gene clusively affects girls and is totally disabling. The RTT has a prevalence of family (comprising , and ) is linked to a spectrum 1/15000 being responsible for 10 % of severe mental retardation in fema- of neurodevelopmental disorders, les. including intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Schi- The clinical diagnosis is essential, since the discovery of a mutation confirms zophrenia the diagnosis, but does not necessarily establish. Several genes that cause (SCZ) is a neuropsychiatric disease with high variability in the clinical d1is9e0ase had been described: MEC P2
, CDKL E5
S aHndG F 2OX0G115. | GLASGOW, SCOphTeLnAotNypDe, , cUhaKra |c tWerWizeWd b.Ey SmHajGor. OimRpGairments in perception of realityABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and on in patients and controls. SNPs showed an effect on scores of tests of social disorganized thought or behavior. Different studies have already pointed to cognition such as the IPSAQ, Reading the Mind in the Eyes, and the Hinting an Task showing that risk variants located within/proximal to gene regions in- impairment of glutamatergic synaptic plasticity as an undSeHrAlyNinKg3 cause of volved in neurotransmission have significant effects on cognitive functions. SCZ Future work will aim to further elucidate this in conjunction with impact on pathology. To elucidate a putative contribution of genetic variants imaging measures. Outcomes from such investigations may point towards to the etiology of SCZ, we sequenced the gene in neurotransmission pathways contributing to the disorder. 500 affected individuals and compared the sequencing results to ancestral- Cognitive Tests Used in SNP Analysis Measure Test ly IQ WAIS Verbal IQ matched controls. Novel SHANK3 missense WAIS Performance IQ variants were identified in 1.6 % of the screened individuals, three of WAIS Full-scale IQ which Episodic Memory WMS Logical Memory 1 and 2 WMS Faces 1 and 2 were predicted as deleterious by at least two different algorithms. We CANTAB Paired Associate Learning identified association of 5 genetic variants, with study-wide significance Working Memory WAIS Letter-Number Sequencing (P<0.001). Combined with previous studies, the rare G>V variant was CANTAB Spatial Working Memory Attention Sustained Attention to Response Task found CANTAB Intradimensional/Extradimensional Set Shifting in 4 out of 1543 SCZ pSaHtiAeNntKs3 and in 4 out of 2147 individuals with autism Continuous Performance Task spectrum disorders (ASD), but not in 9315 controls. Social Cognition Internal, Personal, Situational Attributional Questionnaire Hint Task We conclude that the gene harbors different genetic Reading the Mind in the Eyes variations predisposing to SCZ, ranging from common and uncommon va- riants to rare deleterious missense mutations. The SHANK3-G>V variant was found PM09.114 inSHANK3 An immunological study of 3 schizophrenia susceptibility genes both ASD and SCZ patients, pointing to an overlapping genetic contribution identified by GWA study of to both neuropsychiatric P. Hallford, C. Mackenzie, J. Wei; Division of Health Research, University of the Highlands and Islands, Inverness, United disorders. Kingdom. PM09.112 Study of genetic association of HLA-DQ2.5 with circulating IgG antibody to cow’s milk casein in schizophrenia Introduction: Schizophrenia is a highly heritable disease based on family R. T. McLean1, L. Halley1, M. Doherty1, P. Wilson2, J. Wei1; adoption and twin studies. A number of genome wide association (GWA) 1University of Highlands and Islands, Inverness, United Kingdom, 2University of studies have been published, which have identified hundreds of genetic loci Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. associated with an increased risk of schizophrenia. Interestingly, a recent study suggests most schizophrenia associated genes were highly expressed in B-lymphocytes, suggesting that dysfunction of humoral immunity may be Introduction: An increase in anti-casein antibodies has been reported in involved in the pathophysiology of the disease. schizophrenia. Genome-wide association (GWA) study suggested that there In this study, we looked at the immunological response against 3 different was a lower frequency of the HLA-DQ2.5 genotype in schizophrenia patients antigens encoded by schizophrenia associated genes identified by GWA stu- than control subjects. The present work was thus designed to investigate the dies, including those coding for transcription factor 4 (TCF4), tripartite mo- relationship between the HLA-DQ2.5 genotype, schizophrenia and circula- tif containing 26 (TRIM26) and disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DIS C1
). ting IgG antibody to cow’s milk casein. Methods: We developed an in-house enzyme linked immunosorbent assay Methods: A TaqMan genotyping protocol was applied to genotype HLA- (ELISA) to measure circulating IgG against the above 3 antigens in 100 pati- DQ2.5 in a total of 169 patients with schizophrenia and 261 healthy control ents with schizophrenia and 119 control subjects. subjects. Plasma samples from these subjects were used to detect IgG an- Results: The student’s T test suggests that there was no significant diffe- tibodies against 3 linear peptide antigens derived from α-casein (CSN1 S1
) rence in antibody levels for TRIM26 and DIS C1
 between the patient group and κ-casein (CSN3-1 and CSN3-2) using an in-house enzyme-linked immu- and the control group (P>0.05), while a significant increase in TCF4 anti- nosorbent assay. body levels was found in patients with schizophrenia compared to control Results: There was no association found between schizophrenia and circu- subjects (P<0.05). lating IgG to these three antigens. However, we observed an increase in IgG Conclusions: This study suggests that an autoimmune component is likely to CSN3-1 (p=0.035) and a decrease in IgG to CSN3-2 (p=0.0086) in DQ2.5 to be involved, in which circulating IgG to TCF4 may play a role, in the deve- carriers compared with non-DQ2.5 carriers in the control group but not in lopment of schizophrenia. the patient group. In addition, the frequency of HLA-DQ2.5 genotype was significantly higher in healthy controls than schizophrenia patients. P S09
.115 Conclusions: This study suggests that circulating IgG to cow’s milk casein is The involvement of DIS C1
, GRIA2A, GAD2 genes polymorphic loci in not associated with schizophrenia but its secretion may be genetically con- schizophrenia trolled by the HLA-DQ2.5 genotype. K. O. Kinyasheva, A. Gareeva, E. Khusnutdinova; Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Center of RAS, Ufa, Russian P S09
.113 Federation. Schizophrenia-associated SNPs proximal to neurotransmission genes impact cognitive functions in patients and controls. D. Cosgrove1, D. Hogan2, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2, Psychiatric Schizophrenia is a severe multifactorial disease with a morbid risk of 7.2 per Genomics Consortium, A. Corvin2, M. Gill2, D. Morris1, G. Donohoe1; 1,000 and is affected by genetic and environmental factors. The disruption 1NUIG, Galway, Ireland, 2TCD, Dublin, Ireland. of the glutamatergic and the GABAergic systems, neuroplasticity changes are considered as an essential component of the pathogenesis of schizo- phrenia. Schizophrenia (SZ) is characterised by positive, negative and cognitive sym- The aim of the current study was to determine the association of two po- ptoms. As SZ is highly heritable, research has focused on GWAS, the most lymorphic loci rs821597, rs843979 of DIS C1
 gene, two polymorphic loci recent of which identified 83 new regions of interest associated with SZ. The rs2236418, rs928197 of GAD2 gene and polymorphic locus rs4403097 of link with specific functions in SZ is currently unknown. To take these results GRIA2A gene with the schizophrenia in a sample of 338 cases (50% Russi- forward, these need to be identified, be that at the level of protein, neural ans and 50% Tatars) and 350 controls (50% Russians and 50% Tatars) from pathway or phenotype. To characterise the effect of specific SNPs on cogni- Volga-Ural region of Russia. The genotyping of these polymorphic loci was tive function, selection was carried out based on the following classificati- carried out by PCR-RFLP. The Haploview 4.1 program was used to determi- ons 1) proximity of SNP to gene, 2) unique association of gene to SNP, and ne the pairwise linkage disequilibrium and haplotype analysis. Odds ratios 3) gene involvement in neurotransmission, which is disrupted in SZ. This (OR) with 95% confident intervals (CI) were calculated. resulted in nine SNPs in close proximity to genes involved in glutamater- The GAD2*A/A genotype (OR=3,62; Р=0,0009) and the GAD2*A allele gic neurotransmission (GRM3, GRIN2A, SRR, CLCN3), signalling (CACNB2, (OR=3,11; Р=0,002) of polymorphic locus rs2236418 of GAD2 gene were HCN1, RIM S1
) and receptor genes (DRD2, CHRN). To assess the impact of found to be a risk markers of schizophrenia in Tatars ethnic group. The ha- each SNP on cognitive functionE, SneHuGro p2sy0c1ho5l o|g GicaLlA mSeGasOurWes, (STCabOleT 1L)A N pD lo, t yU pK e G| AW D2W *AW T . fE roS mH bG lo.O ckR wG hich constructed of two polymorphi1c 9lo1ci were analysed. Analyses indicate significant effects on measures of cogniti-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM09.118 Association of COMT and MTHFR genetic variation with symptoms of rs2236418, rs928197 of GAD2 gene was identified as the high risk marker schizophrenia of schizophrenia in Tatars ethnic group (OR=2,15; Р=0,0001). However pre- H. Kandratsenka, I. Halayenka, N. Danilenko, T. Shatarnova, O. Davydenko; viously mentioned polymorphic loci rs821597, rs843979 of DIS C1
 gene, Institute of Genetics and Cytology of NAS of Belarus, Minsk, Belarus. rs4403097 of GRIA2A gene, rs928197 of GAD2 gene were not associated with the schizophrenia in Tatars and Russian ethnic groups. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research Background. Schizophrenia is a common, complex multifactorial psychiatric grant #14-04-97012p_povolzhie_a. disorder with a lifetime incidence of 1-2%. Changes in functioning of dopa- PM09.116 minergic metabolism and intracellular methylation which are controlled by Schizophrenia associated variants in cognition: a schizophrenia GWAS COMT and MTHFR genes could be risk factors of overall schizophrenia. follow-up Aims. To investigate the role of a COMT (rs4680) and MTHFR (rs1801133) K. M. Kendall, J. T. Walters; gene polymorphisms in the etiology of schizophrenia according to the seve- MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff, United Kingdom. rity of symptoms (PANSS rating criteria), in the Belarusian population. Materials and methods. 125 schizophrenia patients and 90 controls were studied. Patient inclusion criteria were: ICD-10 schizophrenia diagnosis, age In 2014, the Psychiatric Genetics Consortium (PGC) reported a schizophre- 27-65 (46.9 ± 9.5) years. nia genome-wide association study (GWAS) identifying 128 single nucleoti- Results. No differences in allele and genotype frequencies of both MTHFR de polymorphisms (SNPs) at 108 independent loci as associated with schi- and COMT loci between schizophrenia patients and controls were obser- zophrenia. This study aims to examine these variants for association with ved. The Mann-Whitney test has demonstrated an association of MTHFR cognition in an independent schizophrenia sample. Genotypes at 125 SNPs T-allele with greater scores of conceptual disorganization (p=0.001), gran- were combined with MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery scores in a re- diosity (р=0.051), mannerisms and posturing (p=0.009) symptoms while gression analysis for 592 individuals with schizophrenia. The social cogniti- COMT G-allele - with greater scores of blunted affect (р=0.023), poor rap- on domain was excluded due to reliability difficulties. 40 SNPs demonstra- port (p=0.019), lack of spontaneity and flow of conversation (р=0.037), ste- ted nominally significant association with one or more cognitive domains. reotyped thinking (р=0.052), motor retardation (р=0.027), poor attention 8 SNPs were associated with the composite cognition score. 4 SNPs were (р=0.003) symptoms for polymorphism in schizophrenia patients. Notably, associated with other cognitive domains following correction for number of we observed significant associations of rs1801133 MTHFR T-allele with in- domains examined (table 1). This study suggests a role for previously iden- creased summation of ratings of Positive Scale and rs4680 COMT G-allele tified schizophrenia associated variants in influencing cognition. We will be with greater summation of ratings of Negative Scale (р=0.014), General Psy- attempting to replicate this in further independent samples. chopathology Scale (р=0.024), PANSS Total score (р=0.024) for patients. Table 1. SNPs and association with cognitive domains. Conclusions. Our results have shown that rs1801133 MTHFR affects the in- beta SNP Chr Gene Domain p tensity of positive syndrome. Polymorphism rs4680 COMT influences the coefficient rs6704641 2q33.1 Intron SATB2 Composite 0.227 0.01 severity of patient‘s negative syndrome and symptoms of General Psycho- rs6704641 2q33.1 Intron SATB2 Speed of Processing 0.237 0.001 pathology Scale in clinical characteristics of schizophrenia. rs2905426 19p13.11 Unknown Composite -0.219 0.012 rs2332700 14q.24.2 Intron RG S6
 Composite 0.22 0.015 P S09
.119 rs190065944 15q25.1 Intron CHRNA5 Composite 0.276 0.019 An intersection of retroviral infection/reactivation, epigenetics and rs56873913 19q13.33 Intron PRRG2 Composite 0.245 0.02 genetics in schizophrenia Attention and rs56873913 19q13.33 Intron PRRG2 Vigilance 0.271 0.008 R. P. Loewe1, M. Schneider2; rs2973155 5q33.1 Unknown Composite -0.2 0.024 1GeneWake GmbH, Neuried, Germany, 2University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany. Intron rs2007044 12p13.33 Composite -0.173 0.027 CACNA1C rs12522290 5q33.2 Unknown Composite -0.222 0.035 rs7907645 10q24.32 Unknown Speed of Processing -0.502 0.005 Schizophrenia is a disorder that can present itself in a broad spectrum of Attention and phenotypic variability ranging from single mild episodes to a dire need of rs35518360 4q24 Unknown -0.368 0.004 Vigilance life long treatment in a mental institution with around the clock care. The underlining concept of this seems to be driven not only based on the en- P S09
.117 vironment or the physical and mental health status upon onset, but is es- Assessing disease relevant interactions in schizophrenia. sentially attenuated via retroviral infection and epigenetic alterations in B. Ambroise1, J. T. R. Walters1, J. L. Moran2, S. A. McCaroll2,3, M. J. Owen1, M. C. the context of an as yet undefined genetic landscape. Past efforts were in O‘Donovan1, V. Escott-Price1, A. J. Pocklington1; part not holistic enough to elaborate on the vastness in the plasticity of this 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, psychiatric disease. The combined analysis of dendritic cells with viral parti- Boston, MA, United States, 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. cles in the cerebrospinal fluid, miRNA expression pattern derived from CSF- derived microparticles, the methylation analysis and gene alterations will be presented to derive signalling pathways explaining inflammation and virus Schizophrenia is a highly heritable disorder in which genetic factors account reactivation in the CSF of patients with schizophrenia. Multi-parametric ana- for ~80% of the variability in liability. Genome wide association studies lysis is introduced as a sub-classifier with potential impact not only on more (GWAS) have shown that there are potentially thousands of risk loci asso- specific diagnosis, but furthermore to merit patient specific treatment in the ciated with the disease (Sullivan et al. 2003). Although it has been shown future. Potential here lies in the use of anti-viral and immune modulating that risk for schizophrenia is partially explained by additive effects of top- compounds as well as novel therapeutics shifting epigenetic signatures. ranking single SNPs, interaction between SNPs may help to explain additio- nal heritability that contributes to risk above and beyond that explained by PM09.120 single polymorphisms (Hemani et al. 2014; Zuk et al. 2012). Genome organization and instability in the schizophrenia brain The CLOZUK dataset (Hamshere et al. 2013) consists of 5,199 cases ascer- Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, I. Y. Iourov1,2,4, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, T. Liehr5; 1Mental Health Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian National tained through facilitation with Novartis, the manufacturer of a proprietary Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Separated Structural Unit form of clozapine (Clozaril), and consisted of individuals with treatment- “Clinical Research Institute of Pediatrics”, Ministry of Health of Russia, Moscow, Russian resistant schizophrenia. 5,873Controls were drawn from the Welcome Trust Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Case Control Consortium 2 (WTC C2
) and the UK National Blood Transfusion Federation, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Service by Cardiff University. Genotyping was done on two different chips. Education, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Institute of Human As comprehensive pair-wise SNP-SNP interaction analysis is time consuming Genetics, FSU, Jena, Germany. and computationally intensive, LD pruning was used to reduce the number of SNPs involved in the analysis. All pair-wise interaction effect sizes were calculated separately for each chip using logistic regression and then com- It has been repeatedly noted that chromosome/genome instability and bined by meta-analysis. abnormalities do affect the schizophrenia brain (Yurov et al., 2001; 2008). Although no single interaction survived Bonferroni correction, there was Alternatively, specific changes of the genome organization should co-occur evidence for enrichment of disease-relevant interactions amongst genes with genome instability suggesting the existence of a cellular (endo)pheno- most highly associated with schizophrenia. The effect was more pronounced type. Here, genome organization at chromosomal level has been addressed for interactions at higher significance levels. Similar effects were originally by a set of molecular neurocytogenetic techniques. Interphase chromoso- observed in a smaller, independent dataset (International Schizophrenia me-specific multicolor banding (ICS-MCB) was used to analyze genome or- Consortium, 2008). ganization and instability in the schizophrenia brain. The evaluation of 12 192 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO saT mL pA leN s oD f , t hU e K di s| e W aseW d bW ra. iE nS aH ndG 1. 2O cR onG trol samples has shown a strikingABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S09
.123 Additional case of SL C6
A1 and SL C6
A11 (3p25.3) deletion in an discrepancy between schizophrenia and unaffected counterparts. Chromo- autistic child with intellectual disability and EEG anomalies some arrangement in interphase nuclei of the schizophrenia brain was com- V. Seidel1, P. de Castro2; pletely different from the unaffected brain. The diseased brain has exhibited 1Clinical Genetics, Pediatrics Department, Hospital MI Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 10-40% of cells affected by genome/chromosome instability manifested as 2Child Neurology, Pediatrics Department, Hospital MI Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain. aneuploidy and chromosome breakage of chromosome 1. Additionally, re- maining cells have almost all demonstrated a phenotype specific for chromo- some instability. More precisely, 23-48% of cells in the schizophrenia brain Introduction: Recently, three cases of overlapping microdeletions 3p25.3 were featured by the chromosome 1 localization at the nuclear periphery in showing a consistent phenotype with developmental delay, epilepsy, poor contrast to controls characterized by chromosome 1 positioning near the nu- speech and stereotypes have been described. We present a forth case: A se- cleolus. Since such nuclear organization characterizes cellular populations ven year old girl with intellectual disability (ID), absent speech and stereo- affected by chromosome instability, we have suggested that these changes typic movements. are likely to mediate genome instability in the schizophrenia brain. Accor- Case report: Family history and perinatal period were unremarkable. Overall dingly, intranuclear organization of chromosomes in brain cells seems to be growth parameters were normal. Global developmental delay was noticed a new (previously unrecognized) epigenetic mechanism for schizophrenia. before age twelve months, her language development stopped and autistic Supported by Russian Scientific Fund (Grant #14-35-00060). behaviour became more apparent. Seizures presented at age five years, with P S09
.121 fever. On physical examination she had a normal head circumference, poor SCN8A mutation associated with intrauterine tremor, arthrogryphosis eye contact, bruxism and an unusual but not ataxic gait. No specific dys- multiplex congenita and severe respiratory distress morphic features were observed. Brain imaging and metabolic screen were S. Berland1,2, H. Dalen2, G. Houge1, R. Holdhus3, B. I. Haukanes1, K. Petersen3, C. Gilissen4, normal. EEG showed slow wave activity while awake and a diffuse epileptic A. Hoischen4,3, T. Fiskerstrand1; activity. She is free of seizures under lamotrigine. Genetic investigations in- 1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2St. Olav University Hospital, cluded fragile X testing and sequencing of CDK L5
, which were normal. Trondheim, Norway, 3University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 4Radboud University Results: Chromosome microarray (180K array CGH) detected a 1.09 Mb Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. microdeletion at 3p25.3, including SL C6
A1 and SL C6
A11. These genes en- code gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) transporters. Alterations to any of these two genes have not been previously associated with human disease. A newborn girl presented with severe respiratory distress needing intuba- However, biochemical and animal study data support the plausibility of a tion, continuous coarse tremor, lung hypoplasia, dysmorphic features, bell- link between these two genes and EEG anomalies and ID. Variants in other shaped thorax and arthrogryphosis. EEG was initially normal but pathologi- neurotransmitter transporter genes (eg SL C6
A4) have been found to increa- cal at age 2 weeks. Two cerebral MRIs were normal. EMG findings suggested se the risk for psychiatric disease such as obsessive-compulsive disorder lower motor neuron disease. Epilepsy progressed and was refractory to and autism. treatment. She died after extubation at age 4 weeks. The mother felt tremor Conclusion: We provide further evidence of an association between dele- from the second trimester and no other fetal movements, and tremor was tions affecting neurotransmitter transporter genes and autism spectrum also observed by ultrasound in gestation week 24. disorders. Methods and results: SNP-array and tests for SMA, Schinzel-Gideon syn- PM09.124 drome and patUPD14 were normal. Whole exome sequencing revealed a NGS reveals new causes for spastic quadriplegia in Roma patients de novo novel missense variant in SCN8A: c.718A>G p.(Ile240Val). Missen- R. V. Vazharova1,2, S. Ivanov3, L. Balabanski2, I. Tournev4, T. Chamova4, S. Bichev5, A. se mutations in this gene cause epileptic encephalopathy with intellectual Savov5, D. Toncheva6; disability. SCN8A encodes Nav1.6, the α-subunit of a voltage gated neuronal 1Department of Biology, Medical genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Sofia sodium channel. This variant is located in an intracellular loop in juxtaposi- University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Gynecology and Assisted Reproduction tion to a transmembrane segment that operates as a gate sensor. Notably, an Hospital „Malinov DM“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Genomic laboratory, Gynecology and Assisted Ile to Val substitution in an equivalent position within another transmem- Reproduction Hospital „Malinov DM“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Sofia Medical University, Department of Neurology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5National Genetic Laboratory, Medical brane domain (highly similar structure) was reported in a boy with neona- University-Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Medical tal epileptic encephalopathy, multiple congenital anomalies and movement University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. disorder (Vaher et al; J Child Neurol 2014). Conclusion: We report the first data on prenatal onset of movement disorder, including severe respiratory distress, likely caused by a missense variant in We report on findings obtained by NGS of 552 genes in a small group of SCN8A. Dysmorphic features and arthrogryphosis are probably secondary Roma patients affected with complicated spastic quadriplegia. Recently the to fetal akinesia. Our data adds to previous literature extending the pheno- homozygosity for a founder mutation in the PDHX gene (p.R446*) among typic spectrum of variants in this gene. Roma ethnic group was found to account for around 60% of cases presenting PM09.122 early in life with metabolic acidosis, spastic paraplegia/ quadriplegia, deve- Identification of seizure genes from 748 probands with lopmental delay and epilepsy and screening for this mutation was suggested developmental disorders as first step in clinical workup. Patients were selected on the basis of clinical J. McRae1, D. Fitzpatrick2, H. Firth1, R. Scott3, S. Joss4, M. Hurles1, The Deciphering presentation. We used the TruSight Inherited diseases panel, Illumina and Developmental Disorders Study; the MySeq sequencing system. The search for the disease-causing mutations 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2University of Edinburgh, focused on variants with a quality score ≥ 30 and coverage ≥ 20 ×, located Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3University College London, London, United Kingdom, 4NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Glasgow, United Kingdom. outside of segmental duplications and simple repeats. The step-wise filte- ring criteria included: allele frequency ≤ 1% in the 1000Genomes or NHLBI Exome Sequencing projects; “deleteriousness” predictions (RadialSVM Pred The Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) study aims to advance scores > 0.83357), splice-site (± 15 nt), nonsense, non-stop, and small in- diagnosis of developmental disorders in the United Kingdom and Ireland frame or frame-shift in/dels. Six patients of Roma descent who were negati- through applying the latest genetic diagnostic technologies to samples from ve for the p.R446* founder mutation in PDHX gene were included in the stu- probands and their parents (trios). Children with developmental disorders dy. We found causative mutations in two of them: RNASEH2B, p.Ala177Thr may exhibit a variety of clinical phenotypes. One of the most common phe- homozygous and A P1
S2 , p.Tyr86Ter hemizygous. The mutation in A
P1 S2
 is notypes observed in probands in the DDD study is seizures. novel. Our results show that recessive monogenic diseases such as Aicardi To date, the DDD study has analysed 4295 trios, 748 (17.4%) present with Goutieres syndrome 2 and Mental retardation, X-linked syndromic 5 may seizures. We attempted to identify mutations in genes that contribute to manifest at an early age, resembling cerebral palsy. NGS not only shortens seizures within the subset of probadned sn owvioth at least one subtype of seizu- the time for establishment of a diagnosis, but may alter the clinical course, if res. We sequenced the exomes of the members ofd eea ncohv torio and interrogated it reveals disease for which treatment is possible. genetic variants from the exome for mutations within the probands. PM09.126 We identified genes significantly enriched with mutations. Mutati- Missense variants as a possible cause of GRID2-related ons in many of these enriched genes are reported to have a causative role in spinocerebellar ataxia type 18 seizures, however we identified one mutated gene not previously linked to M. Calvo1, D. Trujillano1, N. Nahavandi1, A. Rolfs1,2, M. Tarnopolsky3, R. Abou Jamra1; seizures and consider this a potentially novel gene implicated in seizures. 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Medical University Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, McMaster We present the findings of our analysis and the potentially novel gene im- University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. plicated in seizures. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 193ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Funding GRID2 is a member of the ionotropic glutamate receptor family of excita- : ANR, European Union, F.R.S-FNRS, PHRC, VERUM and Roger de tory neurotransmitter receptors. Very recently, GRID2 has been associated Spoelberch Foundations with autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia type 18 (SCAR18, OMIM: P S09
.129 616204) that is characterized by early onset severe cerebellar ataxia, ocular An association between variants within the APOE gene and movement abnormalities, and intellectual disability with progreGsRsiIvDe2 cere- concussion profile: a preliminary investigation bellar atrophy. So far, only in three families homozygous or compound hete- S. Abrahams1, S. Mc Fie1, J. Patricios2,3, J. Suter4, M. Posthumus1, A. September1; rozygous large deletions encompassing single or sienv etrraanl esxons of have 1University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2Morningside Sports Medicine been described as disease-causing. We performed whole exome sequencing Clinic, Johannesburg, South Africa, 3University of Pretoria, Johannesburg, South Africa, (WES) in a Canadian patient and identified two missense variants 4Constantiaberg Sports Medicine Clinic, Cape Town, South Africa. in the GRID2 gene: c.2128C>T (Arg170Trp) and c.2218G>A (p.Val740Ile). Based on ExAc, c.2128C>T was identified 6 times (MAF 0.00005) and c.2218G>A was identified 132 times (MAF 0.001, two homozygous cases). Introduction: Concussion is the transmission of biomechanical forces to the Both variants are located in highly conserved amino acid positions. Several, head resulting in neurological deficits, stimulating eleAvaPtOeEd release of brain but not all, prediction programs suggested pathogenicity. qPCR experiments tissue damage marAkPerOsE a nd promoting neural cell death. Apolipoprotein E is are ongoing to exclude large deletions/duplications. The patient has since involved in nerve tissue integrity and encoded by the gene. The ε4 al- the age of 8 months an early-onset episodic ataxia, failure to thrive, deve- lelic variant AofP tOhEe gene was associated with greater severity for brain lopmental delay, dystonic posturing and seizures. At the age of 12 years, injury in boxers. Therefo re, this study’s aim was to investigate the associati- the patient shows in addition progressive cerebellar atrophy. We see most on between variants and concussion profile in rugby players. symptoms of the patient clearly overlapping with those previously descri- Materials and Methods:In this case-control genetic association study, 198 bed in the three families with SCAR18. Although further characterization is previously concussed cases and 129 non-concussed, sport-matched con- needed, our results suggest that also missense variants, and not only dele- trols (age: 15 - 39 years old) were recruitAedP OfrEo m rugby playing schools and terious deletions, might be disease-causing for SCAR18 with a comparable clubs. Participants were genotyped for rs405509 (G/T), rs429358 (ε3/ε4) phenotype. and rs7412 (ε2/ε3) variants within the gene. Sport, concussion and medical history were recorded. Inferred haplotype analyses were conduc- PM09.128 ted. Dominance and recessiveness, two faces of the same coin? Illustration Results: No significant genotype or allele frequency differences were noted with two new genes in autosomal dominant spinocerebellar between cases and controls (>P=0.149) and for concussion symptom dura- degenerations M. Coutelier1,2, A. Durr3,4, L. Burglen5,6,7, C. Goizet8,9, F. Habarou10, D. Rodriguez5,6,11, S. tion in cases (>P=0A.2 P5
O3E). However, the frequencies of the age-adjusted infer- Morais1,12, J. Konop1, S. Chantot-Bastaraud5,7, C. Rougeot5,13, I. Alonso12, C. Tallaksen1, red G-ε4-ε3 (28% vs. 24%; P<0.001) and G-ε3-ε2 (25% vs. 19%; P=0.001) R. Schule14,15,16, M. Janin10, M. Cournelle17, P. Coutinho12,18, M. Milh19, A. Toutain20, A. haplotypes, of the variants (rs405A5 P0
O9E-rs429358-rs7412), were signi- Afenjar5,11, S. Zuchner14, G. Rouleau21, G. Nicholson22, J. Saudubray4, F. Darios3, J. Leal de ficantly greater among cases compared to controls, respectively. Loureiro12,18, D. Héron4, C. Ottolenghi10, F. Mochel3,4, A. Brice3,4, G. Stevanin1; Conclusion: AAltPhOoEugh the independent APO Egenotype frequencies were not 1ICM, NEB, Sorbonne UPMC Univ Paris 06, INSERM, UMRS_1127, CNRS 7225 & EPHE, associated with concussion susceptibility or severity, the combineAdP eOfEfect Paris, France, 2Lab of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Inst, UCL, Brussels, Belgium, of the three variants implicates in concussion susceptibility. 3ICM, NEB, Sorbonne UPMC Univ Paris 06, INSERM, UMRS_1127, CNRS 7225, Paris, France, 4APHP, Genetics & Cytogenetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Centre de Réf Further exploration is needed to understand the complex role of in ‚Malformations & maladies congénitales du cervelet‘, Paris-Lyon-Lille, France, 6INSERM susceptibility. U1141, Paris, France, 7APHP, Armand-Trousseau Hosp., Dep of Genetics, Paris, France, Grants: NRF and UCT. SA and SMF funded by NRF and MP by Thembakazi 8Univ. Bordeaux, Labo Maladies Rares: Génétique & Métabolisme, EA4576, Bordeaux, Trust. France, 9CHU Pellegrin, Génétique Méd., Bordeaux, France, 10Metabolic Biochem. PM09.130 Lab, Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP & Descartes Univ, Paris, France, 11APHP, Armand Trousseau Hosp, Neuropediatrics, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France, 12UnIGENe, Mosaic dominant TUBB4A mutation in a highly consanguineous IBMC, I3S, ICBAS, Univ. do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 13Hospices Civils de Lyon, HFME, family with complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia Neuropédiatrie, Bron, France, 14Dep of Human Genetics & Inst. for Human Genomics, D. Kancheva1,2, T. Chamova3, V. Guergueltcheva3, V. Mitev1, D. N. Azmanov4, L. Univ of Miami Miller School of Med., Miami, FL, United States, 15Ctr for Neurology & Kalaydjieva5, I. Tournev3, A. Jordanova1,2; Hertie Inst.for Clinical Brain Res, Eberhard- Karls-Univ., Tübingen, Germany, 16DZNE, 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry,Molecular Medicine Center, Eberhard-Karls- Univ., Tübingen, Germany, 17CH du Pays d‘Aix, Pédiatrie, Aix-en- Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Neurogenomics Group, Department Provence, France, 18Neurologia, CH de Entre o Douro e Vouga, S.Maria da Feira, Portugal, of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, Medical 19APHM, Neurologie pédiatrique, Hôp de la Timone, Marseille, France, 20Génétique, University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Diagnostic Genomics, PathWest, QEII Hôp Bretonneau, CHU, Tours, France, 21Montreal Neurol. Inst & Hosp, Neurology & Medical Centre, Nedlands, Australia, 5Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and Neurosurgery, McGill U, Montreal, QC, Canada, 22Northcott Neuroscience Lab, ANZAC, Centre for Medical Research, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. Mol.Medicine Lab, Concord Hospital; Univ.of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Introduction Background: Mutations in TUBB4A have been recently associated with a : Cerebellar ataxias (CA) and hereditary spastic paraplegias spectrum of autosomal dominant neurological conditions, ranging from the (HSP) are opposite ends of a wide spectrum of neurodegenerative disor- severe hypomyelination with atrophy of the basal ganglia and cerebellum ders known as spinocerebellar degenerations. Approximately 200 causative syndrome (H-ABC) to the clinically milder dystonia type 4 (DYT4). The pres- genes have been identified, and transmission follows all classical modes. ence of extrapyramidal symptoms was initially considered the only common Therefore, next generation sequencing (NGS) is of great help in their mole- hallmark of these disorders. cMuelathr oddiasgnosis, as well as for identifying new causative genes in unresolved Methods: Clinical, neurological and neuroimaging examinations, followed families. by whole exome sequencing and mutation analysis were performed in a : We used a combined approach of whole genome linkage analy- highly consanguineous pedigree with five affected children. sis and exome sequencing in two families with either CA or HSP, aiming to Results: We identified a novel c.568C>T (p.H190Y) TUBB4A mutation in a iRdeesnutilftys the causative genes. Their involvement was validatedG wRiItDh2 panel se- highly consanguineous pedigree mimicking autosomal recessive inheri- quencing approaches, and functional studies when available. tance. The mutation have originated de novo in the mosaic mother of five : In a CA family, we identified a missense mutation iGnR ID2 , hetero- children affected by complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). The zygous in late-oLnusrecht earffected adults, and homozygous in a chAiLldD wHi1t8hA c1onge- patients presented with an early onset, slowly progressive spastic parapa- nital CA. In two patients with congenital CA, we identified mutations resis of the lower limbs, ataxia and brain hypomyelination, in the absence of mimicking the mouse model. In a family with HSP, a mis- dystonia or rigidity. sense mutation segregated with dramatically low plasma levels of citrulline, Conclusions: Our study adds complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia to making it a potential trait biomarker. Four additional pedigrees, and in vitro the clinical spectrum of TUBB4A-associated neurological disorders. We aCnoanlcylsuessi oonf ornithGinReI Dm2etaboAlLisDmH, 1a8lAlo1wed establishing protein dysfunc- establish genotype-phenotype correlations with mutations located in the tion. same region in the tertiary structure of the protein. : Both and had been implicated in autosomal P S09
.131 recessive disorders in humans. With functional evidence, we established, in TOSCA: What will it add to our knowledge of genotype-phenotype both cases, that AD transmission can occur, and is linked to a different phe- correlations in tuberous sclerosis complex? notype. Aside from the novelty in the field of spinocerebellar degenerations, R. Touraine1, J. C. Kingswood2, G. Beaure d’Augères3, E. Belousova4, P. Bruzzi5, T. Carter6, this illustrates the permanent landscape remodelling that occurs in human g1e9ne4tics since the arousal of NGS. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index R. Castellana7, V. Cottin8, S. Crippa9, P. Curatolo10, M. Dahlin11, P. J. de Vries12, J. Carlos P S09
.133 Ferreira13, C. Fladrowski14,15, M. Feucht16, G. Gislimberti9, C. Hertzberg17, S. Jozwiak18, A. Whole exome sequencing improves the diagnosis yield in sporadic Macaya19, R. Nabbout20, F. O’Callaghan21, M. Perkovic Benedik22, V. Sander23, M. Sauter24, infantile spasm syndrome S. Youroukos25, B. Ulker26, B. Zonnenberg27, A. C. Jansen28; S. Dimassi1,2,3, A. Labalme1, D. Ville4, A. Calender5,3, C. Mignot6,7, N. Boutry-Kryza5,2,3, J. De 1CHU-Hôpital Nord, Saint Etienne, France, 2Sussex Kidney Unit, Royal Sussex County Bellescize8, C. Rivier-Ringenbach9, E. Bourel-Ponchel10, M. Rossi1,2, M. Till1, P. Edery1,2,3, D. Hospital, Brighton, United Kingdom, 3Association Sclérose Tubéreuse de Bourneville, Heron6,7, V. Des Portes4,3,11, D. Sanlaville1,3,2, G. LESCA1,2,3; Gradignan, France, 4Moscow Institute of Pediatrics and Pediatric Surgery, Moscow, 1Department of Genetics, Lyon, France, 2CNRL, CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, Russian Federation, 5IRCCS AUO San Martino IST–Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Lyon, France, 3Claude Bernard Lyon I University, Lyon, France, 4Department of Cancro, Genoa, Italy, 6TSA Tuberous Sclerosis Association, Nottingham, United Kingdom, Neuropediatrics, Lyon, France, 5Department of Molecular Genetics, Lyon, France, 7Novartis Farmacéutica SA, Barcelona, Spain, 8Hôpital Louis Pradel, Claude Bernard 6Département de Génétique et Centre de Référence « Déficiences intellectuelles de causes University Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 9Novartis Farma S.p.A., Origgio, Italy, 10Tor Vergata rares », AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 7GRC-Génétique des University Hospital, Rome, Italy, 11Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, Déficiences Intellectuelles de Causes rares, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, F75013, 12Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Paris, France, 8Epilepsy, Sleep and Pediatric Neurophysiology Department, Lyon Africa, 13Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisbon, Portugal, 14Associazione Sclerosi University Hospital, Lyon, France, 9Department of Pediatrics, Nord-Ouest Hospital, Tuberosa ONLUS, Milan, Italy, 15European Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Association, In Villefranche-sur-Saone, France, 10Department of Pediatric Neurophysiology, Amiens den Birken, Dattein, Germany, 16Universitätsklinik für Kinder-und Jugendheilkunde, University Hospital, Amiens, France, 11Reference Center for Tuberous Sclerosis and Rare Vienna, Austria, 17Vivantes-Klinikum Neukölln, Berlin, Germany, 18The Children’s Epileptic Syndromes, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France. Memorial Health Institute of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 19Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 20Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 21Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 22SPS Pediatrična Klinika, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 23Tallinn Children Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 24Medizinische Infantile spasms syndrome (ISs) is an epileptic encephalopathy characteri- Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich, Germany, 25“St. zed by clinical spasms with ictal electrodecrement, usually occurring before Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 26Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland, the age of 1 year and frequently associated with cognitive impairment. Etio- 27University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 28UZ Brussel VUB, Brussels, Belgium. logies of ISs are widely heterogeneous and an increasing number of genetic T O SC A causes have been reported during the last years. However, the etiological diagnosis remains unknown in up to 40% of patients. We searched for de uber us lerosis registry to increase disease wareness (TOSCA), a novo mutations in 10 ISs probands and their unaffected parents using WES. multicenter, international disease registry, to study the manifestations, Inclusion criteria were the lack of consanguinity and of family history of epi- interventions, and outcomes in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex lepsy, as well as exclusion of common causes of ISs by brain MRI, metabolic (TSC), has enrolled >2000 patients. The genetic research project of TOSCA, screening, array-CGH and screening for mutations in CDK L5
 and STXB P1
, wTShCic1h TisS Cli2mited to European countries, aims to improve our understanding and for ARX duplications in males. We found a probably pathogenic de novo of genotype/phenotype correlations in TSC. TSC is most often attributed to mutation in four patients. Two of them were missense mutations in SCN2A / mutations, but limited genotype/phenotype correlations have and in KCNQ2, in two patients who had no history of epilepsy prior to the been describedT SsCo2 far due to the large number of mutations and the rela- onset of ISs. The third mutation, found in a female patient, involved, ALG13, tively small sample size of studies. Nevertheless, it ThSaCs 1been TshSoCw2n that located on the X chromosome. This mutation has been recently reported in patients with mutation tend to be more severely affected, but with three unrelated females with ISs. The fourth mutation was a three base-pair significant clinical overlap between individuals with and muta- in-frame deletion in NR2F1, a gene whose mutations have been shown to tions, to the extent that it is inadvisable to make a clinical judgment based cause intellectual disability and optic atrophy. In this study, we showed that on an individual’s mutation type. At first interim analysis of TOSCA, molecu- WES can significantly improve the diagnosis yield in patients with sporadic lar testing had been performed on 301 of 508 (59.3%) patients. Pathogenic ISs. mutations were reported in 224 (74.4%) patients. Median time from clinical PM09.134 diagnosis to molecular testing was 30 months (range, 0-655). Overall, 125 Unexpected molecular genetic findings by Next-Generation- (24.6%) patients had ≥1 relative diagnosed with TSC. TSC was diagnosed Sequencing in a young ataxia patient prenatally in 27 patients (5.3%; ultraTsSoCu2n d finding in 19; family history in K. Grundmann1, S. Nia2, M. Schulze1, M. Sturm1, B. Kootz1, C. Baumgartner2, P. Bauer1, J. 8). As previously described in the literature, some features of TSC appeared K. Bickmann1; to be more common in patients with mutations (ie, subependymal gi- 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tübingen, Germany, 22nd ant cell astrocytoma, infantile spasms, and renal angiomyolipoma). Given Department of Neurology, Center of Neurology Rosenhügel, Vienna, Austria. the larger size of the TOSCA cohort, quantitative analysis of more subtle and in-depth genotype/phenotype correlations will be performed, with the hope of improving the clinical utility of such findings. Introduction: An 18 year-old patient of non-consanguineous parents had PM09.132 ataxic symptoms since age 16. The symptoms in the once excellent student Exome sequencing of a patient with Corpus Callosum agenesis were accompanied by progressive dementia, psychiatric changes, ocu- K. Tveten1, Ø. L. Busk1, L. Strand1, E. Bryne2, G. J. Braathen1, Ø. L. Holla1; lar apraxia, vertical ophthalmoparesis and non-specific elevations of liver 1Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway, 2Vestfold Hospital, Tønsberg, Norway. enzymes, lactate and CK. He has a similarly-affected younger brother. His Background maternal grandfather had psychiatric issues, his mother’s brother suffers from schizophrenia, autism, hypotonia and gait disturbance.Materials and Methods: The patient was evaluated for Niemann-Picktype C disease and A 1 year old boy was referred to genetic counselling with an unresolved SCA17 but no mutation could be identified. His DNA was then subjected to developmental disorder and corpus callosum agenesis. Previous genetic te- Next Generation Sequencing of 128 ataxia-associated genes and the results sting revealed a 245 kb deletion on chromosome 7p22.2 which was assumed worked up clinically and segregated in the brother and mother.Results: The tMoa btee roiaf ln aon sdig Mniefitchaondcse as it was maternally inherited. MR caput revealed patient has a heterozygous SYN E1
 variant once associated with autosomal agenesis of the corpus callosum, whereas MR SPECT and EEG were normal. dominant Emery Dreyfuss Muscular Dystrophy (EDMD4) as well as hete- Results rozygous mutations in WF S1
 and PEX7, and a likely pathogenic variant in Exome trio sequencing was performed of the patient and his parents. VP S13
A. Of those, only the WF S1
 mutation was also present in his brother. All mutations had been inherited through the mother. VP S13
A alone has not We identified two heterozygous mutations in the EPG5 gene. The first muta- been segregated. The genetic diagnosis of EDMD4 was not confirmed by mu- tion was a missense mutatioEnP iGn5herited maternally and the second mutation scle biopsy. In the course of disease his brother developed diabetes insipi- was a frame-shift duplication inherited paternally. Both mutations were no- dus and signs of celiac disease. Both brothers have deteriorating vision that vel. Recessive mutations in are known to cause the rare Vici syndrome could indicate optic atrophy (ophthalmologic exam is pending). characterized by corpus callosum agenesis, hypopigmentation, cardiomyo- Conclusion: The clinical presentation is now in line with Wolfram syndro- pCaotnhcyl,u imsimonunodeficiency and cataracts. Of these characteristics, only corpus me but a second mutation is warranted. We are currently establishing a mi- callosum agenesis was present in this patient. croarray covering SNPs of ataxia-related genes. This may reveal a second WF S1
-mutation in the two brothers and their father. Although the patient does not fulfill the clinical criteria for Vici syndrome, P S09
.135 we believe the two novel heterozygous mutations are the likely cause for Diagnosis and management of Romanian children with Williams- tEhPeG c5orpus callosum agenesis. Apparently he has a milder phenotype than Beuren syndrome previously reported in literature. I. O. Focsa1, A. Arghir1, S. M. Papuc1, A. C. Tutulan-Cunita1, C. Iliescu2, D. Craiu3, C. mutation analysis may be of importance in other patients that pre- Burloiu3, M. Boer3, B. Budisteanu3, M. Budisteanu1,3; sents with corpus callosum agenesis without other features. 1Victor Babes National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania, 3Prof. dr. Alex. Obregia ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 195ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania. DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF ROMANIAN CHILDREN WITH WIL- (NBIA). NBIA is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous condition. LIAMS-BEUREN SYNDROME (WBS) WDR45 mutations cause a childhood onset encephalopathy accompanied OBJECTIVE: by neurodegeneration in adulthood and iron accumulation in the basal gan- The present study focuses on the evaluation of the clinical cha- glia. WDR45 mutations have been almost exclusively found in females and rMaActTeEriRstIiAcLs oAf pNeDd iaMtrEiTc pHaOtiDeSn:t s with WBS, to design a personalized manage- male lethality was suggested. Here, we describe a male patient suffering ment plan, to prevent the complications and to improve the prognostic. from a severe and early neurological phenotype, initially presenting as neo- 22 children clinically and genetically dia- natal stormy seizures associated with an altered interictal EEG pattern and gRnEoSsUeLdT wS:i th W BS. The clinical diagnosis was based on the WBS diagnostic abnormal neurological development. This patient is a carrier of a microde- scoring system; FISH tests were performed to confirm the diagnostic. letion of chromosome Xp11.23 containing three genes, including WDR45. Allchildrenwere refered to our department for intellectual disa- These findings reveal that deletions of WDR45 are viable in males and can bility; 35% of them associated motor delay and 48%, poor language deve- initially be diagnosed as early onset epileptic encephalopathy without brain lopment. All children presented specific facial dysmorphism. Most children iron accumulation. had particular behavior: temporal-spatial disorientation, hyperacusis, and PM09.138 attraction to music (100%); hypersociability (65%); hyperkinesias (35%); New insights into the genetics of X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism fussy eating patterns (12%). 17% of the children had cardiovascular dis- (XDP, DYT3) orders and 6% presented hypercalcemia. Some children presented atypical A. Westenberger1, A. Domingo1,2, L. V. Lee2, I. Brænne3, T. Liu4,5, I. Vater6, R. Rosales2,7, features: 2 children had autism and 1 child associated Marfan syndrome. R. Jamora2,8, P. Pasco2,8, E. Cutiongco-dela Paz2,9, K. Freimann1, T. G. P. M. Schmidt1, D. 29% of patients were enrolled in physical therapy, and 42%, in different ty- Dressler10, F. J. Kaiser111, L. Bertram1,12, J. Erdmann3, K. Lohmann1, C. Klein1; 1Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 2XDP Study Group, pes of cognitive and behavioral therapy. Most of these children improved in Philippine Children’s Medical Center, Quezon City, Philippines, 3Institute for Integrative their psychomotor development, well-integrating in regular education. 12% and Experimental Genomics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 4Department of of the children were not enrolled in any therapeutic program and presented Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, vCeOrNy CsLloUwS IpOsNycSh: omotor aquisitions, thus preventing their enrollment in any 56Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, type of education. Berlin, Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Most of our patients presented the classical picture of Germany, 7Faculty of Neurology and Psychiatry, University of Santo Tomas, Manila, WBS, but some children had different particularities which contributed to Philippines, 8Department of Neurosciences, University of the Philippines, Manila, Philippines, 910Institute of Human Genetics, National Institutes of Health—University a delayed diagnosis. The management of WBS patients requires a multidis- of the Philippines, Manila, Philippines, 10Movement Disorders Section, Department of ciplinary approach, and is essential for a better social integration of these Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, Hannover, Germany, 11Section children. of Functional Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Acknowledgments: National Research Project PN 09.33.02.03; PN II 42-130 Germany, Lübeck, Germany, 12School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial PM09.136 College, London, United Kingdom. Homozygous deletion involving WWOX confirms causality in early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy and allows for extensive detailed phenotyping in large consanguineous families X-linked recessive dystonia-parkinsonism is a rare movement disorder that D. J. McMullan1, G. K. Hall1, D. A. Arafah2, L. Cooper-Charles1, D. Bohanna1, J. Vogt3, H. is highly prevalent in Panay Island in the Philippines. Earlier studies identi- Cox3; fied seven different genetic alterations within a 427-kb disease locus on the 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Makkah X chromosome; however, the exact disease-causing variant among these is Maternity and Children Hospital, Makkah, Saudi Arabia, 3West Midlands Regional still not unequivocally determined. To further investigate the genetic cause Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom. of this disease, we sequenced all previously reported genetic alterations in 166 patients and 473 Filipino controls. Singly occurring variants in our eth- nically matched controls would have allowed us to define these as polymor- WWOX (OMIM #605131) encodes WW domain-containing oxoreductase phisms, but none were found. Instead, we identified five patients carrying and acts as a tumour suppressor with a role in esophageal squamous cell none of the disease-associated variants, and one male control carrying all carcinogenesis. A very recent association with early Infantile Epileptic En- of them. In parallel, we searched for novel single-nucleotide variants using cephalopathy (IEE) has been reported, initially in a single child (of consan- next-generation sequencing. We did not identify any shared variants in co- guineous parents) with a homozygous nonsense mutation and subsequently ding regions of the X chromosome. However, by validating intergenic vari- in eight individuals from two families with a clinical diagnosis of spinocere- ants discovered via genome sequencing, we were able to define the bounda- bellar ataxia type 12 and in two siblings with IEE, with compound heterozy- ries of the disease-specific haplotype and narrow the disease locus to a 294- gous deletions and/or nonsense mutations (Mignot, 2015). kb region that includes four known genes. Using microarray-based analyses, We present a very large consanguineous family with eight living and one de- we ruled out the presence of disease-linked copy number variants within ceased infant with undiagnosed encephalopathy investigated by array-CGH. the implicated region. Finally, we utilized in-silico analysis and detected no A ~440kb homozygous deletion was identified at 16q23.1(77.75-78.19Mb). strong evidence of regulatory regions surrounding the disease-associated Homozygous deletions segregated entirely with affected children. Healthy variants. In conclusion, our finding of disease-specific variants occurring in siblings and parents were either heterozygous or normal. The deletion con- complete linkage disequilibrium raises new insights and intriguing questi- tains four RefSeq genes (NUDT7, VAT1L, CLE C3
A and exons 1-4 of WWOX). ons about the origin of the disease haplotype, the existence of phenocopies Collation of our cohort and those published to date suggest an emerging and of reduced penetrance, and the causative genetic alteration in XDP. pattern of poor postnatal growth, microcephaly and onset of seizures in Grants: The Fritz Thyssen Foundation (to AW), the German Academic Ex- the first year of life. Visual impairment and hypotonia are also observed, change Program (DAAD) (to AD). together with multiple deaths, mostly related to epilepsy. Specific genotype- P S10
.01 phenotype granularities, potentially related to differing mutational mecha- Primary fibroblasts cultures reveal TDP-43 abnormalities in nism / CNV gene content are presented. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis patients with and without SOD1 IEE has heterogeneous causes including many single gene disorders that mutations can be inherited or de novo; most are impossible to distinguish from each a. moncada, M. Sabatelli, a. conte, A. Del Grande, G. Marangi, P. doronzio, m. lucchini, m. other on clinical grounds alone and the identification of WWOX reiterates mirabella, a. romano, a. romano, r. piacentini, g. bisogni, s. lattante, m. luigetti, p. rossini, the essential movement towards whole genome SNV and CNV analysis as m. zollino; prerequisite in clinical assessment. Catholic University of Sacred Heart, roma, Italy. P S09
.137 Early onset epileptic encephalopathy in a male patient carrying an Xp11.23 deletion including the WDR45 gene. A landmark in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis research was the discovery of A. Abidi1,2, C. Mignon-Ravix1,2, P. Cacciagli1,2,3, N. Girard4, M. Milh1,2,5, L. Villard1,2; TDP-43 as major component of the abnormal protein aggregates that form 1Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France, skein-like and spherical inclusions or appear as diffuse granular material 3Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de La Timone, Marseille, France, 4Neuroradiologie, Hôpital in neuronal and glial cells. Additional studies have confirmed that TDP-43 de La Timone, Marseille, France, 5Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital de La Timone, plays a central role in the pathogenesis of ALS and related neurodegenera- Marseille, France. tive conditions, including frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin positive aggregates. Studies on ALS patients have consistently shown that, in addition to cytoplasm accumulation, TDP-43 undergoes post-translational Mutations in the WD repeat 45 (WDR45) gene been have recently identified 196 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOmTodLiAficNatDio,n sU, Kin c|l uWdiWng Why.pEeSrpHhGos.pOhoRrGylation, ubiquitination and cleava- in patients suffering from neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulationABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ge into small C terminal fragments (CTFs). In the present study we exami- gene revealed two previously unreported heterozygous mutations: a dele- ned TDP-43 expression in primary fibroblasts cultures from 22 ALS pati- tion (c.24527_24528delCT p. P8176
fsX8179) in exon 174 and a duplication ents, including cases with SOD1, TARDBP, FUS,  C9
ORF72 mutations and nine (c.24250_24253dupGTCA p.T8085fsX8100) in exon 171 in the DNA samp- patients without genetic defects. By using a phosphorylation-independent le of the patient with nemalin myopathy. In case of the patient suffering antibody, fifteen patients showed notable alterations of TDP-43 level in the from centronuclear myopathy, the genetic analysis detected a hemizygous nuclear or cytoplasmic compartments. In particular, a marked accumulation nonsense mutation (c.1456C/T p.Arg486X CM990881) in the MTM1 gene. of TDP-43 was observed in the cytoplasm of all cases with  C9
ORF72 and These mutations result in the formation of premature termination codons, TARDBP mutations, in one patient with FUS mutation and in three patients thus tey presumably leading to truncated nebulin and myotubularin prote- without genetic defects. In patients with SOD1 mutations, TDP-43 was si- ins. Our investigations have great importance for the affected families since gnificantly reduced in the nuclei and it lacked cytoplasmic mislocalization. they help family planning. Hopefully, these findings might also provide the These changes were associated with the presence of truncated and phos- basis of future studies for the development of novel therapeutic modalities phorylated TDP-43 species. Our findings show that fibroblasts from ALS in neurogenetic disorders. patients recapitulate some of hallmark TDP-43 abnormalities observed in PM10.04 neuronal cells. Though TDP-43 appears to be differentially processed in fi- Exome sequencing in a patient with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease broblasts versus neuronal cells from ALS patients, primary fibroblast cul- G. J. Braathen1,2,3, K. Tveten1, H. Høyer1, Ø. L. Holla1, Ø. L. Busk1; tures may represent a helpful tool to investigate TDP-43-mediated disease 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, mechanisms. Skien, Norway, 2Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 3Campus AHUS, Akershus University Hospital, University of PM10.02 Oslo, Nordbyhagen, Oslo, Norway. A novel mutation in the MYBP C1
 gene causes atypical Arthrogryposis Multiplex Background N. Ekhilevitch1, A. Kurolap1, D. Oz-Levi1, A. Mory1, T. Hershkovitz1, H. Mandel2,3, H. N. Baris-Feldman1,3; 1The Genetics Institue, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 2Metabolic Unit, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is characterized by progressive loss of Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 3Rappaport School of Medicine, Technion – the peripheral motor and sensory nerves and is the most common inherited Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. neuropathy, affecting 1 per 1,214 persons in the general population. More Introduction than 70 CMT genes have been identified. The duplication of peripheral mye- lin protein 22 (PM P22
) causes 20-50% of all CMT cases while point mutati- ons are assumed to cause the remaining CMT cases. Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is characterized by nonprogres- Genetic analysis to discover point mutations have traditionally been perfor- sive multiple joint contractures appearing at birth.We present a 20-months- med with the laborious and time consuming Sanger sequencing. old boy, the third child of Israeli-Druze first-degree cousins. He presented High-Throughput Sequencing (HTS) is fairly quick and to a low cost compa- with AMC, hypotonia, hearing impairment, FTT and mild motor delay. His red with old methods when sequencing many genes simultaneously. Exome older deceased sister was described with a similar but more severe pheno- sequencing is a technique for sequencing all the protein-coding genes in a type, which included AMC, cleft palate, feeding problems and severe deve- gMeantoemriea.l and Methods lopmental delay. The extended family includes a 16 y/o cousin presenting with isolated AMC, whose deceased sister was described with AMC and cleft palate. AR esspuolrtasdic CMT case and her parents were investigated with exome HTS AM evathrioadbsle intra-familial phenotype and expected autosomal recessive inhe- sequencing. ritance prompted molecular diagnosis by whole-exome sequencing. We identified a novel homozygous missense variant in the SET binding fac- Following informed consent by the parents, whole-exome sequencing was tCoorn 1c l(uSsBiFo1n) gene probably causing CMT in this family. conducted on the child‘s genomic DNA. Variant analysis focused on rare ho- mReoszuylgtosus changes, followed by validation of candidate variants via Sanger sequencing and segregation analysis. MYBP C1
 To our knowledge, this is the second CMT family with SBF1 mutation. P S10
.05 Exome analysis revealed a homozygous missense variant in the Copy number variations in a population-based study of Charcot- gene,NM_001254718.1:c.481G>A (p. E161
K), affecting the last nucleotide of Marie-Tooth disease eDxiosncu 6s.s Tiohnis novel variant was not observed in the common variant databa- H. Høyer1,2,3, G. J. Braathen1,2,3, A. K. Eek1, G. B. N. Nordang1, L. Strand1, C. F. Skjelbred1, M. ses aMndY BsPegCr1egated as expected within the extended family. B. Russell2,3; 1Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway, 2Head and Neck The gene encodes a slow skeletal muscle isoform, essential for mu- Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 3Campus Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, Nordbyhagen, Norway. scle contraction. Heterozygous mutations in this gene are associated with distal arthrogryposis type 1bM, YwBhPeCr1eas a homozygous nonsense mutation is implicated in lethal congenital contracture syndrome 4. Our family expands the phenotypic spectrum of mutations. Our novel c.481G>A variant Copy number variations (CNVs) are important in relation to diversity and alters the last nucleotide of the exon 6 and therefore may affect splicing, evolPuMtioPn2,2 b ut can sometimes cause disease. The most common genetic cau- allowing residual protein function which leads to a milder phenotype. se of the inherited peripheral neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the duplication; otherwise, CNVs have been considered rare. P S10
.03 WPMeP in2v2e stigated CNVs in a population-based sample of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Mutation screening in rare myopathies (CMT) families. The 81 CMT families had previously been screened for the E. Horváth1, N. Nagy1,2,3, S. Tamási4, K. Farkas2, M. Széll1,2; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, duplication and point mutations in 51 peripheral neuropathy genes, 2Dermatological Research Group of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, University of a genetic cause was identified in 37 CMT families (46%). Index patients Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 3Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of from the 44 CMT families with an unknown genetic diagnosis were analysed Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 4Géza Hetényi Hospital of the Jász-Nagykun-Szolnok County, by whole-genome array comparative genomic hybridMizFaNti2on to MinPvZestigate Szolnok, Hungary. the entire genome for larger CNPVMs, Pa2n2d multiplex li gation-dependent probe amplification to detect smaller intragenomic CNVs in and CNT.NA P2
 LOAnMe pAa2tientS hEaMdA t5hAe pathogenic duplicationnot detected by previous The myopathies are neuromuscular disorders in which the primary sym- methods. Three. patients had potentially pathogenic CNVs in the , ptom is muscle weakness due to dysfunction of muscle fiber. Other sym- or ,L Ai.eM. Ag2enes relateCdN tToN nAePu2romusScEuMlaAr5 oAr neurodevelop- ptoms of myopathy can include include muscle cramps, stiffness, and spasm. mental disease Genotype and phenotype correlation indicated likely pa- The aim of our study was to identify the underlying genetic abnormalities thogenicity for thPeM  P22
 CNV, the and CNVs remained in case of two patients with rare myopathies. A 4-year-old Hungarian boy potentially pathogenic. presenting with the clinical and histological findings of nemaline myopathy Except from the duplication, disease causing CNVs are rare but may type 2, and a 5-month-old infant with the histological diagnosis of centro- cause CMT in about 1% (95% CI 0-7%) of the Norwegian CMT families. nuclear myopathy were investigated. Peripheral blood samples were taken from the patients and genomic DNA was isolated. Direct sequencing of the NEB and MTM1 genes was perfoErmSeHdG. T h2e0 m1u5t a|t iGonL AscSreGenOinWg o, fS tCheO NTELBA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 197ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM10.06 Identification of causal genes in Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome by whole exome sequencing. Neurodegenerative diseases are becoming increasingly prevalent with the E. O‘Connor, A. Töpf, J. Müller, S. Laval, H. Lochmüller; aging population, and are among the major contributors to disability and MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, IGM, Newcastle University., Newcastle Upon disease worldwide. The identification of the gene defects responsible has Tyne, United Kingdom. played a major role in our understanding of the pathogenic processes invol- Background ved, and provided opportunity to develop targeted treatment strategies. The neuromuscular junction (NMJ) is a specialised synapse with a complex molecular architecture that provides for reliable transmission between the Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of genetically hetero- nerve terminal and muscle fibre. We previously identified a mutation in SL- geneous disorders characterised by compromised function at the NMJ. CMS  C5
A7, which encodes the presynaptic choline transporter critical for nor- manifests in childhood with fatigable weakness of limb, ocular and bulbar mal NMJ signalling, as the cause of a dominantly-inherited motor neurone mAiumscsles. There are ~20% patients with a clinical diagnosis that still remain disease (distal hereditary motor neuropathy type VII; dHMN-VII). We esta- genetically undiagnosed despite over 20 known CMS genes. blished that the mutation responsible resulted in the dominant-negative Methods interference of the mutant molecule with function of the wild type choli- To identify novel CMS genes by whole exome sequencing (WES). ne transporter, resulting in significantly reduced (although not completely abolisheSdL)C t5rAan7sporter activity. Here, we investigated a second family with DNA from a cohort of patients with a clinical diagnosis of CMS was sent to clinical features overlapping those of dHMN-VII. We identified a distinct fra- deCODE genetics for WES. Variants in the exome were filtered to exclude meshift mutation indicative of a similar dominant-negative disease those with a frequency greater than 1%, those unlikely to significantly im- mechanism. We also modelled the mutation identified in a cell-based sy- pact the protein or not compatible with the inheritance model.i nR evmitraoining stem to investigate transporter function. Together our findings corroborate ivna rviiavnots were segregated within the families. Three potential candidate ge- a dominant-negative disease mechanism arising from SL C5
A7 mutation as nes were identified in four families, which were then analysed and a cause of dHMN-VII, and provide further insight into the role of aberrant where possible. Zebrafish orthologues were identified for two of the choline transporter function in neurological disease. gReenseusl,t sthese were then knocked down via antisense morpholino oligonu- Supported by MRC grant G1002279 and the Neurosciences Research Foun- cleotide (MO) injection and phenotype investigated. dation. P S10
.09 MO injection in zebrafish for two genes caused abnormal movement in re- Algorithm of molecular genetic investigation in Duchenne muscular sCpoonncsleu stioo tnactile stimulation, shortening and abnormal branching of motor dystrophy (case report) axons, poorly defined somites and disorganisation of muscle fibres. P. Hedvicakova1, J. Haberlova2, J. Drabova1, Z. Musova1, L. Apltova1, J. Zamecnik3, F. Losan4, A. Krepelova1; Three genes have been identified as possible causative genes in CMS by 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University WES. The preliminary studies carried out on zebrafish demonstrated phe- in Prague and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of notypes consistent with CMS such as disorganisation of muscle architecture Paediatric Neurology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Pathology and Molecular and abnormal branching of motor axons. To confirm results obtained using Medicine, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and Motol University MOs, we plan to utilise CRISPR technology to target the genes in zebrafish. Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Genetika Plzeň, Ltd., Plzen, Czech Republic. P S10
.07 A case of TTN-related autosomal recessive congenital centronuclear myopathy Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) is an X–linked neuro- T. Adyan1, G. Rudenskaya1, S. Artemieva2, V. Sukhorukov2, A. Polyakov1; muscular disorder characterised by progressive muscular weakness. The 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Institute incidence is 1 in 3500 male births. for Clinical Pediatrics Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, We present an atypical case of a 6-year-old boy without family history, with Russian Federation. a partial deletion of exon 51 of the DMD/BMD gene, which has not been de- scribed yet. We show the algorithm of investigation and methods used. MLPA investigation performed at the age of 2 years has proved neither a de- Gene TTN (titin; locus 2q31.2) is responsible for several phenotypes: cardio- letion, nor a duplication. Sequencing of the whole gene revealed a possible myopathies and skeletal myopathies with or without heart involvement dif- partial deletion of exon 51. The range of this deletion was determined using fering by inheritance, age of onset and other features. Centronuclear (myo- aCGH. Primers located behind the deletion were selected and the resulting tubular) myopathy, in its turn, is clinically and genetically heterogeneous, PCR product was sequenced, revealing the deletion of the last 60bp of exon MYF6-, DNM2-, BIN1-, MTM1-, CCD C78
-related forms are known. Recently 51 and a huge part of intron 51 (over 27kb). Thus the donor splice site is several cases of TTN-related recessive congenital centronuclear myopathy destroyed. were described (Ceyhan-Birsoy et al, 2013). We present another case in The investigation of the mRNA obtained from the muscle biopsy of the pati- 7-year-old boy, an only child in Russian family. In three weeks he underwent ent ascertained the occurrence of three transcription products, two of which surgery on coarctation of aorta. By 1-2 years congenital myopathy became changing the reading frame and subsequently leading to a premature stop evident. Myopathy was predominantly proximal, with CPK 1000-1300 U/l, codon, the third one lacking the last 46 codons of exon 51. early knee and ankles contractures, kyphoscoliosis, pectus carinatum, feet The diagnosis could have been determined thanks to the cooperation of se- deformation, mild facial dysmorphism and no cardiomyopathy. Mental de- veral departments. A clinical geneticist and neurologist expressed suspicion velopment and brain MRI were normal. Muscle biopsy performed in five of the disease based on elevated liver enzymes. The convincing clinical pic- years detected centronuclear myopathy. DNM2 and MTM1 mutations were tSuurpep ofurrtethde rb yd egvrealnotp ifnogr lceodn ctoe pdteueapl edre ivnevloepstmigeantti oonf arnedse waricthh tohreg ahneilzpa toifo na not found. By that time the boy sat independently and crawled actively. With further periodic treatment in China he was improving and recently began to mUnoilveecrusliatyr Hcyotsopgietanle Mticoitsotl a0n0d0 6a 4p2a0th3 oflroogmis tth teo Mthien ipstrreyc iosfe H deiaagltnho osfis t.he Czech walk with bent spine and self-support (hands on knees). In Beijing DEYI Cli- Republic. nical Laboratory exome sequencing was performed. Of numerous findings those in TTN were of probable diagnostic value: сompound heterozygosity for mutations c.94123G>T (exon 358) and c.98868insA (exon 360) of pater- PM10.10 nal and maternal origin correspondingly were detected. We tested results by Survival in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Sanger sequencing. Clarified TTN genotype was: c.[94120insA,94123G>T] + cardiomyopathy in long-term follow-up. [98868insA]. The diagnosis permits prenatal/preimplantation DNA testing M. Treneva, O. Groznova; Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics at Pirogov Russian National Research in the family. Coarctation of aorta in the child is evidently independent. Medical Universi, Moscow, Russian Federation. PM10.08 Mutation of SL C5
A7 associated with distal hereditary motor neuropathy K. E. S. Barwick1, M. A. Bower2, M. M. McEntagart3, D. Walk4, A. H. Crosby1; Purpose: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients often have cardio- 1RILD Wellcome Wolfson Centre, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Genetic myopathy. Unsuccessful treatment of Counselling, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 3St. George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Neurology, University of congestive heart failure symptoms in DMD patients is a big problem. Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States. Methods: in 68 patients follow-up was from 6 up to 18 years (all with verified mutations of dystrophin gene). Cardiac examination was 198 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOmTadLeA. ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Result: all the patients were found to have indications for the use of an ACE same haplotype of the X chromosome to three of her sons, of which only two inhibitor and almost half of the children had those for the administration of are sick and carrying the deletion of exons 61 and 62 of the Dystrphin gene. beta-blocker. Patients were divided in two groups: group I (n=35) received This can be explained by the presence of two cell populations in the germ long-term courses of an ACE inhibitor (captopril in a dose of 0,5 mg/kg/ cells of the mother: one carries the deletion and the other not, allowing a day) random transmission of the disease to her sons. and a beta-blocker (metoprolol by individually adjusting its dose). Despite P S10
.13 recommendations, Group 2 (n=33) were not treated with the above drugs. MuSK - a new target for lethal fetal akinesia deformation sequence Mortality (FADS) in group I during the follow-up period was 37% (13 patients), in group II M. Wilbe1, S. Ekvall1, K. Eurenius2, K. Ericson1,3, O. Casar-Borota1,3, J. Klar1, N. Dahl1, A. - 60% Ameur1, G. Annerén1, M. Bondeson1; (20 patients). In group I mean death age was 21,15 years, in group II - 1Immunology, Genetics and Pathology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 18,25 years (no significant difference were found). The part of survived 2Women‘s and Children‘s Health, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Pathology and Cytology, Uppsala, Sweden. patients to the age of 21 years was significantly higher in group I: related frequency 0,77 (95% CI 0,5983⋯0,94) versus 0,39 (95% CI 0,19⋯0,5974). Conclusion: early s tarted long-term treatment by ACE inhibitor Fetal akinesia is clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders, with the and a beta-blockerin patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy common feature defined as reduced or loss of fetal movement. Several di- significantly increased the part of survived patients to the age of 21 years. sease genes of fetal akinesia have been described, but the genetic etiology of majority of cases is still unknown. P S10
.11 We report on a family with recurrent fetal loss, where the parents had five Identification of a synonymous variant as disease causing mutation in affected fetuses with fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS [MIM a DMD carrier 208150]) and one healthy child. The fetuses displayed no fetal movements J. Sanz1, D. Niedrist2, S. Gallati1, F. Joncourt1; 1Division of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute for from gestational age of 17 weeks, extended knee joints, flexed hips and el- Medical Genetics, Zürich, Switzerland. bows and clenched hands. There was polyhydramnion and no visible fetal stomach. Whole exome sequenMciunSgK w ere performed on a family trio and only one candidate homozygous variant was identified in the fetus, c.40dupA A fifty year old woman was referred to our laboratory for analysis of the (p.Thr14Asnfs*9), located in (muscle, skeletal, receptor tyrosine ki- dystrophin gene. Her brother had died from Duchenne muscular dystrophy nase). Segregation analysis revealed homozygosity for all affected fetuses, with unknown molecular cause. BasDedM oDn elevated CK-levels in 1988 she while the variant was not present in the healthy child. The c.40dupA variant had been identified as probable DMD carrier. After exclusion of a large de- leads to a frameshift in MuSK predicting a premature stop codon, but the letion/duplication sequencing of the coding region revealed the novel mutated mRNA is not cleared by nonsense-mediated decay pathway, which heterozygous variant: c.1329C>T. The substitution is synonymous, but as it is currently under investigation. is located near the end of exon 11, an effect on splicing was suspected. In MuSK is an agrin-dependent receptor tyrosine kinase required for formati- order to prove or exclude such an effect transcript analysis was essential. A on of the neuromuscular junction and missense mutations in this gene have muscle biopsy was not feasible and the possibility of creating a lymphobla- previously been described in congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS). In- stoid cell line was lacking. Therefore RNA extraction from buccal and nasal terestingly, MuSK is located in the same acetylcholine receptor pathway as epithelial cells was attempted. EvenD MthDough full length dystrophin is not ex- several other genes reported to cause CMS and/or FADS. pected to be expressed in these tissues, nasal epithelial cells, but not buccal Additional families with intra-uterine fetal death, fetal akinesia and FADS cells, proved to be a good source of mRNA for our purpose. An aberrant are under currently under investigation, aiming to increase knowledge of transcript not present in a normal control was identified, reamplified and genetic etiology in unresolved cases. sequenced. The aberrant transcript was found to lack the four last bases of PM10.14 exoinn s1il1ic, or.1328_1331delGCAA, thus leading to a frameshift and a premature GJB1 mutations in Croatian CMT patients stop codon, p.(Ser443Ilefs*5). The results were in accordance with sever- A. Merkler1, Z. Mitrovic1, J. Sertic1,2; al analyses. Taken together our findings yield convincing evidence, 1University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia. that c.1329C>T indeed is a disease causing mutation. Furthermore, nasal epithelial cells, which in contrast to muscle biopsies and blood samples can be obtained in a non-invasive way, proved to be a good alternative material for transcript analysis. Introduction: In heterogeneous group of hereditary motor and sensory CMT neuropathies, GJB1 mutations causing M.Charcot-Marie-Tooth X type 1 (CM- PM10.12 TX1) are considered to be second most common, following PM P22
 variants. Genetic confirmation of germline mosaicism in a Duchenne muscular The disease is most often characterized by severe distal muscles weakness dystrophy Tunisian family and atrophy, sensory loss and foot deformity. Female carriers can be mildly M. Gribaa1, W. Manoubi1,1, A. Mili1, H. Ben Hamouda2, S. Sassi1, I. Ben Charfeddine1, A. Amara1, I. Chatti1, D. Hmida1, A. Chaieb3, A. Saad1; affected or asymptomatic. The diagnosis is suspected on NCV profile, fea- 1Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology turing an intermediate velocity range. We report the results of GJB1 clinical Farhat Hached University, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Pediatrics, Tahar Sfar and molecular study in the first series of Croatian CMT patients. University Hospital, Mahdia, Tunisia, 3Department of Pediatrics, Farhat Hached Objective: The detection and phenotypic characterization of GJB1 mutations University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. in Croatian CMT patients. Materials and methods: Following clinical and EMG examination, 22 suspec- ted samples from 18 families, negative for PMP dupl/del, were analyzed for Introduction: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked recessive the mutations in GJB1 coding region. Applied Biosystems 3130xl Genetic genetic dystrophinopathy related to the absence of Dystrophin cytoskeletal analyzer and BigDye® Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit were used. protein. This disease affects generally boys; women are vectors. The prediction of new variants pathogenicity was made with PolyPhen-2 Objective: In this context, we report a molecular study in a Tunisian family software. affected by DMD. Genetic analysis showed a particular transmission profile Results: GJB1 missense point mutations were found in 12 patients from 9 fa- indicating a maternal germline mosaicism. milies (7 heterozygous, 5 hemizygous). In 3 unrelated families p.Val170Asp Patients and methods: Here we report a family composed by four boys and was found. In each of the remaining 6 families different mutations were two girls. Genetic study was performed by MLPA and a modified fluorescent found (p.Leu108Pro, p.Val13Met, p.Ser49Pro, p.Arg183His). Two mutations PCR (TP-PCR). MLPA allowed deletions and duplications analysis of different were not described previously: p.Phe141Ser (c.422T>C) and p.Val177Met dystrophin’s gene exons. Genotyping of six microsatellite markers, using the (c.529G>A). Very severe phenotype was characteristic of novel p.Phe141Ser TP-PCR technique, helped to establish the haplotype of each individual and in hemizygous and also heterozygous state. Cardinal phenotypic features to follow its transmission in this family. are compared. Result: MLPA showed, in both affected boys, a deletion of the exons 61 and Conclusions: GJB1 mutations were found in one half of CMTX1 suspected pa- 62 of the Dystrophin gene. However, the genotyping study revealed the pre- tients/families. In hemizygous and also heterozygous patients, phenotype is sence of the disease associated haplotype in three boys in whom one is phe- often severe, yet varies from mild/asymptomatic to devastating, with ear- notypically healthy with no deletion responsible for the disease. liest distal sensory involvement. Discussion and Conclusion: Genetic analysis showed a particular transmis- sion profile indicating a maternaE l gS eH rmG li n2 e0 m1 o5 sa | i cG isL mA . SS hG e tO raW ns, m S itC teO d T thL eA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 199ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S10
.15 Limoges, France, 4Cytogenetic Department, CHU of Limoges, Limoges, France, 5Genetic GNE variants in a family with a complex neurological syndrome Department, Henri-Mondor’s Hospital, Paris, France, 6Biochemistry and Molecular E. Koschmidder1, I. Brænne2, B. Arif3, S. Naz3, S. Hinderlich4, C. Klein1, K. Lohmann1; Genetic Department, CHU of Limoges, Limoges, France. 1Institute of Neurogenetics, Luebeck, Germany, 2Institute for Integrative and Experimental Genomics, Luebeck, Germany, 3School of Biological Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan, 4Department of Life Sciences and Technology, Beuth University of Applied Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSc) are a highly interesting solution to Sciences, Berlin, Germany. create and observe the behavior of specific and unattainable cells from a patient. Our team is interested in genetic peripheral nerves disease and in particular in Charcot-Marie-Tooth pathology (CMT). One ofG oDuArP o1bjectives is A consanguineous Pakistani family with a complex neurological syndrome the development of motoneurons models from patients using the iPSc stra- including dystonia, pyramidal signs, limited speech, and hearing loss (Arif tegy in order to better understand the pathophysiology of gene. This et al. Mov Disord 2011;26:2279-2283) was investigated. An autosomal re- gene was described in 1998 to be responsible for a CMT axonal form and it cessive mode of inheritance was assumed in the five affected siblings. The encodes a mitochondrial outer membrane protein, but its function is still ancestors and two siblings were healthy. In order to identify the genetic unclear. GDA P1
 cause, genome sequencing was performed in two patients. Filtering for We first obtained dermal fibroblasts (DF) from skin biopsies of a healthy rare, shared, homozygous variants, predicted to alter the protein sequence person and of a homozygous patient carrying nonsense mutati- revealed variants in six different genes (FER1 L6
, AB P1
, DIAPH3, DUS P5
, on. Then, we reprogrammed DFs into iPSc using non-integrative plasmids EMG1, MP P2
). Since none of the variants segregated within the family, fil- (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and cMyc). After amplification, all quality controls were tering for compound heterozygous variants identified eight candidate genes performed to conclude that our iPSc had the same properties and capacities (SQLE, SPRED1, GNE, LEFTY1, MYH9, CD C42
BPA, DHX57, STAB1). Only the than embryonic stem cells and a normal karyotype. Finally, we optimized two variants in GNE (p.R101C, p. L332
F [NP_005467]) segregated with the protocols to successfully differentiate these iPSc into rosettes (structures disease in the family. While  L332
F was novel and not found in ethnically full of neural progenitors), then into neurons and finally into motoneurons matched controls, R101C had a minor allele frequency of 0.3% in 190 Paki- for control and GDA P1
 patients. stani controls and of 0.002% among Europeans at http://exac.broadinstitu- Generation of motoneuroinns-v uitsriong axonal CMT-patient-derived iPSc was a te.org/gene/ENSG00000164116. Both variants are in-silico predicted to be first crucial step to better understand the role of GDA P1
 in this pathology. pathogenic and are located in the epimerase domain of Glucosamine (UDP- Dynamic study of these motoneurons, like observing their mito- N-acetyl)-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE). GNE encodes a chondria in real time, will be then possible. The endpoint of this study will bifunctional enzyme needed for the rate-limiting step in sialic acid synthe- be to perform screenings of various drugs, so as to restore the function of sis. Experiments to access epimerase activity in the mutants are underway. these cells. Mutations in GNE are known to cause GNE-related myopathy and sialuria. PM10.18 A disease-causing effect of our GNE variants might suggest pleiotropy for Whole exome sequencing approach in genetic diagnosis of limb girdle mutations in GNE. However, results are based on a single family only. Thus, muscular dystrophy. further research is warranted to elucidate the full phenotypic spectrum of J. P. Fichna1, A. Macias2, M. Szymczyk2, A. Kamińska2, C. Żekanowski1; GNE mutations. 1Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University of Warsaw, This study was supported by the German Research Foundation (LO Warsaw, Poland. 1553/8-1). PM10.16 Results of multigene panel testing for inherited peripheral Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) is a heterogeneous groupl oocfi ge- neuropathy reveal a high prevalence of autosomal recessive genetic netically determined disorders, characterized by primary or predominantly aetiology, not restricted to severe early onset disease proximal distribution of muscle weakness. So far over 25 different as- R. Whittington1, S. Burton-Jones1, N. Forrester1, D. Lim2, T. Willis3, G. Dennis1, D. Smith1, sociated with the disease have been identified. However, a large overlap of M. Williams1, T. Antoniadi1; phenotypic manifestations resulting from different gene mutations poses a 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Clinical challenge for determination of the exact type of the muscular disease. Mo- Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women’s Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, reover new genes are still to be discovered as up to 50% clinical LGMD cases United Kingdom, 3The Muscle team, Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Hospital, Oswestry, United Kingdom. are left without molecular diagnosis. To accelerate molecular diagnosis and to find novel genes involved in the di- sease we have adapted Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) workflow. Variants prioritisation was based on predicted pathogenicity, dbSNP information, Inherited peripheral neuropathy (IPN) is a clinically and genetically hetero- and affected molecular pathways. geneous group of disorders involving more than 90 genes and various modes So far weC hAaPvNe3 anDaYlSyFseFdK gRePnoAmNiOc 5DNPALE sCa1mplesS fGrCoAm 34 LGMD patients, and of inheritance. Since July 2013 we have provided a 56-gene IPN NGS panel in 17 cases we found mutations in the genes already associated with the assay as a specialist UK Genetic Testing Network service. This is a frontline disease: , , , , and TTN. TDwEoS pCaOtiLen6Ats2 hCadO Lm6oAr3e diagnostic tool and has largely replaced single-gene Sanger sequencing. Of LthDaBn3 o/nZeA SkPnoRwYnR g1enLeM aNfAfecLteAdR.G AEpaNrtE fBroFmL NcaCusative mutations also additio- the 56 genes included, 26 are associated with an autosomal recessive form nal variants in genes related to muscle diseases ( , , , , of the condition, and for the majority of those no diagnostic service was pre- , , , , , ) that might contribute to the viously available. clinical phenotype were found. During the first 18 months more than 500 patient results were issued fol- Genetic diagnosis was possible more often in a group clinically determined lowing IPN gene panel testing. Of all the positive diagnostic results, up to as dysferlinopathies and calpainopathies with 14 out of 20 patients harbou- one third involved recessive genes. We present the distribution of recessi- ring pathological variants in known genes. In the group of 14 patients with ve cases, the genes and phenotypes involved, and highlight individual case less typical phenotype instant genetic diagnosis was made only in three ca- studies. ses. Genetic etiology of patients without mutations in already known LGMD Autosomal recessive inheritance might typically be expected in severe, early genes is being further investigated. onset, progressive neuropathy; however in our cohort a large proportion of The research was supported by the KNOW-MMRC project (JPF). patients were over 18 upon genetic diagnosis, including some cases assu- med to be sporadic. This broadens the spectrum of phenotypes associated PM10.20 with recessive genes. LMNA related Congenital Muscular Dystrophy (L-CMD) - clinical Our data shows that gene panel testing is a powerful, unbiased approach for review of patients diagnosed at the Newcastle MRC centre for genetic diagnosis in IPN. It provides a higher diagnostic yield, faster and at Neuromuscular Diseases in the last 10 years. a lower cost than sequential single-gene screening of the proband, allowing M. Bertoli, J. Hudson, H. Lochmüller, V. Straub, K. Bushby; efficient clinical management and family follow-up. Newcastle University John Walton Centre for Muscular Dystrophy Research, MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre for Life, P S10
.17 Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. IPS cells creation to generate iPSc-derived motor neurons: a new cellular model to progress in the understanding of the axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Lamin A/C related muscular dystrophies can present in adulthood as Limb- P. Faye1, N. Vedrenne2, L. Richard1,3, S. Bourthoumieu1,4, B. Funalot5, F. Sturtz1,6, A. Lia1,6; girdle muscular dystrophy 1B and an autosomal dominant form of Emery- 1EA6309 Myelinic Maintenance and Peripheral Neuropathies, Faculty of Medicine and Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, or at birth or in very early infancy. Because of Pharmacy, Limoges, France, 2EA 3842 Cellular Homeostasis and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Limoges, France, 3Neurology Department , CHU of Limoges, the risk of a life threatening cardiac involvement early diagnosis is crucial. We review the clinical presentation and medical history of a cohort of 10 pa- 200 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG tients with a laminopathy associated to an early onset muscular dystrophyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (L-CMD, Lamin-related Congenital Muscular Dystrophy). Age at last clinical individual DM2 patient which is in accordance with previous speculations assessment was 1 to 38 years (mean age 13 years).The severity of the mus- in the literature. In order to use this method in routine diagnosis, impro- cular involvement is variable, presenting at birth with severe neonatal hypo- vement of the detection limit is needed to distinguish normal alleles from tonia or in early infancy with an abnormal gait. Contractures and rigid spine short but pathogenic expansions. can be present at birth but most frequently develop during childhood. Onset P S10
.23 of other complications is also variable: severe feeding difficulties were ob- Progressive muscular dystrophies child (about 24 case) served in two patients requiring PEG insertion at 4 and 8 years respectively; m. abbassi1, l. bouguenouch1, s. hanane1, f. moufid1, s. chaouki2, M. Hida3, k. ouldim1; impaired respiratory function requiring non invasive nocturnal ventilation 1Unit of medical genetics and oncogenetics, CHU Fes, fes, Morocco, 2(2) Pediatrics was observed in two patients at 4 and at 35 years. Symptomatic cardiac ar- department University Hospital Hassan II Fes, fes, Morocco, 3(2) Pediatrics department rhythmias requiring defibrillator or pacemaker implantation were observed University Hospital Hassan II Fes, fes, Morocco. in two patients, and one patient had asymptomatic sinus tachycardia and Progressive muscular dystrophies child diastolic dysfunction at 5 years. (about 24 case) Due to the variable severity of the phenotype an early clinical diagnosis can be challenging, and the interpretation of a novel genetic variants, which re- quires particular care due to the possible cardiac risk of family members, M.ABBASSI(1), L.BOUGUENOUCH(1), H.SAYEL(1), FZ.MOUFID(1) ,S. CHAOU- can even be more complex and requires active interaction between the clini- KI (2), M.HIDA(2), K.OULDIM(1) cian and the genetic laboratory. (1) Unit of medical genetics and oncogenetics, Central Laboratory for Medical P S10
.21 Analysis, University Hospital Hassan II Fes Bilateral congenital lumbar hernias in a patient with central core (2) disease - a case report J. Lazier1, J. K. Mah2, A. Nikolic3, V. Samedi4, X. C. Wei5, C. Fajardo4, M. Brindle6, R. Pediatrics department University Hospital Hassan II Fes Perrier1,7, M. A. Thomas1,7; Progressive muscular dystrophies, term proposed by Erb in 1884, form a 1Department of Medical Genetics, Alberta Children‘s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada, set of neuromuscular diseases of various etiologies and different severities. 2Section of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Cumming School of Medicine, These are diseases characterized by progressive degeneration of muscle University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 3Division of Neuropathology, Department fibers with a histological formula necrosis refresh characteristic; they also of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Calgary and Calgary Laboratory show great phenotypic and genotypic heterogeneity. Services, Calgary, AB, Canada, 4Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, In this present study, we were interested to take stock of the Sacroglyca- University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 5Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 6Department of Surgery, Alberta noapthies due to their greater frequency in Morocco and their very close cli- Children‘s Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 7Department of nical characteristics, as well as the implementation of molecular diagnostics Pediatrics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. in the Laboratory Molecular Biology. Based on the received clinical data, 24 patients with progressive muscular dystrophies were analyzed by PCR-SSCP screening SGCG the gene, more par- Congenital lumbar hernias are rare malformations caused by defects in the ticularly by targeting c.del525T mutation in exon 6 of the gene, followed by development of the posterior abdominal wall. A known association exists sequencing of the disputed region. with lumbocostovertebral syndrome, however other associated anomalies Molecular tests we conducted showed that approximately 40% of patients have been previously reported, including one case with arthrogryposis, sug- had a deletion in the c.del525T SGCG gene in the homozygous state. This gesting an association with myopathy. We present an infant girl with bilate- frequency clearly showed the molecular level the high frequency of these ral congenital lumbar hernias, multiple joint contractures, decreased muscle diseases in our country and stressed the importance of testing a priority in bulk and symptoms of malignant hyperthermia. Molecular testing revealed our patients. an R4186C mutation in the ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) gene, known to be The diagnostic approach that we used in our study seems well suited for associated with central core disease. This is the first reported case of a child driving in the first instance in our country, especially as it has the advantage with congenital lumbar hernias and central core disease. of easily allowing a differential diagnosis. Stromal interaction molecule 1 (STIM1), which modulates calcium flow PM10.24 through RYR1, plays an important role in skeletal muscle differentiation. MYH7 exon 31 mutations within the rod domain cause autosomal Mutations in STIM1 have been previously shown to result in immunodefici- dominant muscular dystrophy in two un-related Jewish Moroccan ency and myopathy. It is possible that downstream RYR1 mutations may also families impair store-operated calcium entry, leading to altered calcium-dependent M. Feinstein-Linial1, M. Buvoli2, A. Buvoli2, M. Sade3, D. Dayan1, L. A. Leinwand2, O. S. signalling pathways that interrupt muscle differentiation and development. Birk1; This case suggests an expansion of the central core disease phenotype to 1Morris Kahn laboratory of human genetics at the national institute of biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 2Department of molecular, cellular and developmental include congenital lumbar hernias. biology, university of Colorado, Boulder, CO, United States, 3Department of PM10.22 neuromuscular diseases , Wolfson medical center, Holon, Israel. Genetic diagnosis of the Myotonic Dystrophies by Molecular Combing M. Larsen1, S. Rost1, J. Komatsu2, N. Frankenbach2, A. Bensimon2, C. R. Müller1; 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 2Genomic Skeletal myofibers are characterized by the expression of particular myo- Vision, Paris, France. sin isoforms. In slow twitch, type I fibers, which display oxidative metabo- lism and high endurance, the predominant myosin is MYH7, encoding the slow/β-cardiac MYH. MYH7 mutations have been associated with at least Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 and 2 (DM1, DM2) together represent the most 5 different clinical phenotypes, among them are Dilated Cardiomyopathy common muscular dystrophies in adults with a frequency of 1:8000. Both 1S/ Left Ventricular Noncompaction 5 (MIM613426), Familial Hypertrophic diseases are associated with an expansion of a microsatellite repeat within Cardiomyopathy 1 (MIM192600), Laing Distal Myopathy (MIM160500), the untranslated regions of two different genes, DMPK and ZNF9, respec- Myosin Storage Myopathy (MIM608358) and Scapuloperoneal Syndrome, tively. Myopathic Type (MIM181430). Two unrelated families of Jewish Moroccan Currently, the gold standard for genetic DM diagnosis is Southern blotting ancestry presented with apparently autosomal dominant heredity with par- by which the repeat sizes for DM1 can be determined accurately. This is tial penetrance of a unique progressive muscular dystrophy somewhat re- not the case for DM2, due to the somatic instability of the expanded alleles. miniscent of Laing Distal Myopathy. Whole exome sequencing identified in Therefore, we developed an alternative diagnostic technique for DM based both families two different heterozygous mutations within exon 31 of MYH7: on molecular combing in oirnd esirt uto analyze both repeat loci in parallel and to c.4309G>C (p.Ala1437Pro) and c.4301G>C (p.Arg1434Pro). Each of the mu- quantify expanded DM2 alleles. tations impair myosin self-assembly properties and has dominant negative Molecular Combing is an hybridization like technique where locus activity in nonmuscle cells, as was demonstrated in COS-7 cells transfected specific probes are hybridized to uniformly stretched genomic DNA. Dif- with β-myosin constructs carrying the mutations. Of MYH7 mutations, pro- ferent loci can be detected by individually designed probes. We designed line mutations within the Rod domain were shown to cause Laing distal a diagnostic protocol for assaying the DM1 and DM2 loci together in one myopathy and to be the most damaging to MYH7 Rod domain. Thus, our approach. The two loci including the repeat itself are reliable detected by functional studies demonstrate that the Laing-like partly-penetrant myopa- two different probe sets and repeat sizes can be measured directly with an thy stems from mutations affecting the myosin rod domain. accuracy of 0.8 kb (±0.4). For the first time, the Molecular Combing DM-test allows for a quantification of expaEnSdHedG D M220-1al5le l|e sG oLnA siSngGleO mWol,e cSuCleOs. TWLeA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 201 demonstrate that there is a wide size range of repeats in the sample of anABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S10
.25 P S10
.27 Healthy, premutation and mutation range myotonic dystrophy type The importance of developing the Hellenic Neuromuscular Disorders 2 alleles - seeking the approximate borders between stable and (HNDR) Registry unstable repeat motifs K. Kosma, K. Kekou, C. Sofokleous, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, E. Kanavakis; J. Radvanszky1,2, E. Radvanska3, E. Nagyova2, P. Spalek4, A. Valachova5, T. Szemes2, G. Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece. Minarik2,6, L. Kadasi1,2; 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius The Department of Medical Genetics of Athens University has been the re- University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Neonatology, Faculty Hospital, Nove ference centre for neuromuscular disorders in Greece since 1990, being the Zamky, Slovakia, 4Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Trencin, Slovakia, 6Institute first lab to offer routine molecular diagnosis and prenatal testing for DMD/ of Molecular BioMedicine, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, BMD (Duchenne / Becker Muscular Dystrophy), SMA (Spinal Muscular Atro- Slovakia. phy) , Myotonic Dystrophy and FSHMD. On 2012 the first national registry for neuromuscular disorders in Greece [Hellenic Neuromuscular Disorder Registry, HNDR)] was created, while on Introduction: Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is caused by expansion of a 2013 it has been connected with TREAT-NMD network. Currently the soft- (CCTG)n repeat in the CNB P1
 gene. In healthy-range alleles the repeat is ge- ware is configured to register patients with DMD/BMD and SMA disorders nerally interrupted by one or more GCTG, TCTG or ACTG motifs. Uninterrup- and up to now we have included data on 155 patients, from which 18 have ted tracts were, however, described in expanded alleles as well as in larger SMA and the rest DMD/BMD. healthy-range alleles which are generally considered as DM2 premutations. The HNDR has become a hub for information and awareness for the public The threshold for pathogenicity is still poorly described in the literature, and the means to link patients and their families with scientists in Greece while the smallest reported pathogenic alleles had 55 and 75 CCTG repeats, and all over the world. This structure also enables patients to volunteer for respectively. research therapeutic protocols, opening the way for the creation of trial Materials and methods: For DNA analyses we used conventional PCR and centers in our country. Beyond that, this database has been proven helpful bi-directional repeat-primed PCR complemented by Sanger sequencing and in the research for neuromuscular disorders therapy, genotype-phenotype targeted massively parallel sequencing where needed. correlation, and population studies. The HNDR publicizes the extent of the Results: We identified wider range and higher frequency of uninterrupted problem in Greece, which additionally helps anyone interested in lobbying alleles than it was previously reported, with 15 alleles characterised in total, for the rights and needs of the patients with neuromuscular disorders. spanning the whole spectrum of healthy-range alleles. We therefore further PM10.28 investigated the intergenerational stability of these alleles. Moreover, in two Genetic testing of inherited muscular dystrophies and myopathies unrelated patients with symptoms of neuromuscular disorder we identified using Next Generation Sequencing two ambiguous alleles, containing 31 and 34 uninterrupted CCTG repeats. K. Stehlikova, D. Skalova, L. Fajkusova; Since further analyses revealed a full range DM1 expansion in the DMPK Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech gene in the first patient and a homozygous CLCN1 stop mutation in the Republic. second patient we concluded that these “grey zone” alleles are most likely not pathogenic themselves, although, they represent unstable premutation alleles. Their possible modifying role, however, cannot be conclusively dis- The inherited muscular dystrophies and myopathies comprise a heteroge- closed. neous group of muscle diseases that share similar clinical features as pro- Conclusion: Our results suggest that uninterrupted alleles with up to ~30 gressive skeletal muscle weakness and wasting. Mutations in several genes CCTG repeats are likely stable during transmission, while instability gradu- that encode proteins of extracellular matrix, endoplasmic reticulum, nuclear ally increases with increasing length of uninterrupted tracts above this ap- envelope, sarcolemmal proteins and glycosyltransferases are known to be proximate threshold (financial support: VEGA_2/0115/15). responsible for muscular dystrophies and myopathies. The large overlap of phenotypic manifestations resulting from different gene mutations poses a PM10.26 challenge for determination exact type muscular disease. A large deletion affecting TPM3, causing severe nemaline myopathy K. Kiiski1, V. Lehtokari1, A. Y. Manzur2, C. Sewry2,3, I. Zaharieva3, F. Muntoni2,3, K. Pelin1,4, Fistly, we designed capture library to target the coding and all flanking intron C. Wallgren-Pettersson1; regions of 42 genes associated with group of disease as muscular dystrophi- 1The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and the Department of Medical and Clinical es, congenital muscular dystrophies, congenital myopathies, distal myopa- Genetics, University of Helsinki, Haartman Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Great Ormond thies and other myopathies. We performed targeted capture combined with Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL next-generation sequencing using NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Choice library in Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Biosciences, Division 140 Czech probands. Mutations associated with muscular dystrophies or of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. myopathies were identified in 77 of theAmCT. AFo1r, C thAeP Nre3s,t C oOf Lp6aAti1e,n CtOs,L w6Ae 3h,a DvMe tDo, cDoNnMfi2rm, D dYeStFe, cLteAdM vAa2r,iLaMntNsA a,RnYdR c1o,r SreGlCaGte, SthGeCmB with ScEliPnNic1a l findings of pati- TPM3 ents. Mutations have been detected in We present here the first large (17-21 kb) aberration in the α-tropomyosinslow and gene. To be able gene ( ) identified using our self-designTePdM n3emaline myopathy (NM) to offer complex diagnostics of neuromuscular disorders, we broaden our CGH-array. The identified homozygous mutation deletes the promoter as neuromuscular panel by adding of remaining genes from groups chosen in well as the muscle-specific exons 1a and 2b of . The promoter and exon the first panel and by adding genes associated with other groups of diseases: 1b of the non-muscle isoform seem to be intact. ThNe EhBomozygous deletion myotonic syndromes, ion channel muscle diseases, metabolic myopathies, was identified also using whole-exome sequencing (WES). Previously, we congenital myasthenic syndromes, motor neuron diseases and other neu- identified one heterozygous nonsense mutation in exon 42. We hypo- romuscular disorders. thesize that this nonsense mutation may have had a modifying impact on This work was supported by grant IGA MZ CR NT14574-3. the severe phenotype of the patient. This female infant was born to first- P S10
.29 cousin parents. Paucity of movement was noted from birth, and proximal A novel mutation in LRRK2 influences risk for Parkinson disease in and axial weakness was confirmed at 5 months. Best motor function achie- the Maltese Population ved was rolling from side to side. Failure to thrive led to nasogastric tube G. Camilleri1, S. Camilleri2, S. Bezzina Wettinger1, R. Farrugia1; feeding at ten and gastrostomy insertion at 13 months. The patient died at 1Deaprtment of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of age 17.5 months. Muscle biopsy at 5 months showed marked variation in Malta, Msida, Malta, 2Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine fibre size with several small fibres with slow myosin, some central nuclei, and Surgery, University of Malta, Msida, Malta. red-staining inclusions on trichrome stain in several fibres, which electron microscopy confTirPmMe3d as rods, as well as central mitochondrial aggregates. WNEeB have screened 196 families with NM or a related disorder using the NM- Introduction: LRRK2 encodes Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2, one of the most CGH array. This deletion is the first large rearrangement outside the common known autosomal dominant genetic causes of Parkinson disease gene, suggesting that large aberrations in the other NM genes are rare. (PD). Individuals with mutations in LRRK2 present with a phenotype and They should, however, be taken into consideration. The NM-CGH microarray pathology similar to idiopathic, late onset PD. A number of mutations have method is available for mutation analysis in our laboratory. been identified in this gene, however, the pathogenic nature of most muta- tions remains unclear. Materials and Methods: Next generation sequencing data from healthy indi- viduals was mined for LRRK2 mutations present in the Maltese. A novel mu- 202 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOtaTtiLonA (NN6D1,8 US) Kw a|s W idWentWifie.Ed SanHdG ge.OnoRtyGped by PCR and RFLP in a PD case- control collection; samples from Malta collected as part of the GeoparkinsonABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM10.32 Performance of SMN1 and SMN2 copy number assays using ddPCR project. Odds Ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) was determined S. Marrs, D. Skvortsov, M. Patil, J. Regan; using logistic regression. Digital Biology Center, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Pleasanton, CA, United States. Results: The novel mutation identified was in exon 16 of LRRK2. The A>G change at c.1853 gives rise to a missense mutation: N618S. Preliminary ana- lysis on part of the Maltese collection gave a minor allele frequency of 0.03 Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the most common autoso- in controls (n=136) and 0.06 in cases (n=73), giving an OR of 2.17 (95%CI: mal recessive disease causing death in infants. The disease is caused by the 0.82 - 5.74). lack of SMN1. The copy number of a highly similar gene, SMN2, determines Conclusion: The novel N618S mutation appears to increase risk for PD in disease severity. It is difficult to measure SMN1 and SMN2 copy number ac- the Maltese. curately since these two genes only differ by a single functional nucleotide. Funding sources for this study: Data and samples were collected as part of Although no therapies currently exist for SMA, five different pharmaceutical the 5th framework (F P5
) EU funded Geoparkinson study, project number companies have therapies in clinical trials. To assess the efficacy of these QLK4‐CT‐1999‐01133. This work was supported by the MASTER it! Pro- therapies, it is necessary to measure the number of SMN2 copies accurately gram (Malta); this scheme is co-funded by the ESF under Operational Pro- in each trial participant. gram II-Cohesion Policy 2007-2013. Materials and Methods: 16 Coriell samples and 93 Kenyan, 70 Mexican, and PM10.30 96 British HapMap samples were screened for SMN1 and SMN2 copy num- Genetic studies of patients with Parkinson‘s disease in Ukraine ber using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). O. Koliada; Results: 99.2% of the samples measured within 10% of the integer for SMN1 Gerontology Institute, Kiev, Ukraine. and SMN2 copy number, and 100% were within 15% of the integer. In total: 5, 1, 204, 45, and 20 samples had 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 copies of SMN1, respective- ly. Likewise, 43, 109, 108, 14, and 1 samples had 0, 1, 2, 3, and 5 copies of Parkinson‘s disease is the second most frequently occurring neurodegene- SMN2, respectively. None of the 275 samples had 4 copies of SMN2. rative disorder. The frequency of the disease in a population of people over Conclusions: ddPCR provides unambiguous copy number calls for SMN1 60 years is 2%. Diagnosis of the disease is very complicated at the young and SMN2 when ≤3 copies are present. We did not have sufficient number age, as the first symptoms appear, on average, at the age of 50-60 years. In of samples with ≥4 copies to determine the accuracy of this technology for this regard, especially promising are studies in the field of molecular ge- higher-order copy number states. netics, results of which can be used in early diagnosis of the disease. The P S10
.33 objective of this work was to find genetic markers for Parkinson‘s disease A comprehensive analysis of SMN2 target re-sequencing in a cohort of in populations in Ukraine. 350 patients with PD (210 men and 140 women) Italian and Spanish patients affected by Spinal Muscular atrophy. were examined after a mean disease duration of 7,6 ± 0,33 years (mean age G. Dubsky de Wittenau1, S. Radovic2, A. Alias3, E. Tizzano Ferrari4, F. Cesca1, A. Poz1,5, F. was 63,1 ± 1,3 years). Curcio1,5, R. Lonigro1,5; Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP method and methods based on 1University, Department of Medical and Biological Sciences, Udine, Italy, 2IGA Technology real-time PCR. For the first time in Ukraine, major mutations in the ge- Services, Parco Tecnologico L. Danieli, Udine, Italy, 3Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, barcelona, Spain, 5Azienda nes PARK2, LRRK2, SNCA and GBA responsible for hereditary forms of Ospedaliero Universitaria, Udine, Italy. Parkinson‘s disease were genotyped. Frequencies of mutations in patients that had various peculiarities of the disease and were at different age of SMN1 manifestation were analyzed. Comparison of telomere length in buccal cells Homozygous deletion of results in a spinal muSsMcuNl2ar atrophy (SMA) and leukocytes of patients with PD and control group was carried out. Signi- phenotype. Severity of the disease partially relies on the individual copy ficant differences were revealed in the length of telomeres in buccal epithe- numbers and variants of the phenotypic modulator . We used a NGS lium cells in patients and in controls, while in blood cells telomere length strSaMteNgy2 of „pooled iSnMdeNx1ing“ for gene re-sequencing of 41 SMA patients did not differ. In addition, a significant correlation between telomere length belonging from Italian and Spanish population. All subjects carry 3 copies in blood cells and in buccal epithelial cells was found in patients, but not in of , 0 copies of . We report a total of 115 SNPs, among which 60 control group. never previously identified, and 5 indels among which only one previously P S10
.31 described. All indels and most of SNPs are intronic, except than two conser- Imbalance of excitatory/inhibitory synaptic expression in Rett vativSeM SNN2Ps in exon2a and exon3 respectively. The main intriguing results syndrome iPSC-based neuronal models are: i. Variants distribution is not homogenous but rather clustered along I. Meloni1, S. Amabile1, E. Landucci1, T. Patriarchi1,2, E. Frullanti1, A. M. Pinto1, C. Lo Rizzo1, the sequence. The highest variant rate have been found in intron 7 F. Ariani1,3, F. Mari1,3, M. A. Mencarelli3, J. W. Hell2, A. Renieri1,3; (1:112bp), in intron 8 and 3’UTR (1:152bp). These findings suggest that 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Davis, CA, United States, 3Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera exon 7, which undergoes alternative splicing and is involved in modulating Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. SMA phenotype, is flanked by hotspot of hyper-mutable regions. ii. Only two individuals present the exon2a variant (c. C84
T), while 33 out of 41 individu- als present the exon3 variant (c.A462G). It will be intrSigMuNin2g to test the last Introduction: Rett syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder due to de variant as an hallmark of SdMeNle2tion-prone chromosome 5. iii. In one patient novo mutations in MEC P2
, CDK L5
 or FOXG1 genes. MeC P2
 and FoxG1 are we have a variants frequSeMncNy sustaining 4 copies of along the 5‘ of transcriptional regulators; CDK L5
 is a kinase involved in multiple cellular the gene and 3 copies of along the 3’. This last result sustains quan- processes. In spite of their involvement in the same disease, a functional titative re-sequencing of as a tool to improve diagnosis/prognosis by interaction between the three proteins has not been proven and diseaMseE mCPe2- identifying partially deleted and non-functional genes. chanCisDmKsL 5re main elusive. We reported recently that expression of GluD1 is Grant references: POR FESR 2007-2013 “ A platform for molecular and per- increased in iPSCs-derived neurons from patients with mutations in sonalized medicine” and (Livide et al, Eur J Hum Genet 2015). GluD1 is a post-synaptic PM10.34 protein that induces preferentially inhibitory presynaptic differentiation of A natural variant (c.863G>T) in exon 7 of SMN1 disrupt the inclusion cortical neurons. of Exon 7 into mRNA and is responsible for spinal muscular atrophy Methods: We established a human neuronal model based on patients-speci- Y. Qu, F. Song, J. Bai, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Jin; fic iPSCs and we characterized their expression profile to test the hypothesis Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China. that common alterations occur in cells mutated in the three genes. Results: We identified an over-expression of GluD1 also in FOXG1-mutated cells. Since GluD1 induces inhibitory presynaptic differentiation and an ex- PSMroNx1imal spinal muscular atrophy (SMAS)M iNs an autosome recessive gene- citation/inhibition imbalance has been suggested in MEC P2
-related Rett tic neuromuscular disorder, which is caused by deletion or mutation of syndrome, we tested the expression of a panel of excitatory and inhibitory (survival motor neuron1) gene. exon 7 splicing is regulated markers. Our results demonstrated an excitation/inhibition imbalance in by a number of exonic and intronic splicing regulatory sequences and the neurons mutated in all three genes. A consistent imbalance was also obser- trans-factors that bind them. Here we identified a natural SvMarNia1nt c.863G>T ved in embryonic FOXG1+/- mouse brain. However, a reduction of both exci- (p.Arg288Met) in exon 7 of SMN1 gene in three patients affected with type tatory and inhibitory markers is observed in post-natal mouse models. Ior typeII SMA .The in vivo assay showed that most of SthMeN 1 transcripts Conclusions: Our data provide further evidence in favor of an excitation/in- loss the entire exon 7. The ex vivo splicing assay had demonstratedSM thNa1t this hibition imbalance as an important contributor to the pathogenesis of Rett vSaMrNia2nt disrupt inclusion of exon 7 (about 85%) into mRNA and dif- due to MEC P2
 mutations and suggest a similar mechanism for CDK L5
- and ferent bases replacement showed different splicing effect in both and ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 203 FOXG1-mutated patients. pre-mRNA. The variant c.863G>T is located in the region that inclu-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index des multiple splicing factors and is specially adjacent to the binding site of diagnostic pipeline described in this study could be useful for other groups Tra2β1. Our results showed that this variant disrupts the binding of Tra2β1 studying neuromuscular diseases. Moreover, the targeted exome approach not promote the binding of hnRNP A1. This present research about this na- used here could be applied to other genetic disorders. tural occurrence variation influence the pre-mRNA splicing of SMN should P S10
.37 bFue ncdonintrgibuted to interpretation of the pathogenic mechanism in SMA pa- Transthyretin (TTR) mutations in the turkish familial amyloid tTiehnists r.esearch was supported by the National Natural Science Foundati- polyneuropathy (FAP) patients. on of China (Project No. 81100933 and 81470056), the Capital Health M. Poda1, H. Durmuş2, M. M. Atmaca3, Y. G. Parman2; Research and Development of Special (Project No. 2011-1008-03) and 1Istanbul university, DETAE, Genetics Dept., Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, the Research Foundation of Capital Institute of Pediatrics (Project No. Istanbul Medical Faculty, Neurology Dept., Neuromuscular Disorders Unit,, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Neurology Dept., Neuromuscular Fangxiang-2014-01). Disorders Unit, Istanbul, Turkey. corresponding author:Fang Song ,songf_558@263.net - Introduction P S10
.35 Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is an clinically heterogeneous au- STIM1 mutations at a common amino acid residue (p.340) identified tosomal dominant trait. Mutations in the TTR gene are most commonly ob- in two individuals with a predominant muscle disease phenotype served. TTR is synthesized mainly in the liver and mutations in the gene E. A. Harris1, J. Hudson2, M. Neri3, A. Ferlini3, K. Bushby1, H. Lochmüller1, V. Straub1, R. Barresi1,4; result in misfolding and depositions of mutated TTR protein, cousing a life- 1Newcastle University John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Newcastle threatening nerve length-dependent polyneuropathy. Until now, over 100 upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne, United mutations are described that are reflected in the protein structure. Kingdom, 3Section of Medical Genetics and Microbiology, Department of Medical - Materials and Methods Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 4Rare Diseases Advisory Group Service for Blood for DNA extraction was drawn after the patients signed an informed Neuromuscular Diseases, Muscle Immunoanalysis Unit, Newcastle upon Tyne, United consent. TDTNRA was isolated from 10ml whole blood using a commercially Kingdom. aviable kit (QIAamp DNA Blood Maxi Kit- Qiagene). For the detection of va- riants in gene, coding region of the TTR gene was amplified and for the PCR fragments Sanger sequencing was performed (Macrogene). The obtai- Background: Dominant mutations in STIM1 have been identified in the com- ned chromatograms were analysed with the aid of Chromas and CLC Main plex phenotype Stormorken Syndrome (SS) and in non-syndromic tubular Workbench 5.5 programs. The obtained sedqbuSNenPc es were alined with the hu- aggregate myopathy (TAM). All reported individuals with SS have a common man reference seqMuuetnacteio NnsG _in0 0H9e4r9ed0i. tDareyte Acmteydl oviadroisains ts were searched and p.R304W gain of function mutation in the coiled coil domain 1 of STIM1. In confirmed in public databases such as (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. contrast mutations in TAM are restricted to the EF hand domain. gov/SNP/) and (http://amyloidosis- Methods and Patients: We performed exome sequencing on patient 1 and mutations.com/cdna-attr.html). identified a de novo STIM1 mutation. We subsequently selected 4 patients - Results with tubular aggregates, and 4 patients selected by phenotype, and perfor- Six different variants in theTTR gene were observed (n=48) (rs1800458, med immunostaining for STIM1 and direct sequencing of the STIM1 gene. rs28933979, rs121918090 , rs121918097, rs121918082 , rs36204272) Patients with STIM1 mutations were deep phenotyped. in our patient population . Four of the variations were described as pa- Results: Two patients with STIM1 mutations were identified. Patient 1 has thogenic mutations in the databases [ n=3, p.Val50Met (rs28933979); the common SS mutation (p.R304W), and exhibits features in keeping with n=2, p.Gly67Glu (rs121918090); n=1, p.Gly73Glu (rs121918097); n=1, this (thrombocytopaenia, miosis, aspenia, hypocalcaemia). Tubular aggre- p.Glu109Gln (rs121918082). gates were present in muscle biopsy and showed accumulation of STIM1. - Conclusions Patient 2 has a novel mutation at the same amino acid residue (p.R304G), As a mere reflection the clinical and genetic heterogeneity of the disease, and presents with a strikingly similar pattern of neuromuscular phenotype DNA testing helped but aside from miosis no additional features of SS. The neuromuscular phe- resolve the diagnosis of the 14.5% of the patients. notype in both patients comprises myalgia, muscle stiffness, and reduction PM10.38 in range of joint movement, with mild weakness on examination. Targeted next-generation sequencing reveals novel TTN mutations Conclusion: The use of STIM1 immunoananlysis in patients with tubular causing recessive distal titinopathy aggregates was successfully applied to screen for patients with STIM1 mu- A. Evilä1, S. Penttilä2, P. Hackman1, B. Udd1,2,3; tations. We report a novel mutation at the common SS amino acid residue 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman in a patient with TAM and miosis, in addition to further characterisation of Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Neuromuscular Research Center, a new patient with SS. University of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 3Neurology PM10.36 Department, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland. Clinical targeted exome (gene panel) approach advances the diagnosis of myopathies. S. Gorokhova1, M. Cerino1,2, A. Sevy3, Y. Mathieu1, J. Desvignes1, S. Attarian3,1, E. TTibTiNal muscular dystrophy (TMD) is the first described human titinopathy. Campana-Salort3,1, J. Pouget3,1, N. Levy1,2, M. Bartoli1, M. Krahn1,2; It is caused by mutations in the last two exons, Mex5 and Mex6, of titin gene 1Aix Marseille Université, INSERM, GMGF UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2APHM, ( ). The first reported TMD mutations were dominant and the Finnish Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Timone Enfants, Marseille, France, founder mutation, an 11-bp insertion/deletion in Mex6, caused a severe ear- 3APHM, Department of Neurology, Neuromuscular and ALS reference center, La Timone ly-onset limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 2J (LGMD2J) when homozygous. university Hospital, Marseille, France. Later we reported that not all TMD mutations cause LGMD when homozy- gous, but some rather cause a more severe TMD. We have now performTedT Na targeted next-generation sequencing assay of myopathy related genes on six We developed a massively parallel sequencing approach in order to optimi- families with recessive distal titinopathy. Two novel TMD mutatioTnTsN in ze clinical diagnosis of myopathies at La Timone Hospital (Marseille), which were identified, which both seem to be recessive. Three of the families, Ita- is a reference center for a number of neuromuscular disorders in France. In lian, Bosnian and Iranian, had a novel nonsense TMD mutation in Mex5 a pilot project, we selected 298 genes implicated in neuromuscular diseases in hToTmNozygous state or in combination with another nonsense mutation on and cardiomyopathies listed in the Gene Table of Neuromuscular Disorders the other allele. One Hungarian family had a novel missense TMD mutation as well as differential diagnosis genes. Targeted exome approach was deve- in Mex6 in combination with a frameshift mutation on the other alle- loped using HaloPlex target enrichment system adapted for Ion Torrent Next le. In addition one Spanish family had a pTrTeNviously reported Iberian TMD Generation Sequencing technology. This initial study had 92% sequence co- mutation in combination with a frameshift mutation and another Spanish verage at 20x and resulted in 47% diagnostic yield in a cohort of 37 distal family had a nToTvNel missense mutation in A-band in combination with myopathy patients. Detailed analysis of the technical characteristics of the a nonsense mutation and a novel titinopathy phenotype. Family members study allowed us to pinpoint the aspects that could be further optimized. For witThT oNnly one mutation were healthy. According to our previous results example, we observed that longer HaloPlex probes were lost at the emulsion the frameshift and nonsenTsTeN mutations located upstream of the last exons PCR step. Moreover, results for several target genes were not interpretab- of cause degradation of mRNA through nonsense-mediated decay and le due to high rate of off-target read alignment. Based on these results, an mainly the other mutated allele is expressed. This study was supported optimized set of HaloPlex probes for 306 genes was designed for Illumina by a grant from the Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation. s 2e 0qu 4encing technology. Forty six myopathEyS pHatGien 2ts0 w1e5re | s GcrLeeAnSedG foOr Wmu, -SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG tations using this improved targeted exome approach. We believe that theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S10
.39 variants, known as FH L1
A, FH L1
B and FH L1
C. In healthy individuals, FH- Type 0 Spinal Muscular Atrophy: further delineation of pre- and post-  L1
A is the predominant splice variant and is mainly found in skeletal and natal features in 16 French patients cardiac muscle. The FH L1
 transcript profiles from two affected individuals S. Grotto1, J. Cuisset2, S. Marret3,4, S. Drunat5, P. Faure6, S. Audebert-Bellanger7, I. Desguerre8, V. Flurin9, A. G. Grebille10, A. M. Guerrot1, H. Journel11, M. Mathieu-Dramard12, were investigated in skin fibroblasts with quantitative real-time PCR. This J. Nakhleh13, G. Plessis14, S. Renolleau15, J. Roume16, B. Simon-Bouy17, R. Touraine18, M. demonstrated loss of isoform A and B, and an almost 200-fold overexpressi- Willems19, T. Frébourg1,6, E. Verspyck20, P. Saugier-Veber1,6; on of isoform C confirming that lack of FH L1
A and overexpression of FLH1C 1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2Department results in an extended phenotype of EDMD as recently shown by Tiffin et of Pediatric Neurology, Roger Salengro Hospital, Lille Regional University Hospital, al. (2013) Lille, France, 3Department of Pediatric Intensive Care, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 4Inserm ERI 28, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine, P S11
.001 Rouen University, Rouen, France, 5Department of Genetics, Robert Debre University Chromosome 18p deletion syndrome: clinical, developmental and Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 6Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in cytogenomic characterization of six Brazilian patients Biomedicine, Rouen University, Rouen, France, 7Department of Pediatrics and Genetics, V. A. Meloni1, R. S. Guilherme1, M. Moysés-Oliveira1, S. S. Takeno1, C. B. de Mello2, B. C. Brest Regional University Hospital, Brest, France, 8Department of Pediatric Neurology, Costa-Tavares3, M. I. Melaragno1; Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 9Department of Pediatric 1Genetics Division-Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Núcleo de Intensive Care, Le Mans Hospital, Le Mans, France, 10Department of Obstetrics and Atendimento Neuropsicológico Infantil Interdisciplinar, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Allergy and Gynecology, Saint-Brieuc Hospital, Saint-Brieuc, Saint-Brieuc, France, 11Department Immunology Division-Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. of Genetics, Vannes Bretagne-Atlantique Hospital, Vannes, France, 12Department of Genetics, Amiens University Hospital, Amiens, France, 13Department of Pediatric Intensive Care, Mulhouse Hospital, Mulhouse, France, 14Department of Genetics, Caen Introduction: Chromosome 18p deletion syndrome [del(18p)] (OMIM University Hospital, Caen, France, 15Department of Pediatric Intensive Care, Armand- Trousseau Children’s Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 16Department of Genetics, Poissy- 146390) has been well described in literature with over 150 patients repor- Saint-Germain-en-Laye Hospital, Poissy, France, 17Department of Genetics, Versailles ted on, but few of them were evaluated by cytomolecular techniques. Hospital, Le Chesnay, France, 18Department of Genetics, Saint-Etienne University Materials and Methods: We studied six Brazilian patients with 18p deleti- Hospital, Saint-Etienne, France, 19Department of Genetics, Montpellier Regional on based on clinical, developmental and cytogenomic findings. The patients University Hospital, Montpellier, France, 20Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, were evaluated by a specific clinical protocol, including immunological, en- Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. docrinological and neuropsychological assessments. The cytogenetic study was performed by G-banding karydoet ynpoveo, SNP-array (Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0, Affymetrix) and FISH-BAC techniqduee nso.vo Objective: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is caused by homozygous inac- Results: The results showed four pure deletions and two deletions tivation of the SMN1 gene. The SMN2 copy number modulates the severity caused by derivative chromosomes, one of them and the other inhe- of SMA. The 0SMN1/1SMN2 genotype, the most severe genotype compa- rited from a paternal translocation. Although literature indicates 18p11.11 tible with life, is expected to be associated with the most severe form of the as the most frequent breakpoint, our patients presented different break- disease, called type 0 SMA, characterized by severe neurologic impairment points: 18p11.21 (4/6, four out of six) and 18p11.23 (2/6). The main clini- from birth. The aim of the study was to review clinical features and prenatal cal findings were: short stature (5/6); microcephaly (2/6); ect koepriact poistius iptailray- manifestations in this rare SMA subtype. r(1is/6); growth hormone deficiency (1/6); hypothyroidism (3/6); intellectual Methods: SMA patients with the 0SMN1/1SMN2 genotype were retrospec- disability (5/6); cardiac anomalies (2/6); scoliosis (3/5); and tively collected using the UMD-SMN1 France database. Data from 16 pati- (4/6). The distinguished facial dysmorphic features were similar among ents were reviewed. the patients: ocular hypertelorism (6/6); ptosis (3/6) and strabismus (6/6). Results: These 16 patients displayed type 0 SMA. Most patients, at birth, had The neuropsychological assessments showed IQ scores from borderline in- profound hypotonia, severe muscle weakness, severe respiratory distress, tellectual functioning to moderate intellectual disabilityT.GIF1, GNAL, LAMA1 and cranial nerves involvement (inability to suck/swallow, facial muscles Con cLlPuIsNio2ns: Some genes located in the 18p deleted segment seem to play weakness). They also showed characteristics of fetal akinesia deformation an important role in the patient’s phenotype, such as sequence (FADS) and congenital heart defects (CHD). Recurrent episodes of and genes. The SNP-array technique permitted a better chromosome bradycardia were observed. Death occurred within the first month. At pre- breakpoint definition and, associated to the specific clinical protocol, pro- natal stage, decreased fetal movements were frequently reported, mostly vided a better genotype-phenotype correlation revealing genes that might only by mothers, in late stages of pregnancy; increased nuchal translucency influence the patient’s phenotype. was reported in about half of the cases; CHD, abnormal amniotic fluid volu- Financial support: FAPESP. me, or joint contractures were occasionally reported. PM11.002 Interpretation: Despite a prenatal onset attested by severity at birth and Three new cases with atypical deletions in the 22q11.2 region signs of FADS, prenatal manifestations of type 0 SMA are not specific and A. M. Cueto-González1,2, T. Vendrell-Bayona1, M. Del Campo1,3, M. Borregan1, N. not constant. Finally, as illustrated by the frequent association with CHD, Castells1,4, N. Jariod1, A. Plaja1, E. Tizzano1,3; type 0 SMA physiopathology is not restricted to motor neuron, highlighting 1Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Facultat de Medicina. Departament de that SMN function is critical for organogenesis during development. Ciències Morfològiques. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona., Barcelona, Spain, PM10.40 3CIBERER, Spain, Spain, 4Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. A novel single nucleotide splice site mutation in FH L1
 confirms an Emery-Dreifuss plus phenotype with pulmonary artery hypoplasia and facial dysmorphology 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is mainly characterized by co- A. Pen1, M. Nyegaard2,2, M. Fang3, H. Jiang3, R. Christensen1, H. Mølgaard4,5, H. notruncal congenital heart defects, velopharyngeal insufficiency, hypocalce- Andersen6,5, B. P. Ulhøi7,5, J. R. Østergaard8,5, S. Væth1,5, M. Sommerlund9,5, A. P. de mia and a characteristic craniofacial appearance. The etiology in the majori- Brouwerg10, X. Zhang3, U. B. Jensen1,5; ty of patients is a 3-Mb recurrent deletion in 22q11.2 region. However, rare 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, cases with proximal, central and distal deletions in 22q11 region have been 2Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark, 3BGI-Shenzhen, reported with different phenotypes. Shenzhen 518083, China, 4Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University Hospital, We report three cases with atypical deletions diagnosed in a total of 119 Aarhus N, Denmark, 5Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark, 6Department of Neurology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, patients with deletions in 22q11.2 region attended in our 22q11DS Multi- 7Department of Pathology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, 8Department disciplinary Clinics. of Pediatrics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, 9Department of The first case, a girl with short stature, hirsutism and ventricular septal defect Dermatology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, 10Department of Human was found to have a distal 22q11DS deletion, arr[hg19] 22q11.21(20754422- Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. 21561514)x1, including the CRKL gene and with no overlap with the known critical region. The deletion was also present in her brother that only pre- sents nasal voice and her asymptomatic father. A paternal uncle died around We describe a Danish family with an, until recently, unknown X-linked di- 3 months old of congenital heart disease sixty years ago. sease with muscular dystrophy (MD), facial dysmorphology and pulmonary The second and third cases are two boys that shared a de novo deletion in the artery hypoplasia. One patient died suddenly before age 20 and another was centromeric end of the distal region of 22q11DS, arr[hg19] 22q11.21q11.22 resurrected from cardiac arrest at the age of 28. Linkage analysis pointed to (21505358/21808950-22905068)x1. One patient had global developmen- a region of 25 Mb from 123.6 Mb to 148.4 Mb on chromosome X containing tal delay and an Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) while the other patient over 100 genes. Exome sequencing identified a single nucleotide splice site had global developmental and learning delay, with particular phenotypic mutation c.502-2A>T, which is located 5’ to exon 6 in the gene encoding four features. and a half LIM domain 1 (FH L1
) EprSoHteGin . 2FH0 L115
 e x| pGreLsAseSs GthOreWe m, aSinC sOpTlicLeA NCDor, rUelKat i|o nW oWf clWini.cEaSl aHnGd .gOenRetGic data of atypical 22q11DS deletions2 i0s 5ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S11
.005 2q33.1q34 microdeletion syndrome: a case report cardinal importance in dissecting the contribution of individual genes to C. Pidone, I. Loddo, M. C. Cutrupi, V. Procopio, M. I. S. Crapanzano, E. Moschella, M. R. DGS phenotype. In particular, nasal voice cosegregation with a partial de- Pizzino, S. Briuglia; letion of 22q11DS region (case 1) may point to specific genes involved in UOC Genetics and Pediatric Immunology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy. palate formation or function. P S11
.003 Delineation of a novel 2q11.1q11.2 Microduplication syndrome We describe a case of a girl, the second child of healthy non-consanguineous S. Azzarello-Burri1, J. Andrieux2, B. Oneda1, P. Joset1, J. Czeschik3, A. Küchler3, B. Demeer4, parents. Pregnancy was complicated by threats of preterm birth, but she E. Palmer5, F. Lopes6, B. Plecko7, A. Rauch1; was born full term. Birth weight was 3,120 kg and length 50 cm. At birth she 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Institut de had anterior anus with rectum perineal fistula, left hip dysplasia and several Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 3Institute dysmorphic features: bilateral blepharophimosis, up-slanting palpebral fis- of Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 4Centre d’activité sures, epicanthus inversus, low-set ears, micrognathia, mild macroglossia, de génétique Clinique, CHU Amiens-Picardie, Amiens, France, 5Genetics of Learning long hands and fingers (+2DS). She presented feeding difficulties, failure to Disability Service, Waratah, NSW, Australia, 6Life and Health Sciences Research Institute, threat and mild psychomotor delay. Brain MRI performed at 2 months of University of Minho, Braga, Portugal, 7Child Neurology, University Children‘s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. age was nodrem naol.v Sohe had also bicuspid aortic valve and selective IgA defici- ency with recurrent respiratory and gastrointestinal infection. Array-CGH de novo showed a microdeletion of 8,3 Mbp in 2q33.1q34 (201,315,087- Using chromosomal microarray testing we detected a 1.48 Mb 209,635,377). This region contains some interesting genes, such as CD28, 2q11.1q11.2 duplication in a patient with developmental ddee nlaoyv,o microce- CTLA4 and ICOS, that are important regulators of the immune system. phaly, plagiocephalus, torticollis, laryngomalacia and failure to thrive. This This microdeletion can explain the clinical features of our patient, outlining duplication contains about 26 genes (12 OMIM genes). One duplica- the characteristics of this syndrome. tion 2q11.2 with a minimum size of 1.47 Mb was described in the literature PM11.006 in a patient with moderate developmental delay, hypotonia with continued Cerebral white matter abnormalities in 6p25 deletion syndrome head lag at age 15 months, short stature, midface hypoplasia with hypopla- I. M. Bader1, G. Sander1, G. Kronberger1, I. Vlasak1, I. Reindl2, C. Rauscher2, J. Koch2, J. stic nose, macrocephaly with frontal bossing and dolichocephaly and signi- Atzwanger2, E. Haschke-Becher3, W. Sperl2, O. Rittinger1; 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University, ficant shortening of all segments of the extremities with significant brachy- Salzburg, Austria, Salzburg, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics; Paracelsus Medical dactyly. Five other patients with similar duplications and psychomotor re- University, Salzburg, Austria, Salzburg, Austria, 3University Institute of Medical and tardation/ learning difficulties were found through the DECIPHER database. Chemical Laboratory Diagnostics, Salzburg, Austria, Salzburg, Austria. While head circumference seems to be variable, shared anomalies consist of frontal bossing/ large forehead (described in 4 of 7 patients), birth weight <  P10
 and failure to thrive (described in 2 patients), muscular hypotonia We report the phenotype and genotype of a 4 years and 11 months old boy (described in 2 patients), sensorineural hearing impairment (described in who was transferred to hospital after an accident. CT-scan and cMRI showed 2 patients) and café-au-lait spots (described in 2 pdaeti nenovtso). In 3 cases the a cranial fracture as a result of the accident and two incidental findings: 1) duplication was maternally inherited (in 2 cases from mothers with known large bifronto-temporal arachnoidal cysts and 2) multifocal white-matter- learning difficultdiees n),o ivno 3 cases the duplication was and in one case lesions involving the periventricular, deep, and subcortical cerebral white the inheritance was unknown because the father could not be tested. In one matter. patient another aberration was detected, which could have an im- The clinical phenotype of the boy included mild developmental delay, stra- pact on the phenotype. Our observations indicate that 2q11.1q11.2 duplica- bism, slightly dysmorphic features and mild hearing impairment. tion is a novel recurrent microduplication syndrome mediated by flanking Molecular karyotype from peripheral blood detected a ~ 3,9 Mb heterozy- low-copy repeats. gous microdeletion in 6p25.3 - 6p25.2 deleting 34 genes, 18 of which were PM11.004 OMIM annotated including the transcription factor FOX C1
. A 17 mb deletion in 2q31.3-q33.1 in a girl with central nervous Microdeletions in 6p25 are thought to be associated with a distinctive cli- system malformations and severe developmental delay nical phenotype - the 6p subtelomeric deletion syndrome - that includes E. Caramaschi1, P. Bergonzini2, G. Tediosi1, M. Maretti3, I. Stanghellini4, L. Iughetti5, A. sensorineural hearing loss, anterior chamber eye defects, cardiac defects, Guerra2, A. Percesepe4; developmental delay and other developmental and behavioral abnormali- 1Pediatric University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, 2Pediatric Neurology, ties, hypotonia, hip dysplasia, cerebellar abnormalities and a characteristic Policlinico di Modena, Modena, Italy, 3University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, facial appearance. Few reports exist that describe multifocal T2-weighted Italy, 4Human Genetics Unit, Policlinico di Modena, Modena, Italy, 5Università degli studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. and FLAIR abnormalities involving the periventricular, deep, and subcorti- cal cerebral white matter associated with the 6p25 deletion in young child- ren and in adults. More than 30 cases with a deletion of the 2q31-q33 region have been re- From our case and from the review of the literature we conclude that a mi- ported. Deletions vary in size and location and are associated with variable crodeletion in 6p25 should be considered as the cause for unclear multifocal clinical features including craniofacial dysmorphism, developmental delay, cerebral white matter abnormalities in patients that in addition have dys- growth retardation and other anomalies. We report the case of a girl born morphic features and multiple congenital anomalies even when intellectual from healthy unrelated parents after an uncomplicated pregnancy (birth abilities are within the normal range (Vernon et al. 2013). weight 2660g). Perinatal history was unremarkable, apart from a congenital P S11
.007 laryngeal stridor. Her motor development was delayed (sit position at the 9q34.3 microdeletion in three patients characterized by array-CGH age of 3 years, walk at the age of 4 years). Dysmorphic features were evi- K. T. Abe, I. M. P. O. Rizzo, L. L. Roese, M. F. Pereira, L. M. Formigli, M. Schneider, M. D. V. denced: triangular face, high forehead, maxillary hypoplasia, small eyes, low Oliveira, N. Sakai Jr, D. R. Carvalho, C. E. Speck-Martins; SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasília – DF, Brazil, BRASILIA, Brazil. set ears, short neck, small teeth, small hands. Ophthalmological examination showed alternating strabismus. The girl developed epilepsy from 6 month of age, resistant to drug treatment. Neuroradiological examination at the age of Submicroscopic deletion del(9)(q34.3) is a newly described genomic disor- 9 and 10 years showed a diffused reduction of white matter with moderate der that has been reported as a clinically recognizable 9q Subtelomeric De- ventriculomegaly, gracile posterior body and splenium of corpus callosum letion Syndrome (9qSTDS) also known as 9q34.3 Microdeletion Syndrome and gracile hippocampus. Neurological examination evidenced based enlar- and Kleefstra Syndrome. That microdeletion affects fetal development and ged deambulation, chaotic movement and dysmetria, no other anomalies. results in intellectual disability, childhood hypotonia and facial feature. In She developed motor stereotypies of the hands, severe intellectual disability addition, congenital heart and renal defects, microcephaly, epilepsy, obesity, (not able to speak), and aggressive behavior both self- and hetero-aggressi- behavioral problems and absence of expressive speech are frequently pre- ve. In past clinical history reported frequent respiratory, skin and oral infec- sent. Structural brain and/or subcortical white matter abnormalities may tion (no specific immunological deficit). Array CGH analysis has evidenced a also occur. Microdeletions of the 9q34.3 region, like other terminal deleti- 17 Mb deletion in chromosome in 2q31.3-q33.1. Our case shows phenotypic ons, have breakpoints occurring in multiple sites of the distal chromosome similarities with previously described cases with overlapping deletions; in end. There is no eEviHdMenTc1e for phenotype-genotype correlation between size addition we report the presence of a drug resistant epilepsy, reported also of the deletions or type EoHf mMuTt1a tions and severity of clinical features. Stu- by Mencarelli (2007) and Mitter (2010), and of previously unreported brain dies confirm the gene to be the major determinant of the 9qSTDS anomalies, behavior problem and recurrent infections. phenotype. In addition, haploinsufficiency is associated with neu- 206 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO roT dL egA enN eD ra, t iU onK a | n dW nW euW rod.E evS eH loG pm.O enR taG l defect. We report the molecularABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Johns Hopkins Aramco Healthcare, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 2CeGaT GmbH, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, characterization and phenotype of three patients, 3-years-7-months-old, Tuebingen, Germany, 3CeGaT GmbH, Tuebingen, Germany. 1-year-7-months-old, and 2-years-old, with respectively 374 Kb, 867 Kb and 1,750 Kb terminal deletions at 9p34.3 chromosome region detected by array-CGH. Although they had different delEeHtiMonT 1size anCdA CONMAI1MB Genes Webb-Dattani syndrome (#615926) is an autosomal recessive disorder cha- deleted, they present similar and recognizable phenotype of 9q34.3 micro- racterized by frontotemporal hypoplasia, pituitary and hypothalamic insuf- deletion syndrome. The first patient has only and genes ficiency due to hypoplastic development of these brain regions. The condi- deleted, but alCl AthCeNyA h1aBv e a sEuHbmMiTc1roscopic deletion that share an overlap- tion was described in 6 siblings from highly consanguineous Saudi Arabian ping region encompassing those genes. It reinforces that haploinsufficiency kindred with congenital brain malformation, panhypopitutrism, acquired of both genes and are dosage-sensitive and contribute to microcephaly, seizAuRrNeTs,2 s evere global developmental delay, spastic cerebral core phenotype of 9qSTDS. palsy, and post-retinal blindness. A homozygous truncating mutation was PM11.008 identified in the gene by a combination of homozygosity mapping Microdeletion of 9q34.11: an emerging contiguous gene syndrome? and whole exome sequencing. R. E. Keelagher1, F. S. Togneri1, N. S. Cooper2, N. K. Ragge2, D. J. McMullan1; Here we describe another family with three affected siblings born to a 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2West healthy Saudi Arab first cousins couple. The index patients were identical Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom. male twins presented at three months of age with congenital central hypo- tonia and hypoventilation precipitated by an acute bronchiolitis. They had a similar clinical manifestation that was characterized by diabetes insipidus, Interstitial microdeletions within 9q34.11 have been described in a rela- central hypothyroidism, adrenocortical insufficiency, severe developmental tively small number of patients to date. Recurrent clinical features reported delay, acquired microcephaly, cortical blindness with normal retinal exami- in these individuals include intellectual disability, hypotonia and seizures nation, seizures, and gastroesophageal reflux. Brain MRI showed hypotha- amongst others. Deletions including the STXB P1
 gene have been associated lamic, infundibular, and pituitary axis insufficiency, small sella with absent with an increased risk of epilepsy. However, further genotype-phenotype posterior pituitary bright spot. Family history is significant for an older af- correlations remain poorly defined. Here we describe two previously un- fected deceased female sibling at 18 months of age, and four miscarriages of reported patients with interstitial deletions of this region. In patient 1, a de undetermined etiology. Whole exome sequencing detected a homozygous novo deletion of ~1.8 Mb was detected at 9q33.3q34.11. Although this de- unclear variant (c.378C>Tp.G126G) in ARNT2 gene of both of the affected letion is proximal to the Kleefstra syndrome region at 9q34.3, it appears to twins. According to splice prediction programs, this variant creates a new result in a strikingly similar phenotype including progressive microcephaly, donor splice site, possibly leading to a loss of function. Both of the parents hypotonia, severe developmental delay and facial dysmorphism. In patient were found to be heterozygous and none of the unaffected siblings were ho- 2, a deletion of ~2.1 Mb of 9q34.11 was detected. Clinical features noted in mozygous for this variant. this patient overlap those described in patient 1 and include speech and lan- P S11
.011 guage delay, microcephaly, hypotonia and facial dysmorphism. Importantly, Delineating a new interstitial genomic rearrangement by array-CGH absence seizures were reported in patient 2, despite the STXB P1
 gene not at 19p13.3 band being deleted in this individual. A common region of ~885 kb containing J. NEVADO1,2, J. A. Rosenfeld3, M. Rocio1, M. Palomares-Bralo1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, M. A. approximately 28 genes was deleted in both patients. These case reports Mori1,2, K. W. Gripp4, 19p13.3 microdeletion/microduplication syndrome study-group, J. provide further evidence for an emerging 9q34.11 contiguous gene deletion A. Tenorio1,2, R. Martín-Arenas1, F. Santos-Simarro1,2, M. L. De Torres1, S. Garcia-Miñaur1,2, syndrome characterised by developmental delay, microcephaly and hypoto- B. Fernandez1, M. V. Fernandez-Montaño1, I. Rueda-Arenas1, P. D. Lapunzina1,2; 1INGEMM, HOSPITAL UNIVERSITARIO LA PAZ, MADRID, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, nia and may assist in refining genotype-phenotype correlations associated 3Signature Genomics, Perkin Elmer, USA, WA, United States, 4AI DuPont Hospital for with deletions of this region. Children, WILMINGTON, DE, United States. P S11
.009 Mutation analysis in patients with Adams-Oliver syndrome using a targeted resequencing strategy. Introduction: High resolution microarray comparative genomic hybridiza- J. Meester1, M. Zenker2, M. Sukalo2, B. Loeys1,3, L. Van Laer1, L. Southgate4, W. Wuyts1,3; tion (aCGH) is a powerful genetic tool implemented as a first-tier test for 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Otto von Guericke Universität Magdeburg, diagnosis of genomic imbalances in individuals with intellectual disability, Magdeburg, Germany, 3Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Queen Mary autistic disorders and congenital malformations.it also has been proven to University of London, London, United Kingdom. be successful in characterizing the growing list of microdeletion/duplicati- on syndromes. Using this experimental approach, we and others recently described new microdeletion/microduplication syndromes. Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare developmental disorder typically Methods: A “genotype first” approach, using aCGH, in which patients are characterized by congenital cutis aplasia of the scalp and vertex with trans- characterized by a similar genomic rearrangement before a common clinical verse terminal limb defects. In addition, vascular anomalies, comprising presentation has been used. pulmonary and portal hypertension, retinal hypovascularisation and con- Results: We report 13 new patients with proximal 19p13.3 submicroscopic genital cutis marmorata telangiectasia, as well as congenital heart defects, rearrangements and review patients from the literature and public genomic such as ventricular septal defects, tetralogy of Fallot and valve anomalies databases such as DECIPHER and ISCA Consortium for a total of 37 cases. have been observed. We describe the phenotypic findings and suggest these patients represent To date, five causal genes have been described: EOGT and DOCK6 for reces- a new microdeletion/duplication syndrome at 19p13.3 band, with a 113.5 sive AOS and ARHGA P31
, RBPJ and NOTCH1 in dominant AOS and sporadic Kb critical region as Small Region of Overlapping harboring three genes. cases. Common features consist of abnormal head circumference in most patients Using a targeted resequencing strategy with HaloPlex Targeted Enrichment (macrocephaly with the deletions and microcephaly with the duplications), (Agilent) and sequencing by synthesis on MiSeq (Illumina), the five known intellectual disability (ID) with developmental delay, hypotonia, speech de- AOS genes were analyzed in 66 patients and families with an AOS phenotype lay and common dysmorphic features. or isolated aplasia cutis. Discussion: This study provides detailed clinical information for geneticists Possible causative variants were identified in 17 families. The majority of to assist in the evaluation, diagnosis and management of individuals with mutation positive families harboured a NOTCH1 mutation (7 families), fol- similar genomic interstitial rearrangements at 19p13.3 band. lowed by DOCK6 (5 families), EOGT (3 families) and RBPJ (2 families). No ARHGA P31
 mutations were deteceted. PM11.012 In conclusion, a mutation in circa 25% of the aplasia cutis/AOS families was Genetic diagnosis of chromosomal anomalies in pediatric patients by detected with a next-generation based targeted resequencing approach of array CGH. five known AOS causing genes. This confirms the genetic heterogeneity of M. Perez Sanchez1, A. Gonzalez Ramirez2, S. Roldan.1, A. Mora Guijosa1, J. Barrionuevo1; 1Servicio Andaluz de Salud (SAS)., Granada, Spain, 2FIBAO., Granada, Spain. AOS/aplasia cutis, and highlights a large proportion of patients with still unexplained etiology. PM11.010 Laboratory evaluation of patients with developmental delay/intellectual Webb-Dattani Syndrome (WEDAS), Report of a Saudi Arab Family with disability, congenital anomalies and dismorphic features has changed signi- a Novel Homozygous Mutation in the ARNT2 Gene ficantly in the last years with the introduction of microarray technologies. S. I. Al-SMajed1, S. Biskup2, N. A. Al-Sannaa1, H. Y. Al-Abdulwahed1, M. Menzel3, S. Kelkenberg3; With these techniques, a patient`s genome is examined for detection of gains or loses of genetic material that typically are too small to be detectable by ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAN sD ta, n U daK rd | G W -baW ndW ed.E chS rH omG o. sO omR eG studies. 207ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index In our laboratory this technology has been implanted as the first tier test trum, thin upper lip and microstomia) were observed. for genetics studies for developmental delay/ mental retardation/ autistic At 15 months, the ASD was repared. He presented a convergent not paretic disorder and/or multiple congenital anomalies (DD/MR/ASD/MCA). strabismus, the muscle tone was improved in general but the lower limb In this study we present the results of array CGH obtained in 548 patients tone was increased when excited, the reflexes were symmetrical but exal- with clinical diagnosis of DD/MR/ASD/MCA. The Nimblegen CGX Cytogene- ted and the CPR was extensor bilateral. We observed a limitation of joints tic Microarrays platform, suplied by PerkinElmer, was performed. extension which improved in subsequent controls. Now, at 41momths, he From the total of 548 patients, the 57,1% were men and 42,9% women. presented a global developmental delay with autistic traits. Patologic result was obtained in 13,1% of patients, without stadistical di- The aCGH (Nimblegen, 720K) performR ed defined a 60Kb deletion on ferences between sexs.The genetics diagnostic yield obtained were 12,5 % 7q11.22, not seen in the aCGH (qChip , 60K), and confirmed by MLPA in for developmental delay, 10,1% for mental retardation, 10,7 for autistic dis- the AUT S2
 gene. order and 16,8 for multiple congenital anomalies. Balanced genomic rearrangements disrupting AUT S2
 gene have been iden- Previous studies suggest that when array-CGH is performed, the diagnostic tified implicating AUT S2
 in neurodevelopmental disorders. More recent de- yield reached 8 to 20 % of total patients. Our results are in concordance wiht scriptions suggest that the AUT S2
 syndrome could be a single gene disorder these previous results with an average of 13,1% detected from the total of and our case support this hypothesis. patients, with a range from 10,1% in the case of mental delay to 16,8 for P S11
.015 multiple congenital anomalies. Familial translocation t(1;12)(q43;q21.1) truncates a CHRM3 Our results are in concordance with the results previously obtained in other GENCODE isoform in a family with specific learning difficulties, ataxic laboratories and they are improved significantly the genetics diagnosis for symptoms, and stroke DD/MR/ASD/MCA patientes in our laboratory. T. Luukkonen1,2, M. Pöyhönen3,4, L. Kuuluvainen3,4, P. Ellonen1, A. Palotie1,5, J. P S11
.013 Terwilliger2,6,7, R. Salonen8, T. Varilo3,2; 1FIMM Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2National Institute for Progressive cerebral striatal arteriopathy in ichthyosis prematurity Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, syndrome; is it eosinophilia-related? Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, M. E. C. Meuwissen1, J. Lambert2, V. Siozopoulou3, L. Mahieu4, G. Delanghe5, F. Kooy1, P. Helsinki, Finland, 5Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States, Govaert5; 6Columbia Genome Center, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, 7New 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Dept. of York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY, United States, 8Dept. of Medical Genetics, Dermatology, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Dept. of Pathology, Norio-centre, Rinnekoti Foundation, Helsinki, Finland. University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Dept. of Neonatology, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Dept. of Neonatology, ZNA Koningin Paola Children‘s Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium. We have established a National Registry of Balanced Chromosomal Rear- rangements in Finland by ascertaining all known Finnish carriers (n=2575). BACKGROUND Ichthyosis Prematurity Syndrome (IPS) is characterized by The registry contains medical records of all available carriers including fa- premature birth, thick caseous desquamating epidermis, respiratory com- mily members carrying the same rearrangement identical-by-descent. From plications and transient eosinophilia. Although respiratory problems can be this resource, we have drawn families with apparent correlating phenotype severe, outcome after the first months is reported to be favorable. Mutations to the balanced translocation. In our gene-mapping pilot we identified a po- in FAT P4
 have been identified in this rare autosomal recessive disorder. tential positional candidate gene for intracranial and aortic aneurysm (Lu- METHODS We report on non-identical twin brothers with consanguineous ukkonen et al. 2013, JMG). parents born prematurely at 30+4 gestational weeks, both with congenital Here, we describe the clinical and genetic findings in a family where carri- skin lesions affecting the thorax, back and extremities, but most prominent- ers (n=6) of t(1;12)(q43;q21.1)are affected first by specific learning diffi- ly the scalp. After birth, CPAP was needed for two days due to respiratory culties, chronic headache, balance problems, tremor, fatigue, and later with distress. At 6 weeks of age, intubation was necessary for 4 days in one boy stroke without known predisposing factors. By next-generaCtiHonR Mm3a te-pair due to apnea and desaturation. Serial brain ultrasound in both boys showed sequencing, we fine-mapped the speciCfiHc RcMhr3o mosomal breakpoints, which progressive striatal arteriopathy. Blood eosinophilia was demonstrated in do not truncate any protein coding genes. On chromosome 1, locates both patients. At 2 months, the skin lesions improved tremendously, leaving 62 kb distal to the breakpoint, and a ATGXENN7CLO3DBE isoform spans the only a reddish discoloration and dryness of the skin. bKrCeNaCk2point. Significant linkage for episodic ataxia typ e 3 has been previous- RESULTS Initial skin pathology showed a verrucous epidermis and hyperke- ly identified in 1q42.3. On chromosome 12, locates 550 kb and ratosis with corneal desquamation. Targeted genetic analysis revealed the 1.2 Mb distal to the breakpoint. Both geneswere within a 670 kb presence of the homozygous c.469A>G change leading to the p.Asn157Asp deletion in a recently published family with a complCeHx RnMeu3roAdTeXvNel7oLp3mBental amino acid substitution in the FAT P4
 gene, confirming the diagnosis of IPS aKnCdN Cat2axic phenotype. in both boys. This study has brought into focus three genes - , and DISCUSSION Progressive striatal arteriopathy has not been described in IPS. in a family with an early retirement because of coCmHRpMle3x neurologi- Both boys showed eosinophilia, which can induce brain damage. In addition, cal phenotype leading to stroke, and perfectly co-segregating translocation encephalopathy is a known feature in eosinophilia-associated conditions, t(1;12)(q43;q21.1). We propose that disruption of the GENCODE i.e. Idiopathic Hypereosinophilia syndrome (OMIM 607685), Incontinentia isoform may play a role in the pathogenesis and lead to the observed com- Pigmenti (OMIM 308300) and autosomal recessive Hyper-IgE syndrome plex phenotype. (OMIM 243700). We hypothesize that hypereosinophilia may have been a PM11.016 causative factor for the striatal arteriopathy, which may be an underreco- Is Bardet-Biedl syndrome more frequent in Europeans than current gnized finding in IPS. estimates? PM11.014 J. L. Mandel1,2,3, C. Redin1,4, J. Muller1,2; 1Translational medicine and neurogenetics dpt. IGBMC, INSERM U964, CNRS UMR7104, A 60Kb deletion in the AUT S2
 gene in a patient with cardiopathy, University of Strasbourg, Illkirch, CU Strasbourg, France, 2Genetic diagnostic laboratory, facial dysmorphism and autistic traits CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Collège de France, Paris, France, 4Center for M. J. García-Barcina, E. Santamaría, E. Sarasola, M. A. Fernández-Cuesta, C. Ruiz- Human Genetics Research, Mass General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, Espinoza, B. Barreña; United States. Hospital Universitario de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain. It is generally quite difficult to have reliable estimates of the prevalence of We present the case of a child referred to the Dismorphology consultati- rare genetic diseases as they may be often underdiagnosed and there are on at the age of 3 months. Born after normal pregnancy and instrumental few efforts to have systematic data collection on a scale large enough to delivery at 36+5 w. Birth weight: 2690g and Apgar 7/9. At 4 hours of life obtain significant numbers. Often numerical values are quoted either from he presented an episode of choking while sucking that needs stimulation rare ancient studies or even unreferenced. In the case of Bardet-Biedl syn- for recovery. Progressively acquires suck-swallow coordination and no si- drome, a genetically heterogeneous disease, the numbers usually quoted are gnificant symptoms associated were observed. An atrial septal defect (ASD) 1:125 000 to 1:160 000 for European populations. While Bardet- Biedl syn- (ostium secundum) was diagnosed by echocardiography and the patient drome can be caused by mutations in 19 currently identified genes (OMIM was discharged for control in external consultations. February 2015), two genes (BB S1
 and BB S10
) account for almost half the On the exploration at 3m slightly decreased axial, lower limbs on flexion cases in European populations, and each of them have a major mutation, (without arthrogryposis), increased tendon reflexes, and peculiar phenoty- p.Met390Arg for BB S1
 and p.Cys91LeufsTer5 in BB S10
. We have looked for p2ic0 t8raits (hypertelorism and almond shapEeSdH pGalp 2eb0r1al5 fi s| sGurLesA, SshGorOt pWhi,l -SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG the frequency of these two mutations in the ExAC database, and for the cu-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index mulated frequency of other rarer known mutations in these genes. Based on mutations. this analysis, we estimate that the frequency of BBS in Europeans is likely to Conclusions: Our preliminary results indicate that these mutations could be about 1:50 000, ie 3 times more than previous estimates, and this sug- cause defects that lead to an abnormal planar cell polarity (PCP) signalling, gests that this severe and pleiotropic disease was underdiagnosed. which is known to underlie certain clinical phenotypes in BBS patients. Using the same strategy of using a recurrent mutation whose contribution These findings need to be confirmed by whole mount in situ hybridization to a genetically heterogeneous disease has been well established, we esti- (ongoing). mated the incidence of Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (that was quoted as Work supported by grants from Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI12/01853). unknown in the most recent update of the cognate GeneReviews) at about S. Castro-Sánchez and M. Alvarez-Satta: FPU fellowships. P. Suárez-Bregua: 1:50 000 to 1:65 000, using ExAC data for the p.Ala177Thr mutation in the predoctoral fellowship from Regional Government (Xunta de Galicia). RNASEH2B gene. P S11
.019 P S11
.017 Characterization of the total ciliopathy variant load dissolves the Identification of a new mutation confirms the implication of IFT172 enigma of oligogenic inheritance in Bardet-Biedl syndrome in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BB S20
) N. Bachmann1, E. Decker1, M. Hiersche1, C. Decker1, H. J. Bolz1, A. Bohring2, D. Mitter3, G. E. Schaefer1, S. Scheidecker1, J. Muller2,3, V. Geoffroy1, C. Redin3, D. Lacombe4, I. Missotte5, Borck4, S. Al Khatani5, A. O. Khan6, M. Cetiner7, C. Bergmann1,8; J. Mandel2,3,6, H. Dollfus1; 1Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 2University of Münster, 1Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Institut de génétique médicale d’Alsace, INSERM Institute for Human Genetics, Münster, Germany, 3University of Leipzig, Institute for U1112, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), Université Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany, 4University of Ulm, Institute for Human Genetics, de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Ingelheim, Germany, 5Armed Forces Hospital, Khamis Mushayt, Saudi Arabia, 6King Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Département de Médecine Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Riyadh, Saudi Translationnelle et Neurogénétique, IGBMC, CNRS UMR 7104/INSERM U964/Université Arabia, 7University Hospital of Essen, Department of Pediatrics, Essen, Germany, de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 4CHU de Bordeaux, Génétique Médicale, Université 8University of Freiburg, Department of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany. de Bordeaux, Laboratoire MRGM, Bordeaux, France, 5Service de Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier de Nouvelle-Calédonie, Hôpital de Magenta, Nouméa, New Caledonia, 6Chaire de Génétique Humaine, Collège de France, Illkirch, France. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is clinically and genetically heterogeneous and overlaps with other ciliopathies. Mutations in about 20 genes are de- scribed. BBS was among the first Mendelian disorders for which triallelic Introduction: Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS; MIM 209900) is a recessive and inheritance has been proposed which still causes uncertainty for genetic genetically heterogeneous ciliopathy characterized by postaxial polydactyly, counselling and prenatal diagnostiBcBs.S W1e perBfBoSrm10e d genetic testing in. 145 retinitis pigmentosa, obesity, hypogonadism, cognitive impairment and kid- unrelated BBS patients, the most comprehensive sequencing-based study ney dysfunction. So far, 20 BBS genes have been identified, with the last ones to date. Initially, we tested for the and hotspot mutations NGS reported being found in one or few families. using our panel for ciliopathies (currently targeting 381 genes) was perfor- Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing was performed in a consan- med inB 8B1S patients.A ILnM aSll1 but three families who fulfilled the diagnostic cri- guineous family in which twoB BaSff1ectedB cBhSi1ld8ren presented typical BBS fea- teria, we identified homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in a tures (retinitis pigmenBtBoSs1a, poBsBtaSx1i6al polydactyly, obesity, hypoBgBoSn1a7dism single gene or . Most mutations were private, 50 were novel and BanBdS 1c8ognitive impairment). to were sequenced by New Ge- not described so far. High-coverage NGS enaBbBleSd the detection of causative neration Sequencing ( to IFT17)2 and Sanger Sequencing ( and CNVs which were key to the diagnosis in hitherto unsolved constellations. ). As no MLPA kit is available for any of the genes, all deletions would Results: A missense mutation in gene (NM_015662.2: c. 2857C>T, p. have been most probably missed by conventional techniques. Most patients Arg9I5F3T C1
y7s2) was identified at the homozygous state in the two patients and carried additional mutations at other loci. However, in contrast to published found at the heterozygote state in both parents and their 3 healthy child- data, our findings are in accordance with a recessive disease model. While ren. mutations have been initially reported in Jeune and Mainzer- modifiers may play a role for variable expressivity, our study widely resolves Saldino syndromes (Halbritter et al., 2014). Recently, mIFuTt1a7ti2ons have also the long-standing enigma of triallelic or oligogenic inheritance in BBS. More been found in isolated retIiFnTit1i7s 2pigmentosa and Bardet-Biedl- like cIiFliTopathy than 95% of typical BBS patients harbour pathogenic mutations in one of (IFBTu1ja2k7owska and al., 2014). This is the second report of mutations in the known disease genes why we conclude that further genetic heterogenei- BBS patients confirming as a BBS gene. Moreover, another gene, ty is limited. Our data is of major importance for genetic counselling, clinical , was already associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (Aldahmesh et management and prenatal diagnostic testing. al., 2014) and this report confirmed th eIF iTm1p7l2ic ation of IFT genes in the pa- PM11.020 thogenesis of BBS. th Beals-Hecht syndrome: expanding the clinical phenotype Conclusions: In this report we validate as the 20 BBS gene (BB S20
) C. Machado, J. Dupont, A. Sousa; and confirm intraflagellar transport defects in BBS. Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal. PM11.018 Characterization of mutations in BB S5
 gene by functional analysis in zebrafish model Introduction: Beals-Hecht syndrome (BHS) or Congenital ContracturalAr- S. Castro-Sánchez1,2, P. Suárez-Bregua3, M. Alvarez-Satta1,2, J. Rotllant3, D. Valverde1,2; achnodactyly (CCA) is a rare autosomal dominant connective tissue disor- 1Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, Faculty of Biology, University der characterized by dolichostenomelia, crumpled ears, arachnodactyly, of Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Vigo (IBIV), Vigo, Spain, muscle hypoplasia andmultiple joint contractures. Heterozygous mutations 3Aquatic Molecular Pathobiology Group, Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas, Consejo in FBN2, which codes for fibrillin-2, are identified in about 27-75% of pa- Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Vigo, Spain. tients.In animal models,FBN2 is a key regulator of bone formation during embryogenesis. Case presentation: We describe a 2 year-old boy, who is the second child of IntroductioDna: nBiaor dreerti-oBiedl syndrome (BBS, #209900) is a rare genetic dis- healthy non-consanguineous parents. At birth,micrognathia, crumpled heli- order considered a member of the group of ciliopathies. In recent years, ces, pectuscarinatum, arachnodactyly and campodactyly of both hands and zebrafish ( ) has been extensively used as a geninet viciv moodel for feet, flexion contractures of wrists, elbows and knees, and generalized mu- the study of human disorders giveBnB Sth5e high homology that exists between scle weakness were noticed. Cardiac evaluation identified total anomalous human and zebrafish genomes (>80%). Here, we report an assay to pulmonary venous return and patent ductus arteriosus. Chest x-ray showed analyse the functionality of three variants, pBrBedSi5cted to be pathogenic, bilateral fusion of multiple ribs. which have been detected by WES or direct sequencing. ArrayCGH did not identify pathogenic CNVs. Sequencing of FBN2 revealed Materials and Methods: Functional modelling of variants was carried two novel heterozygous variants: c.7138+1G>A,at a donor splice site, and out using 8-10 somite stage embryos, previously microinjected with bbs5- a missense variant of unknown significance, c.2934T>A(p.Phe978Leu). Se- MO at one- to two-cell stage. Non-injected embryos were used as controls. gregation analysis is ongoing. We therefore performed rescue experiments with full-length human mRNA Conclusion:Our case is within the most severe clinical spectrum of BHS/ (wild-type and mutant, separately). Thus, affected embryos were classified CCA.To our knowledge, apart from an infant with partial fusion of  C2
- C3
 according to severity of observed phenotypes. vertebral bodies, no other bone fusions were described in affected humans Results: As previously reported, zebrafish embryos injected with bbs5-MO [1]. We propose the fused ribs present in our patientcould be an additional manifested several gastrulation defects, such as curved body axis, kinked clinical finding in relation to BBS/CCA. Bioinformatic evaluation indicated notochord, longer somites or partial loss of somite definition. These phe- that the c.7138+1G>A variant affects splicing of exon 56, and is thus probab- notypes, ranging from mild to more severe, seem to be rescued by using ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANlDy p, aUthKo g|e WnicW. NWon.eEthSeHleGss,. OfuRncGtional studies and results from segreg2at0io9n wild-type human BB S5
 mRNA, but not with mRNA carrying the detectedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S11
.023 Brain-thyroid-lung syndrome in a child caused by a deletion on analysis are needed to better clarify the pathogenicity of the FBN2variants chromosome 14 proximal of the NKX2.1 gene locus identified in this patient. M. Kharbanda1, S. Khadouma2, J. Jones3, M. Donaldson3, J. Pohlenz2, P. Hermanns2, C. P S11
.021 Longman1; 1Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2Children´s Hospital, Mainz, Relation between assisted reproduction techniques and genomic Germany, 3Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow, United Kingdom. imprinting defects J. A. Tenorio, V. Romanelli, L. Fernández García-Moya, P. Arias, G. Gordo, I. Dapía, J. Nevado, SOGRI Consortium, P. Lapunzina; INGEMM, Madrid, Spain. Brain-lung-thyroid syndrome (BLTS) is a rare disorder characterized by congNeKnXit2a.1l hypothyroidism (CH), infant respiratory distress syndrome (IRDS) and benign hereditary chorea (BHC). BLTS is caused by mutations in Introduction: Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS) is an overgrowth syndrome cha- the gene, a transcription factor which is involved in the development racterized by an unusual growth, macroglossia, hemihyperplasia, and other of the thyroid, lung and central nervous sysNteKmX.2.1 features as abdominal wall defects, major frequency of tumors compared In previously documented and published cases of patients with brain-thyro- with general population. Other clinical features are embryonic tumors, ad- id-lung syndrome a mutation or deNlKetXio2n.1 of arr haays c aolmwapyasr abteieven gpernesoemnitc. renocortical cytomegaly, ear anomalies, visceromegaly, renal abnormalities, Hhyebrrei dwizea ptiroensent one patient with the clinical features of brain-thyroid-lung neonatal hypoglycemia and polydactyly. syndrome without a mutation in . Using NKX2.1 The molecular basis of this syndrome is multifactorial, but the most com- , we identifiedM aB hIePteBrRoMzySg1oLus 1 MRbA LdGeAlePtAio1n on chromosome mon alterations are imprinting defects at 11p15.5 locus, which represents 14, which is approximately 195,000 bp proximal to . The deleted re- about 70% of the cases. gion encompasses 3 genes: , and . Currently,N wKeX a2r.1e Material and Methods: In this study, we analyzed KvDMR and H19DMR me- trying to determine whether NKX2.1 directly interacts with one of these 3 thylation levels in 121 patients with BWS, 16 born by assisted reproductive proteins or whether one of the three proteins directly binNdsK tXo2 .t1he techniques (ART) and 105 by natural conception. gene promoter. In 25 patients (15 from ART and 10 from Natural conception) we also analy- Recently, a heterozygous deletion 200 kb proximal to the gene has zed several methylation imprinting loci: SRNPN, PEG1, ZAC, and GNAS. MS- been identified in another pMatBieIPnt with a choreiform movement disorder. MLPA and pyrosequencing were applied to performed molecular analysis of The smallest common deleted region of our patient and the described pa- the imprinting regions. tient encompasses just the gene (MUK-binding inhNibKitXo2r.y1 protein). Results: We found alterations in the locus 11p15.5 in 15 of 16 patients born MBIP is expressed in the thyroid, lung and forebrain. Our current aim is to by ART and 61 of 105 of patients born by natural conception. In addition, clarify whether MBIP is involved directly or indirectly in gene ex- several patients born by assisted reproductive techniques presented defects pression or regulation. This finding will help to identify completely new me- in other imprinting loci. chanisms of NKX2.1 regulation and provide a deeper understanding of the Conclusions: Imprinting defects in patients born after assisted reproductive thyroid development and the possible cause of thyroid disorders. techniques are nine times more frequent than patients born after natural PM11.024 conception. This defects may include more than one imprinting loci and the Exome sequencing reveals Camptosynpolydactyly and Mesoaxial dysregulation of the epigenetic pattern are related to the development of synostotic syndactyly with phalangeal reduction to be allelic imprinting disorders such as Beckwick Wiedemann. Thus, ART is related to disorders the disruption of DNA methylation pattern. A. Dalal1, A. Kar1, A. Das Bhowmik1, S. R. Phadke2; Grants: FIS: PI11/2491; Marató-TV3; EUCID-COST Project(BM1208); Aso- 1Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad, India, 2Sanjay Gandhi ciación Española Síndrome de Sotos. Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India. PM11.022 Epigenetic and genetic defects in Polish patients with Beckwith- Camptosynpolydactyly is a rare and complex type of hand malformation that Wiedemann syndrome was first reported in a child and subsequently in fetus from Muslim family in D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Kugaudo1, E. Ciara1, A. Tańska1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, J. Trubicka1, M. Pelc1, R. Śmigiel2, A. Jezela-Stanek1, E. Obersztyn3, A. Stembalska2, A. India. The proband had disorganized hands consisting of polydactyly with 2 Poluha4, J. Wierzba5, A. Tomaszewska6, M. Janeczko7, J. Fijak7, R. Glazar8, M. Wiśniewska8, digits arising from the dorsum of the hands. In addition there was syn- and M. Klimkowska-Boczoń9, A. Kamela9, M. Krygier5, A. Pioch5, M. Drożyńska-Duklas5, R. camptodactyly of some fingers, syndactyly of toes and nails were dysplastic. Ślęzak2, A. Wawrzkiewicz-Witkowska6, A. Cieślikowska1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska- There were no other anomalies present. Subsequent fetus showed similar Walasek1; anomaly and was terminated. 1Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Wroclaw Medical University, Homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing was done in proband after Wrocław, Poland, 3Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 4Children´s University obtaining informed consent. The sequencing reads were mapped, anno- Hospital, Lublin, Poland, 5Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland, 6Medical University of Silesia, Zabrze, Poland, 7University Children’s Hospital of Cracow, Cracow, tated and filtered for known polymorphisms and synonymous variants. Poland, 8Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznań, Poland, 9University of Rzeszow, The patient revealed two consequent homozygous substitution mutations Rzeszów, Poland. (c.[220G>T;221A>T]) in Basic Helix Loop Helix (BHLHA9) gene. These mu- tations result in substitution of Glutamic acid at 74 position with Leucine (p. E74
L). The mutation was confirmed by sanger sequencing in parents and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a disorder characterized by pre- and sibling and was predicted to be ‘disease causing’ by mutation prediction postnatal overgrowth in children, abdominal wall defects, macroglossia and a software. high risk of tumors. It is caused by different epigenetic and genetic defects of the BHLHA9 has already been reported to be involved in embryonic limb deve- 11p15 region containing imprinted genes which are localized in two domains lopment. Duplications of 17p13.3 region involving BHLHA9 gene are known controlled by the imprinting control region I C1
 and I C2
. to be associated with Split hand/foot malformation with long bone deficien- The aim of the study was to establish the molecular background of BWS in a cy (SHFLD3;612676). Recently missense mutations in BHLHA9 gene were group of 77 Polish patients. Molecular analyses wCDerKeN p1eCrformed on leukocyte identified in Mesoaxial synostotic syndactyly with phalangeal reduction DNA and comprised methylation sensitive multiplex ligation-dependent probe (MSSD;609432). The phenotype of patients with MSSD is much milder com- amplification (MS-MLPA), microsatellite analyses, gene sequencing, and pared to our patient. Mutations in MSSD have been reported at amino acid arrayCGH. The presence of 11p15 defects in 60 BWS patients, including a pair of numbers 71, 73 and 75. Our patient had mutation at position 74. The reason monozygotic twins, was revealed. Hypomethylation at I C2
 in 36 patients, hiper- for the difference in phenotype is not clear but it appears that both MSSD methylation at I C1
 in 3 patients, and paternal UPD of 11p15 in 12 patients were and camptosynpolydactyly are allelic disorders. identified. In other 7 patients aberrant methylation was associated withC thDeK pNr1eC- (Grant number:BT/PR3193/MED/12/521/2011) sence of CNVs: duplications, a triplication or deletions involving CbDoKthN o1rC one of P S11
.025 the imprinted domains. In two patients novel frameshift mutations in Clinical Genetics in the Dutch West Indies: 5-years’ experience of gene were found. In the majority of cases genetic defects (CNVs, muta- clinical and molecular analysis of 350 patients with congenital tions) were inherited and their effects depended on their size, localization and malformation disorders and intellectual deficit. the parental inheritance. Overall, the study revealed the presence of epigenetic T. De Vries1, S. Lo-A-Njoe2, L. van der Veken1, P. Caribbean genetic pediatricians3, H. Ploos or genetic defects in 77% of investigated patients. The pattern of our molecular van Amstel1, G. van Haaften1, N. Knoers1, M. M. van Haelst1; findings is comparable with other populations. The study provides detailed data 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, concerning mutational spectrum of a significant group of BWS patients. 2Pediatric cardiology, Dept.of Pediatrics, Dr. Horacio Oduber Hospital, Aruba, The study was financed by National Science Centre project 1149/B/ 210 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG  P01
/2011/40 (NN407114940).ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Netherlands Antilles, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, Dr. Horacio Oduber Hospital, Aruba, Fundasion Mariadal, Bonaire, St. Elisabeh Hospital, Curaçao, St. Maarten Medical Center, St. Maarten, Aruba, Bonaire, Curacao, St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles. by facial dysmorphism, growth and cognitive impairment, limb malforma- tions and multiple organ involvement. Mutations in five genes, encoding subunits of the cohesin complex (SM C1
A, SM C3
, RAD21) and its regulators The islands Curacao, Aruba, St. Maarten and the three BES-islands (Bonaire, (NIPBL, HDA C8
), account for 70% of patients with CdLS or overlapping phe- St. Eustatius, and Saba) are part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Their notype. total population of approximately 300.000 consists of a mixture of different Here, we present clinical description of seventeen patients with CdLS-like races, which makes them very interesting for genetic analysis. Until recently features caused by mutations in SM C3
 and assess the degree of overlap Clinical Genetics was not part of regular pediatric care on these Dutch Ca- with typical CdLS phenotype. Of these, ten probands are novel and seven ribbean Islands. Since 2010, clinical genetic outpatient clinics have been individuals have been previously reported. Furthermore, we mapped all established at the pediatric departments of St. Elisabeth Hospital, Curaçao, mutations to the known structure of the SMC complex to predict functional Dr. Horacio Oduber Hospital, Aruba, Fundashon Mariadal, Bonaire, and consequences. St.Maarten Medical Center, St. Maarten. All patients exhibited clinical findings of overlap with typical CdLS patients, Here we present the clinical and molecular genetic results of the first 350 in particular harboring SM C1
A mutations. Although SM C3
-associated phe- consultations. The majority of cases presented with intellectual deficit and/ notypes are also characterized by postnatal microcephaly but with a less or congenital malformations. A clinical and molecular diagnosis could be distinctive craniofacial appearance, a milder prenatal growth retardation established in approximately 40% of the cases. that worsens in childhood, few congenital heart defects and an absence of The first results of an Aruban cardio-genetics cohort showed a high inci- limb deficiencies. dence of 12.3/1000 live births with congenital heart diseases. Genome wide Likewise some functional indications previously reported, our modelling of analysis revealed copy number variations (CNVs) that might be associated the mutation effects support the hypothesis that the mechanism of pathoge- with the clinical phenotypes. In addition we found a significant number of nicity in SM C1
A and SM C3
 related CdLS might be due to a dominant negative patients with at least one region of homozygosity larger than 10Mb, sug- effect of the altered protein resulting from missense or in-frame mutations. gestive for identity by descent or consanguinity. Analysis of homozygous Nevertheless, the finding of one truncating SM C3
 mutation, leads us to con- regions is currently pending to identify candidate genes that might explain sider haploinsufficiency as additional potential cause of pathogenesis. the congenital heart disease phenotype in patients without a molecular dia- This work confirms that SM C3
 mutations account for ~1-2% of CdLS-like gnosis. phenotypes and emphasizes the importance of SM C3
 mutation screening, Since the incidence of certain congenital anomalies is higher than the glo- which will allow us to better assess for genotype-phenotype correlation. bal incidence, and patients come from relatively closed island communities P S11
.029 with very detailed phenotype description, these cohorts are very interesting FISHing for a tissue-specific mosaic monosomy of chromosome 21 for future genetics studies. A. D. Kolotii1,2, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, I. Y. Iourov1,2,4, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3; PM11.026 1Mental Health Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research and Novel mutations in IGF1R and SYNM cause reccessive congenital Clinical Institute for Pediatrics at the Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and diaphragmtic hernia and mental retardation Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Russian R. Kadir, N. Fluhr, M. Guri, O. S. Birk; Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Human Genetics and the Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion Federation. University, Beer Sheva, Israel. Non-mosaic chromosome 21 monosomy is considered incompatible with Autosomal recessive congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) with mental re- life. Here, we present an exception, which turned out to be an example of tardation, IUGR, hearing loss, short stature, failure to thrive (FTT) and dys- tissue-specific mosaic monosomy of chromosome 21. In a 9-month-old girl morphism was diagnosed in three individuals of an Arab Israeli family. MRI with severe congenital malformations, cytogenetic analysis of blood re- demonstrated hypomyelination with narrowing of corpus callosum. Homozy- vealed monosomy of chromosome 21. Array CGH (molecular karyotyping) gosity mapping yielded 4 homozygous regions and whole exome sequencing has confirmed the loss of chromosome 21. To determine the background of an affected individual identified only two mutations in these regions, both of viability in the index case, FISH analysis of different tissues (blood and of which within the same 15q26.3 locus: IGF1R (NM_000857.3:c.1915G>A, buccal cells) was done using DNA probes for 21q22.13q22.2 and D13Z1/ p.639G>S) and SYNM (NM_145728.2:c.1859G>T, p.620L>F). None of the D21Z1 (pericentromeric DNA) loci and multicoulor banding. In buccal cells, mutations were found in 100 ethnically matched controls and both mutati- we have detected ring chromosome 21 was detected in 80% of cells. The ons fully segregated as expected within the studied family. region of chromosome 21 lost through the ring chromosome formation was Deletion mutations in this chromosomal locus, harboring both IGF1R and estimated as 21q22.11qter. The patient presented with microcephaly, large SYNM, have been previously linked with CDH. Mutations in IGF1R have low-set ears, glaucoma, perforated corneal ulcer, protruding frontal suture, been demonstrated to cause hearing loss, IUGR, short stature and FTT. In- skull asymmetry, short neck, arachnodactyly, pectus excavatum, ventriculo- terestingly, null mutation of DESMIN, direct interactor of SYNM, leads to megaly and thrombocytopenia. The present case appear to be one of few ca- diaphragmatic hernia in adult mice. We thus present a complex phenotype, ses of mosaic chromosome 21 monosomy and probably one of the first case presumably caused by homozygous mutations in two genes which are in of tissue-specific mosaicism for chromosome 21 loss more-or-less well do- linkage disequilibrium. We speculate that the IGF1R mutation is the cause cumented. One can speculate that this case is the result of intercellular natu- for FTT, IUGR, hearing loss and short stature and that the SYNM mutation ral selection between normal and abnormal cells as proposed earlier (Yurov results in the CDH. et al., 2007, 2009, 2010). Interestingly, it is the FISH-based techniques that P S11
.027 have helped to rule out the presence of normal cells. Thus, FISH and array De novo heterozygous mutations in SM C3
 cause a range of Cornelia de CGH should be applied to analyze different tissues to diagnose similar cases. Lange Syndrome-overlapping phenotypes Supported by Russian Scientific Fund (Grant #14-15-00411). M. C. Gil-Rodríguez1, M. A. Deardorff2,3, M. Ansari4, C. A. Tan5, I. Parenti6,7, C. Baquero- Montoya1,8, L. B. Ousager9, B. Puisac1, M. ´Hernández-Marcos1, M. E. Teresa-Rodrigo1, PM11.030 I. Marcos-Alcalde10, D. Braunholz6, C. Gervasini7, L. Larizza7, J. Pozojevic6, P. Gómez- The ciliopathy protein C C2
D2A associates with NINL and plays a role Puertas11, A. Selicorni12, F. J. Ramos1,13, L. G. Jackson14, I. D. Krantz2, S. Das5, R. C. M. in RAB8A-MICA L3
 regulated vesicle trafficking Hennekam15, F. J. Kaiser6, D. R. FitzPatrick4, J. Pié1; R. Bachmann-Gagescu1,2, M. Dona3, M. Ueffing4, R. Roepman3, K. Boldt4, D. Doherty5, C. 1University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, B. Moens6, S. C. F. Neuhauss7, H. Kremer3, E. Van Wijk3; Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 1University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich, Switzerland, 2Institute for Molecular Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, Life Sciences, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 5University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 6Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Netherlands, 4Eberhard Karls University, Tuebingen, Germany, 5University of Germany, 7Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 8Hospital Pablo Tobón Uribe, Washington-Dept of Pediatrics, Seattle, WA, United States, 6Fred Hutchinson Cancer Medellín, Colombia, 9Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 10Centro de Biología Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States, 7University of Zurich- Molecular Life Molecular „Severo Ochoa“, Madrid, Spain, 11Centro de Biología Molecular „Severo Ochoa“ Sciences, Zürich, Switzerland. (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain, 12Fondazione MBBM AOS Gerardo, Monza, Italy, 13Hospital Clínico Universitario “Lozano Blesa”, Zaragoza, Spain, 14Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 15University of Amsterdam, Amsterdan, Ciliopathies are a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous group of Netherlands. human developmental disorders caused by dysfunction of primary cilia. Jou- bert syndrome (JS) is characterized by a distinctive hindbrain malformation variably associated with retinal dystrophy and other ciliopathy phenotypes. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdELSS)H isG a n2 i0nh1e5ri t|e Gd LdiAsoSrdGeOr cWha,r aScCteOrizTeLdA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 211 Mutations in C C2
D2A, encoding a protein localized at the ciliary transitionABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index zone, are found in ~10% of patients with JS. The ciliary transition zone plays (2/29) X-linked. Interestingly, the rate of consanguinity among positive ca- an important role in controlling the ciliary protein content, but the precise ses was around 80%. One patient with MCA without ID and one with move- mechanism remains unclear. Previous studies in the zebrafish demonstrated ment disorder (2/29, 6.8%) received molecular diagnoses of two overlap- a role for Cc2d2a in Rab8a-dependent vesicle trafficking in photoreceptor ping AR genetic disorders. cells. In this work, we identify the centrosomal protein NINL as a physical In summary, clinical exome sequencing is emerging as a potential molecular interaction partner of C C2
D2A through a yeast-2-hybrid screen. NINL parti- diagnosis tool in Saudi pediatric patients suspected with genetic etiology ally co-localizes with C C2
D2A at the base of cilia and ninl knockdown in ze- with a diagnostic rate of 42%. brafish leads to photoreceptor outer segment loss, mislocalization of opsins P S11
.033 and vesicle accumulation, similar to cc2d2a-/- phenotypes. Moreover, parti- A case of Cockayne syndrome detected by chromosomal microarray al ninl knockdown in cc2d2a-/- embryos enhances the retinal phenotype of analysis the mutants, indicating a genetic interaction in vivo, for which an illustration G. E. Rudenskaya, I. V. Kanivetz, S. A. Korostelev, T. A. Adyan, A. V. Polyakov; is found in patients from a JS cohort. Similar to zebrafish cc2d2a mutants, Medical Genetics Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. ninl morphants display altered Rab8a localization. Further exploration of the NINL-associated interactome identifies MICA L3
, a protein known to interact with Rab8a and to play an important role in vesicle docking and Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) is widely used for search of chro- fusion. Together, these data support a model where C C2
D2A associates with mosomal microdeletions/microduplications but in some instances is hel- NINL to provide a docking point for cilia-directed cargo vesicles, providing pful for detection of monogenic disorders. Our case of Cockayne syndrome, a mechanism by which transition zone proteins can control the protein con- type A (CSA), rare autosomal recessive disorder produced by ERC C8
 muta- tent of the ciliary compartment. tions, is an interesting example. The 8-year-old girl, an only child of non- P S11
.031 consanguineous Russian parents originating from different regions, had A specific R391X mutation in the RUNX2 gene may be associated with pronounced delay of motor and especially of mental development, growth hearing loss in the Cleidocranial Dysplasia: Analysis of four families deficiency (100 cm, 13 kg), microcephaly (42 cm), typical face with deep-set F. Kul, A. Koparır, E. Fenercioglu, M. Seven, M. Ozen, H. Ulucan; eyes, early hypohidrosis, ataxia, demyelinating polyneuropathy with feet de- Istanbul university cerrahpasa medical school, Istanbul, Turkey. formity, atrophy and multiple small calcinates on brain MRI, and optic atro- phy but no skin photosensitivity, deafness, retinal degeneration or cataract. Mutations in ERC C6
 gene responsible for more severe CSB were not found. Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD, MIM119600) is an autosomal dominant skel- DNA test for CSA, which is not performed in our centre routinely, was plan- etal dysplasia characterized by delayed closure of the cranial sutures, apla- ned. Meanwhile, CMA (Affymetrix CytoScan HD Array) was carried out in sia or hypoplasia of the clavicles and dental abnormalities. These findings search of other possible diagnoses, and homozygous deletion of 5q12.1 was accompanied by mobility of droopy shoulders, frontal and parietal bossing, detected. Molecular karyotype: arr[hg19] 5q12.1(60,131,474-60,192,457) hypertelorism, brachycephaly, presence of multiple wormian bones, wide x0. The deletion had size 60983 bp and encompassed two genes, ELOV L7
 (of pubic symphysis, supernumerary, late erupting teeth and short stature. CCD no clinical significance) and ERC C8
. Moreover, an increased number of long can be diagnosed by clinical and radiological evaluation and validated by contiguous stretch of homozygosity (LCSH) - 14% of genome - was found. molecular studies. Heterozygous loss of function RUNX2 gene, which plays Both CMA findings are also strongly unusual for apparently non-inbred fa- an important role in osteogenesis and differentiation of precursor cells, cau- mily. Homozygous deletion was confirmed by ALFP analysis of ERC C8
 exon ses CCD phenotype. 12. Verified CSA diagnosis permits prenatal or preimplantation testing in We report six cases from four unrelated families with CCD phenotype. First the family and proper supportive medical care for the patient minding risk family had a classic CCD phenotype and, IV S4
+4delAAGT mutation was de- of immunological and other complications. tected. Second family had also similar clinical findings with first family and PM11.034 molecular analysis of RUNX2 is not completed yet. Third family also had Cervical spinal cord compression caused by calcification of the yellow classic CCD phenotype and accompanied by hypothyroidism and mixed ligament in Coffin-Lowry syndrome type hearing loss. Her father was presented CCD phenotype and mild sen- K. Kurosawa, Y. Enomoto, C. Hatano, T. Yokoi, N. Nakamura; sorineural deafness. Mutation analysis of third family revealed R391X in Kanagawa Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan. the RUNX2 gene. Last case had also classic CCD phenotype and molecular analysis of RUNX2 isn’t completed yet. In CCD patients, though hearing loss was identified in the literature, previously, there is no comprehensive data Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is an X-linked mental retardation syndrome about auditory capacity of patients who had R391X mutation in the RUNX2. characterized by severe to profound intellectual disability and musculos- Our data suggest that these specific mutation may cause conductive and/ keletal manifestations. Calcification of the yellow ligament (CYL) in early or sensorineural hearing loss in CCD. To elucidate this hypothesis further adulthood, resulting in myelopathy by spinal cord compression, had been functional analysis should be performed. previously reported in 3 CLS patients of Japanese origin. Here, we report on PM11.032 an additional 3 CLS patients with CYL: a 12-year-old boy and a pair of 17- Clinical exome sequencing emerges as an effective diagnostic tool in year-old monozygotic twins. Ossification of the posterior longitudinal liga- Saudi pediatric patients with suspected genetic etiology: a King Fahad ment and of the yellow ligament both represents ectopic ossification in the Medical City (KFMC) experience cervical and thoracic spine region. This ossification is a common disorder A. Peer Zada, E. Faqeih, A. AlAsmari, T. Wani; among Japanese and other Asian populations, resulting in compressive mey- King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. lopathy and/radiculopathy in patients. Loss-of-function mutations in RSK2, a protein required for osteoblast differentiation and function, lead to CLS and are responsible for the skeletal abnormalities observed in CLS patients. We present here, for the first time, an observational study of 69 Saudi pati- Together with these results, the condition of CLS is likely accelerating the ents seen by clinical geneticists who ordered the clinical exome sequencing development of calcification in the ligaments and fascicles in our patients. (CES) tests at KFMC. All the patients were pediatric; 33 females (48%), 36 Early detection and survey of this serious complication should be conside- males (52%); mean age for females, 5.6±0.6 and for males 4.6±0.5 years. red in the management of CLS, especially for patients of Oriental origin. The patients presented with diverse clinical indications; intellectual disabi- P S11
.035 lity (ID: 65%, 45/69), mitochondrial disease (10%, 7/69), multiple conge- Insulin response dysregulation explains abnormal fat storage and nital anomalies (MCA: ~6%, 4/69), metabolic disorders (~4%, 3/69) and high risks of diabetes mellitus type 2 in Cohen Syndrome others comprising of individual cases (~15%, 10/69). We analyzed the CES L. Floriane1, L. Faivre1,2, T. Gautier3, J. Petit4, E. Gautier1,2, D. Masson3, G. Jego3, S. El data with respect to the phenotypic indications at initial diagnoses, overall Chehadeh-Djebbar1,2, N. Marle1,2, V. Carmignac1, V. Deckert3, M. Brindisi5, L. Lagrost3, C. diagnostic yield, mode of inheritance, the spectrum of genetic mutations, Thauvin-Robinet1,2, L. Duplomb1; consanguinity and the incidental findings reported. We observed an overall 1GAD, Dijon, France, 2FHU TRANSLAD, Département de Génétique, Dijon, France, 3Université de Bourgogne, Inserm UMR 866, Dijon, France, 4Service d‘endocrinologie, diagnostic rate of 42% (29 of 69 cases; 95% CI-40%-44%) with 48% (14 of CHU Bocage, Dijon, France, 5Service d’Endocrinologie, CHU Bocage, Dijon, France. 29) of the mutations reported as variants of unknown clinical significance but likely pathogenic and 52% (15 of 29) as known disease causing genetic alterations. The rate of molecular diagnosis was 44% (20/45) for ID, 57% Cohen Syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, with glycosyla- (4/7) for mitochondrial disorders, 33% (1/3) for metabolic disorders, 25% tion defect secondary to mutations in VP S13
B gene, which encodes a protein (1/4) for MCA. Mendelian inheritance patterns included 85% (23/29) au- of the Golgi apparatus. Besides congenital neutropenia, retinopathy and in- t2os1o2mal recessive (AR), 3.7% (1/29) autEosSoHmGal d2o0m1in5a n| tG (ALDA)S aGndO 7W.4%, S COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG tellectual deficiency, CS patients are faced to obesity. Metabolism investigati-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ons show abnormal glucose tolerance tests and HDL values in some patients of chromosome 19. Morphological phenotype of boy consist of short statu- that should be risk factors for the development of diabetes mellitus and/ re, long, lumpy head, slightly sunken temples area, sloping forehead, high, or cardiovascular complications. To understand the mechanisms involved in diffuse frontal hairline, triangular face, prominent eyebrows, ptosis, hyper- CS fat storage, we used two models of adipogenesis differentiation: (i) SGBS telorism, flat nasal bridge, the long ridge and thick tip of the nose, big, raised preadipocytes with VP S13
B invalidation thanks to siRNA delivery and (ii) to the top nostrils, flanged out lower lip, short nasolabial distance, broad CS primary fibroblasts. In both models, VP S13
B invalidation leads to an ac- mouth fissure, ear lobes obliquely backward, crowded, misaligned teeth. In celerated differentiation into fat cells, which is confirmed by an earlier and addition the dystonia and hearing problems, intellectual disability and delay an increased expression of specific adipogenic genes, consequently to an of speech development were observed. increase response of cells to insulin stimulation. At the end of the differen- Conclusion: Two additional sub-microscopic changes in form microdeleti- tiation protocol, these fat cells exhibit a decreased in AKT2 phosphorylation on 6p12.3-p21.1 and microduplication 19q13.41→qter as a highly complex after insulin stimulation, in favor of insulin resistance. Thus, in association chromosomal rearrangement involving three chromosomes together with with the in-depth analysis of the metabolic status of the patients, this study deletion 18p11.21→pter resulted in complex phenotype in boy with pre- allowed us to recommend an appropriate nutrition education in order to viously diagnosed like de Grouchy syndrome. prevent the occurrence of diabetes mellitus as well as recommendation for The study was sponsored by Polish grant of Medical University Bialystok - follow-up of CS patients, in particular for metabolic syndrome development. No 113-06825L. We also preconize not to use the term obesity in CS, but abnormal fat re- PM11.038 partition, which should limit the number of patients whom are addressed Associated malformations in cases with congenital diaphragmatic for CS diagnosis only on the basis of intellectual deficiency associated with hernia obesity. C. Stoll, Y. Alembik, B. Dott, M. Roth; PM11.036 Genetique medicale, Strasbourg, France. Complex chromosomal rearrangement - trisomy 9p24.3q21.11, duplication 17q25.3, deletion 19p12 - in a child with severe hypotonia, facial dysmorphism and genital hypoplasia The etiology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is unclear and its D. Wahl1, U. Heinrich2, E. Krimmel2, C. Uebler3, I. Rost2; pathogenesis is controversial. Because previous reports have inconsistent- 1Praxis für Humangenetische Beratung und Psychotherapie, Augsburg, Germany, ly noted the type and frequency of malformations associated with CDH, we 2Centre for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany, 3Josefinum assessed these associated malformations ascertained between 1979 and Kinderklinik, Augsburg, Germany. 2007 in 386,088 consecutive births. Of the 139 patients with the most com- mon type of CDH , the posterolateral, or Bochdalek-type hernia , 85 (61.2%) had associated malformations. These included: chromosomal abnormali- The male child was born spontaneously as the second child of healthy non- ties (n=25, 18.0%including 12 cases with trisomy 18); non-chromosomal consanguineous parents after 38 weeks of gestation after an uneventful syndromes (Fryns syndrome, fetal alcohol syndrome, De Lange syndrome, pregnancy. Postpartal hypotonia, reduced muscle reflexes and weak crying CHARGE syndrome, Fraser syndrome, Goldenhar syndrome, Smith-Lemli- were the first suspicious symptoms. Further clinical investigations revealed Opitz syndrome, multiple pterygium syndrome, Noonan syndrome, spon- rhizomelia, craniofacial dysmorphism such as frontal bossing, flat occiput, dylocostal dysostosis, and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome); malformation flat nasal bridge, hypertelorism, epicantal folds, deep-set, simple-shaped sequences (laterality sequence, ectopia cordis); malformation complexes ears and micro-retrognatia. Furthermore a simian crease, deep set thumbs, (limb body wall complex) and non syndromic multiple congenital anomalies absent distal crease of the fifth digits, sacral dimple, skintag in the middle of (MCA) (n=36, 25.9%). Malformations of the cardiovascular system (n=53, the thorax and genital hypoplasia with cryptorchidism were evident. In the 27.5%), urogenital system (n=34, 17.6%), musculoskeletal system (n=29, neonatal period a non-alloimmun-thrombopenia appeared that revovered 15.0%), and central nervous system (n=19, 9.8%) were the most common spontaneously. other congenital malformations. We observed specific patterns of malfor- In the age of 5 months, the suckling was presented to the genetic counceller mations associated with CDH which emphasizes the need to evaluate all for the first time. Muscle hypotonia was still evident and presented as poor patients with CDH for possible associated malformations. Geneticists and headcontrol and reduced spontaneous movement. However the baby could pediatricians should be aware that the malformations associated with CDH laugh and was alert. There was a tendency for infections. The family history can often be classified into a recognizable malformation syndrome or pat- was unremarkable, without evidence of abortions and disabilities. tern (35.3%). Conventional chromosomal analysis revealed an additional derivative chro- P S11
.039 mosome 9. Comparative genomic hybridization showed a complex chro- Unusual form of congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (CIE) in two mosomal rearrangement with a terminal duplication 17q25.3 as well as a siblings of an Austrian family. Attempts to unravel genetic basis of this deletion 19p12 in addition to the trisomy 9p24.3q21.11. Using FISH ana- disorder. lysis, the derivative chromosome 9 could be characterized as a product of a P. M. Kroisel, M. R. Speicher, C. Windpassinger; reciprocal translocation 9 and 17 with the correct karyotype 47,XY,+der(9) Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria. t(9;17)(q21.11;q25.3). According to literature the patient’s main symptoms are in compliance with trisomy 9 syndrome. This case again demonstrates that array CGH can re- Congenital ichthyosis is a rare disease and particular subtypes like lamellar veal a complex chromosomal aberration even after a clear-cut conventional ichthyosis (LI) have a very low incidence of less than 1:500.000. In a couple cytogenetic result. of Austrian origin where a distant relationship of both parents was likely P S11
.037 because their grandparents were born in the same small village, two of their Complex chromosome imbalances in form of monosomies 6p12.3- four offsprings were affected by CIE/LI. The so-called collodium baby phe- p21.1 and 18p11.21pter together with trisomy 19q13.41qter notype was present in one daughter and one son, whereas the other two A. T. Midro1, B. Panasiuk1, J. Kiśluk2, A. Sawicka1, J. Żurawska2, S. Falkowski1, O. offsprings are healthy. The affected girl died with 3 month due to disease Kowalczuk2, J. Nikliński2; related complications and the affected son is now 28 years old. He showed 1Department of Clinical Genetic Medical University Bialystok Poland, Bialystok, Poland, early onset of rickets not recognized before an age of 16. Because suffici- 2Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Medical University Bialystok Poland, ent vitamin D treatments started late, he suffered from multiple fractures Bialystok, Poland. and developed bowing of upper and lower limbs. Growth retardation (150 cm length) and microcephaly (OFC 49 cm) but normal mental development and hearing were found. Some of his progeroid features and light sensitivity Introduction: A combination of several different approaches, including rou- resemble similarities with Trichthiodystrophy, another heterogenic autoso- tine karyotype, FISH, and CGH studies are useful in identifying genes and mal recessive disorder, caused by helicase subunits of transcription/repair- regions responsible for phenotype modifications. vector-gene mutations. Homozygosity mapping was performed by SNP Material and Methods: In 23-years-old male using GTG and RBG techniques array analysis using Affymetrix CytoScan 750 with analysis suite 2.1.0.16. a monosomy S uofr etPher insht oGr3t aHrumm oafn c hCrGoHm Mosiocmroea r1r8apy1 K1.i2t1, →8xp6te0rK h. aRse sbueletns Results obtained with patients DNA clearly support parental consanguinity. fwoeurned ainn ahliyss keadr yuostiynpge A. Agirlreanyt c CoymtopGareantoivme igcesn 2o.m7 iSco hfytwbraidreiz. ation, was pre- Just 3 homozygous segments ranging from 18,4 Mb at 5q23.2 from PHAX- to pared using FGF1-gene and 4.7 Mb at 1q21.1 and 3.4 Mb at 12q24.11 were identified. Results: All of the rear- Since none of thus far reported genes for CIE or LI map to these genomic rangements were confirmed by FISH studies. segments, focused NGS approaches to identified potential candidate genes We detected loss of 6449 kb at short arm of chromosome 6, loss of 13 687 kb at short arm of chromE osS oH mG e 1 2 8 0 an1 d5 g | a iG n L ofA 7S 13G 8O kbW a, t S loC ngO aT rmLA NaDre, nUoKw i|m WplWemWen.tEedS.HG.ORG 213ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM11.040 Exome Sequencing As A Useful Tool To Correctly Diagnose A Congenital Myopathy In Two Sibs With An Unclear Phenotype And A plex can result in clinical pictures that are difficult to distinguish from CdLS Tentative Diagnosis Of Opitz-C Syndrome and related disorders. Thus, sequence analysis of these genes should be R. Urreizti1, S. Mort-Farre1, N. Roca-Ayats1, F. Munell2, A. Sanchez-Montañez2, F. Garcia- strongly considered for those patients with suspected clinical diagnoses of Garcia3,4, J. Dopazo3,4, B. Cormand1, L. Vilageliu1, S. Balcells1, D. R. Grinberg1; CdLS who were negative for CdLS-associated genes. 11Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERER, IBUB., PM11.042 Barcelona, Spain, 2Neuropaediatrics Department, Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Acute Megakaryoblastic leukemia in a patient with Cornelia de Lange Spain, 3Department of Computational Genomics, Centro Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain, 4BIER, CIBERER, Valencia, Spain. syndrome. Could germline mutations in cohesin predispose to cancer ? S. DRUNAT1, J. Lachenaud2, C. Baumann1, O. Feneteau3, E. Lainey3, A. Marceau-Renaut4, C. Preudhomme4, A. Baruchel2, H. Cavé1; Opitz C Syndrome (OTCS) is an ultra-rare disease with less than 60 patients 1Department of Genetics-Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 2Paediatric Hematology- diagnosed worldwide and a broad range of affectation, making its diagnosis Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 3Biological Hematology-Robert Debré Hospital, very challenging. The OTCS gene/s has not been identified, yet. We recruited Paris, France, 4Hematology Laboratory-CHRU Lille, Lille, France. a cohort of 14 patients diagnosed as OTCS or C-like syndrome, some with a “tentative” diagnosis. To search for the OTCS gene, 4 patients and their parents, including two brothers with an unclear phenotype, were subjected Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare disorder characterized by a to whole-exome sequencing (WES). While the WES sequences were being distinctive facial dysmorphism associated with growth delay, microcepha- analyzed, a thorough clinical study of the older brother, including a muscle ly, mental retardation and limb anomalies. CdLS is caused by heterozygous NMR, strongly suggested a congenital myopathy, rather than OTCS. mutations in genes encoding the core proteins of the cohesin complex or The WES analysis revealed that the 2 brothers bore 2 mutations in the RYR1 its regulators. Cancer genomics analyses have discovered a very high mu- gene, inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The maternal mutation tation rate in Down syndrome-associated acute megakaryoblastic leukemia was a missense change (p.Cys489Phe), while the paternal was a nonsense (DS-AMKL) suggesting that cohesin mutations may be the third genetic hit mutation (p.Arg2241STOP) previously associated with congenital myopa- responsible for AMKL. Despite the potential role of cohesin in malignancy, thy and atypical periodic paralysis. The p.Cys489Phe mutation is predicted increased tumor incidence in CdLS patients has not been described. to be severely damaging by SIFT, PROVEAN and PolyPhen2. In addition, the We report the occurrence of AMKL in a 3 years boy with a clinical diagnosis Cysteine 489 residue is conserved among 33 vertebrate species and the of CdLS. Leukemic cells displayed the samGeA mTAo1r phologic and immunophe- nature of the amino acidic change and its position in a well-defined alpha notypic characteristics found in DS-AMKL blasts. Molecular and cytogenetic helix suggest that the correct folding of the RYR1 protein may be affected. analysis revealed a frameshift mutation iNn IPBL and trisomy 21 in the bone However, further functional studies need to be performed to demonstrate marrow blast cells. Analysis of a blood sample of the patienGt AaTt Ath1e age of 3 its pathogenicity. weeks by exome sequencing identified a mutation responsible for the WES is becoming a powerful tool in the molecular diagnosis of patients with CdLS but also revealed the presence, at a mosaic level, of the mutation unclear phenotypes, pathologies with an unknown molecular basis or in and trisomy 21 confirming that these defects which are primary events in which very large genes (such as RYR1 with 106 exons) are involved. DS-AMKL are here, secondary events. P S11
.041 This is the first report of leukemia in a patient with CdLS. The clinical im- Beyond Cohesinopathy: Mutations in chromatin-associated factors as plication of this observation needs further investigations to determine wh- genetic cause of CdLS-overlapping phenotypes ether cohesin mutations in CdLS patients may predispose them to cancer. I. Parenti1,2, J. Pozojevic2, L. Graul-Neumann3, C. Gervasini1, L. Larizza1,4, A. Selicorni5, J. Our findings suggest that cohesin defects, in addition to their known role Eckhold2, D. Wieczorek6, B. Wollnik7, J. Pié8, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach9, M. A. Deardorff10,11, F. in leukemic progression, may also represent the first genetic hit to initiate J. Kaiser2; leukaemogenesis by inducing aneuploïdy. 1Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2Sektion für Funktionelle Genetik am Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität P S11
.043 zu Lübeck, Germany, Lübeck, Germany, 3Ambulantes Gesundheitszentrum der Charité A series of 38 novel germline and somatic mutations of NIPBL in Campus Virchow, Humangenetik, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, Berlin, Cornelia de Lange syndrome. Germany, 4Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics; IRCCS Istituto M. Nizon1, M. Henry1, C. Michot1, C. Baumann2, A. Bazin3, B. Bessières1, S. Blesson4, Auxologico Italiano; Milan, Italy, Milano, Italy, 5U.O.S. Genetica Clinica Pediatrica, Clinica M. Cordier-Alex5, A. David6, A. Delahaye-Duriez7, A. Delezoïde2, A. Dieux-Coeslier8, M. Pediatrica Fondazione MBBM, A.O. S.Gerardo, Monza, Italy, Monza, Italy, 6Institut für Doco-Fenzy9, L. Faivre10, A. Goldenberg11, V. Layet12, P. Loget13, S. Marlin1, J. Martinovic1, Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, Essen, Germany, 7Institute S. Odent14, L. Pasquier14, G. Plessis15, F. Prieur16, A. Putoux5, M. Rio1, H. Testard17, J. of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, Cologne, Germany, 8Unit of Bonnefont1, V. Cormier-Daire1; Clinical Genetics and Functional Genomics, Departments of Pharmacology-Physiology 1Département de Génétique, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut and Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Zaragoza, CIBERER-GCV and ISS-Aragon, Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Département de Génétique, Zaragoza, Spain, Zaragoza, Spain, 9Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität zu CHU Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Département de Génétique, CH René Dubos, Pontoise, Lübeck, Germany, Lübeck, Germany, 10Divisions of Genetics and Metabolism, Children’s France, 4Service de Génétique, CHRU Tours, Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, 5Service Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA., Philadelphia, PA, United States, de Génétique Clinique, CHU Lyon HCL, GH Est, Bron, France, 6Service de Génétique 11Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Médicale, CHU, Nantes, France, 7Service de Génétique, CHU Paris Seine-Saint-Denis, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Hôpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France, 8Service de Génétique Clinique, CHRU de Lille, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 9Service de Génétique, CHU de Reims, Hôpital Maison Blanche, EA 3801 SFR CAP-Santé, Reims, France, 10Centre de Génétique, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 11Département de Génétique, CHU, Rouen, France, 12Service de Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder Génétique Médicale, GH du Havre, Hôpital Jacques Monod, Le Havre, France, 13Service manifesting extensive phenotypic variability. Mutations in NIPBL, SM C1
A, d‘anatomie et cytologie pathologiques, Hôpital Pontchaillou, Université de Rennes 1, SM C3
, RAD21 and HDA C8
, encoding subunits or regulators of cohesin, are CHU, Rennes, France, 14Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU Rennes, Hôpital Sud, Rennes, found in about 70% of the patients. France, 15Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Clémenceau, Caen, France, 16Service de Next generation sequencing approaches have allowed us to identify hetero- Génétique Clinique, CHU de Saint-Etienne, Hôpital Nord, Saint-Priest-en-Jarez, France, zygous de-novo mutations in five patients with CdLS phenotypes who were 17Département de Pédiatrie, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France. previously negative for mutations in the CdLS genes. All five mutations alter chromatin-associated factors and each is predicted to result in a loss of function. Two mutations, one nonsense and one 4-bp Introduction: Cornelia de Lange syndrome is a rare and severe multisyste- frame-shift deletion, were found in the ANKRD11 gene, that is associated mic developmental disorder. Five genes have been identified so far, all in- with KBG syndrome. The three other mutations disrupt components of volved in the cohesin complex. NIPBL represents about 60% of identified the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, previously associated with heterozygous mutations. The majority of cases results from a de novo event. Coffin-Siris and Nicolaides-Baraitser syndromes. These mutations include a Recently, NIPBL somatic mosaicism has been highlighted through buccal cell missense substitution in SMARCB1, a frame-shift deletion in ARID1A and a DNA study in some patients with a negative molecular analysis on leukocyte chromosome microdeletion including the ARID1B gene. DNA. Our results support recent molecular findings that describe an intimate Materials and Methods: Here, we present a series of 38 patients with a link between cohesin and the SWI/SNF complex in regulating transcription. Cornelia de Lange syndrome related to an heterozygous NIPBL mutation Furthermore, ANKRD11 associates with histone deacetylases to enable its identified by Sanger sequencing. The diagnosis was based on the following role in transcriptional regulation. These findings add to the growing body criteria: 1) intrauterine growth retardation and postnatal short stature, 2) of work supporting the hypothesis that CdLS and overlapping phenotypes feeding difficulties and/or gastro-oesophageal reflux, 3) microcephaly, 4) result from alterations in specific gene expression patterns. intellectual disability and 5) characteristic facial features. I2n1 su4mmary, mutations in ANKRD11 and cE oS mH poG n e2 n0 ts1 o5 f t | h eG SL WA I/S SG NFO cW om, -SCOReTsLulAtsN: WDe, iUdeKn t|i fWiedW 37W n.oEvSelH NGIP.BOLR mGutations including 34 in leukocy-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tes and three in buccal cells only. All mutations shown to have arisen de clusion: With a diagnostic yield of 25% in the first analysis these results novo when parent blood samples were available. As previously reported, the of the WES based CFA gene panel in a small patient cohort are promising. present series confirms the difficulty in predicting the phenotype according Having a genetic diagnosis allows optimal management and adequate ge- to the NIPBL mutation. Until now, somatic mosaicism has been observed netic counselling. Therefore we recommend that diagnostic WES should be for thirteen cases which does not seem to be consistently associated with a offered to all patients with syndromic or familial forms of orofacial clefting milder phenotype. Besides, several reports support a postzygotic event for and oligodontia. those cases.< PM11.046 Conclusion: Considering these elements, we recommend a first-line buccal Partial monosomy 5p and partial trisomy 13q in a patient with cat- cell DNA analysis in order to improve gene testing sensitivity in Cornelia de like cry and postaxial polidactily detected by SNP array - a case report Lange syndrome and genetic counseling. T. Tkemaladze1, K. Oexle2, G. Melikishvili3, E. Kvaratskhelia1, S. Tchankvetadze4, E. PM11.044 Abzianidze1; 1Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Corpus callosum anomalies in fetuses: from fetal pathology to NGS Krankenhaus rechts der Isar, Technische Universität, Munchen, Germany, and reverse phenotyping 3MediClubGeorgia Hospital, Tbilisi, Georgia, 4Gudushauri National Medical Perinatal C. Alby1, L. Boutaud1,2, V. Malan1,2, L. Mouthon1, A. Achaiaa2, C. Gordon1, N. Bahi-Buisson1,3, Center, Tbilisi, Georgia. J. de Oliveira1, K. Piquand1, P. Nitschke4, C. Bole5, P. Sonigo6, A. Millischer6, M. Moutard7, C. Depienne8,9, D. Héron8,9, S. Lyonnet1,10, Y. Ville11, S. Thomas1, F. Encha-Razavi1,2, M. Vekemans1,2, T. Attié-Bitach1,2; 1INSERM U1163, Institut Imagine, Paris Descartes Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, Here we present a case of a chromosomal rearrangement in a 7-month old 2Service d‘Histologie-Embryologie-Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, boy from Georgia with partial deletion of 5p and partial duplication of 13q APHP, Paris, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, with features of both Cri-du-Cat (CdC) and trisomy 13. The patient was born APHP, Paris, France, 4Plateforme de Bioinformatique, Institut Imagine, Paris Descartes, from a second pregnancy of non-consanguineous parents on the 37th weeks Paris, France, 5Plateforme de Génomique, Institut Imagine, Paris Descartes, Paris, of gestation. The first pregnancy was terminated due to multiple congeni- France, 6Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 7Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 8Service de tal anomalies. At birth the patient weighted 2450 gr, his lenght was 46 sm, Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France, 9INSERM U975, UPMC, Hôpital OFC - 33 sm and presented with cat-like cry. He also has hypotonia, stridor, Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 10Service de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, failure to thrive, postaxial polydactily, unilateral inguinal hernia, epilepsy/ APHP, Paris, France, 11Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants seizures and dysmorphic face: micrognatia, scaphocepaly, malformed low- Malades, APHP, Paris, France. set ears with posterior rotation, low nasal bridge, hypertelorism, thin up- per and thin lower lips, long philtrum, high-arched palate. The SNP array revealed a deletion of 23Mb in 5pter (del 5p15.33-p14.3) and a duplication Corpus callosum (CC) is the major brain commissure connecting the homo- of 54Mb genetic materials in 13qter (dup 13q21.2-q34), that was inherited logous areas of both hemispheres at the midline. CC malformations (CCM) from a balanced translocation carrier mother. Only several cases of his type are the most frequent brain malformations with an incidence of 1/4000 of chromosomal rearrangement have been so far. Our case further confirms newborn often associated with chromosomal anomalies or mendelian syn- the involvement of critical region 5p15.2 for cat-like-cry and involvement of dromes with recessive and dominant inheritance. Recurrence is observed GP C5
 and GP C6
 genes located on chromosome 13 (13q31.3q32.1 region) for in 5 % of cases. Children with CCM have an uncertain neuro-developmental postaxial polydactily. outcome. Therefore, counseling remains challenging, especially prenatally. P S11
.047 We systematically reviewed the data of 142 fetuses with CCM as isolated or Reverse phenotyping of a patient with CRIPT gene mutation and associated autopsy findings in our center. We first completed the cytogene- further delineation of the associated phenotype tic analysis by a CGH array when the underlying etiology was not found: 108 B. Demeer1,2, A. Dadban3, P. Vabres4,5, G. Morin1, B. Aral4,6, A. Varenterghem7, J. Thevenon4,8, (76%) of cases remained unsolved. D. Bremond-Gignac9, J. St-Onge10,6, J. Rivière4,6, J. Courcet4, C. Thauvin4,8, L. Faivre4,8; In our effort to identify the disease causing gene of CCM antenatally, we used 1genetics department, CHU Amiens-Picardie, amiens, France, 2EA 4666, Université de exome sequencing in 10 trios and a targeted high throughput sequencing Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France, 3dermatology department, CHU Amiens-Picardie, strategy including 423 genes in 64 fetuses and 32 are ongoing. NGS allo- amiens, France, 4Equipe d‘Accueil 4271 Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 5Service de wed several diagnosis, such as a PDH deficiency (PDHA1), PCH with ACC Dermatologie, CHU Le Bocage, Dijon, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique moléculaire, FHU- (AMPD2), genitopatelar (KAT6B), Primrose (ZBTB20), Coffin-Siris (ARID1A TRANSLAD, Plateau technique de Biologie, CHU, Dijon, France, 7Pediatric gastroenterology and ARID1B) or Chudley Mac Cullough syndrome (GPSM2). Interestingly department, CHU Amiens-Picardie, amiens, France, 8Centre de Référence Maladies some diagnosis were not possible antenatally due to the absence of specific Rares „Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs“ de l‘Est, Centre de signs, but reevaluation of fetalpathological data (reverse phenotyping) allo- Génétique et Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d‘Enfants, Dijon, France, 9Ophtalmology department, wed to support NGS findings. These situations will be illustrated. CHU Amiens-Picardie, amiens, France, 10Equipe d‘Accueil 4271 Génétique des Anomalies All together, to date, as analysis are still ongoing, combined fetal imaging, du Développement, Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire, Université de Bourgogne, dijon, France. fetal necropsy, cytogenetic and molecular analysis allowed the identification of the cause in at least 30 % of fetuses: 15% chromosomal anomaly and 15 % of mendelian disorder. The necessary reverse phenotyping underlines the importance of fetal necropsy following pregnancy terminations for CCM. We report on a 3 ½ year old boy, with prenatal onset growth deficiency (height:-4SD), microcephaly (OFC:-3.5 SD), transient neonatal pancytopenia, P S11
.045 facial dysmorphism, feeding difficulties, developmental and speech delay, glo- Whole exome sequencing for craniofacial anomalies: the NIjmegen bal hyperlaxity, significant sleep disturbance, and genital, ocular and extre- experience mities anomalies. He also presents with generalized pigmentation anomalies, C. W. Ockeloen, R. Pfundt, S. de Munnik, C. E. L. Carels, T. Kleefstra; and signs of ectodermal dysplasia. Array CGH (Agilent 60k), cytogenetic dia- Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. gnosis of chromosomal breakage syndrome and metabolic screening are ne- Introduction: gative. The whole exome sequencing performed revealed a homozygous fra- me-shift mutation of the CRIPT gene, recently described as a novel primordial Whole exome sequencing (WES) is a successful genomewide dwarfism gene (Shaheen et al, 2014). The mutation (c.132delA), described approach to identify genetic causes of heterogeneous diseases. Our depart- as probably pathogenic, was confirmed in the homozygous state by Sanger ment was among the first to implement exome sequencing in clinical genetic sequencing. Both healthy consanguineous parents were proven to be carrier diagnostics. We show the results of WES for diagnosis of craniofacial anoma- in the heterozygous state. lies. Methods: Twenty patients with craniofacial anomalies (familial or syn- Few available clinical data of the 2 described patients show very similar clini- dromic cleft lip/palate, oligodontia and craniosynostosis) were investigated cal appearance with strikingly facial dysmorphism, growth deficiency, micro- by means of WES. WES was performed on an Illumina HiSeq2000TM plat- cephaly, psychomotor delay, and ocular and extremities anomalies. Mottled form after enrichment with the Agilent SureSelect XT Human All Exon 50 Mb hypopigmentation is also described in the older patient. kit. A two-step analysis was used in which a CFA gene panel containing 94 This report is an example of “reverse phenotyping”. The first description of genes, based on the OMIM database and recent publications, was analysed the CRIPT gene by Shaheen et al helped us to reach a diagnosis in our patient. first before oCpOenLi1n1gA t2he whole exome. Results: In thGeL HfirRs3t step analysis, a Nevertheless the term of primordial dwarfism and its broad definition used genetic diagnosis was made in 5W/2N0T 1in0dAex patients (25%). These comprised by the authors can be confusing; and can prevent some clinicians from sugge- mutations in causing Stickler syndrome, in causing van der sting this diagnosis. Cutaneous signs seem also to be very specific, and need Woude syndFrGoFm8e type 2, and mutations in oligodontia patients. to be precisely looked at in additional patients presenting with this unique Whole exome analysis in 11/15 patients diagnosed Kallmann syndrome, caused by a mutation, in a faE mS iH ly G pr e2 s0 en1 t5 in g| wG iL thA clS eG ft lO ipW /p, a lS atC eO . CT onL -ANsDyn, dUroKm |e .WWW.ESHG.ORG 215ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM11.048 University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 5Technische Universität Dresden, Institute of Exome sequencing of sporadic patients with Currarino syndrome Clinical Genetics, Dresden, Germany. I. Holm1, B. Stadheim1, P. S. Samarakoon1, K. L. Eiklid1,2; 1Deparment of medical genetics, Oslo, Norway, 2Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Interstitial deletions of chromosome bands 1p32.3p32.1 are rare. Only nine unrelated patients with partially overlapping 1p32.3p32.1 deletions Currarino syndrome (CS) is a complex of congenital caudal anomalies inclu- of variable size and position have been reported to date. We report on a ding anorectal malformations, sacral defects and a presacral mass. CS is as- 17-months-old boy with choanal atresia, hearing loss, urogenital anomalies sociated with mutations in the MNX1 gene in familial cases, but in sporadic and microcephaly in whom an interstitial deletion of 6.4 Mb was detected in cases less than one third of the patients have detectable MNX1 mutations. 1p3 P2
C.3SpK392.1 (genomic position chr1:54,668,618-61,113,264 according to We looked for genetic causes of CS in sporadic patients by Whole Exome GRCh37/hg19). The deletDedA Bre1gion harbors 31 RefSeq genes. Notable genes Sequencing. are , haploinsufficiency of which caused low LDL cholesterol plasma 3 trios were included in the study. In addition we included DNA extracted levels in the patient, and , which is a candidate gene for cognitive de- from the presacral mass from one patient, both directly from the biopsy ficits and microcephaly. The patient broadens our knowledge of the clinical and from cultivated fibroblasts derived from the sample. The library was consequences of 1p32 deletions and facilitates karyotype-phenotype cor- sequenced on a HiSeq 2000 (Illumina) with 100 bp paired end reads. Exome relations. Additional patients with overlapping deletions and/or point mu- capture was performed with the SureSelect XT Custom Human All Exon v5 tations in genes of this region need to be identified to elucidate the role of Plus library (Agilent Technologies). In addition we added a custom made individual genes for the complex clinical manifestations. 6 MB whole genome regions around MNX1 on chromosome 7 to look for P S11
.051 variations in regulatory elements. Deletion 2q31: clinical and molecular analysis based on a four new The data were filtered with an in-house developed program (FILTUS) and cases registered variants from an in-house database were used to filter out normal J. Pilch1, K. Matuszewska2, P. Skiba3, J. Gil3, E. Gutmajster4, A. Latos-Bieleńska5,6; variation. We looked especially for sequence variants in genes involved in 1Department of Paediatrics and Developmental Age Neurology, Medical University proliferation, differentiation and embryogenesis. All models of inheritance of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 2Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznań, Poland, were applied for candidate gene identification. The first approach was to 3Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 4Department filter the data through a candidate gene list. Second a de novo analysis was of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 6Center for Medical done. When no relevant genes were found, the next approach was to analyze Genetics GENESIS,, Poznań, Poland. the samples through other inheritance models. Some candidate genes will to be discussed and further investigated. P S11
.049 There are only few publications about interstitial deletions in long arm of Cytogenomic investigation in 162 patients with multiple congenital 2 chromosome and only a few confirmed by array-CGH. Microarray techni- abnormalities and developmental delay: Brazilian experience que allows to precisely define breakpoints which permits a more accurate É. A. Zanardo1, G. M. Novo-Filho1, R. L. Dutra1, F. B. Piazzon1, F. A. R. Madia1, M. M. phenotype-genotype correlation. On the one hand the phenotype of patients Montenegro1, T. V. M. M. Costa1, A. M. Nascimento1, A. T. Dias1, M. Rocha1,2, C. Milani1, A. F. with 2q31 deletions seems to be well characterized but on the other hand de Carvalho3, M. I. Melaragno4, C. A. Kim5, L. D. Kulikowski1,2; 1Laboratório de Citogenômica, Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina the critical region for the phenotype is still unknown. The clinical manifesta- da USP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Centro de Reprodução Humana e Genética, Departamento tions are highly variable but the most common features include frequently de Saúde Coletiva, Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Santo André, Brazil, 3Laboratório observed fail to thrive, facial dysmorphism, developmental delay and mental de Genética Humana e Mutagêneses, Departamento de Biologia Geral, Universidade retardation. Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil, 4Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, In our report we presents four new patients with de novo deletions over- Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 5Unidade de Genética Médica, lapping 2q31. In all patients the breakpoints were characterized by a-CGH. Departamento de Pediatria, Instituto da Criança - HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil. The deletions ranged in size from 13 to 16Mb. In all patients microcephaly, high forehead, narrow mouth, small mandible, partial syndactyly of toes and sandal gap was stated. Additionally blepharophimosis, down slanting palpe- The genomic imbalances are the most common cause of multiple congenital bral fissures, down-turned corners of the mouth and tapering fingers were abnormalities (MCA) and developmental delay (DD), however the etiology present. One of the patients has an increased number of creases on the soles of these imbalances are not well understood, making difficult the counse- and palms which is one of the known features of wrinkly skin syndrome. In ling genetics and the treatment. Currently, the improvement of cytogeno- our report we try to delineate the phenotype of 2q interstitial deletions. We mics diagnostic techniques, such as the screening by arrays, is fundamental compare the phenotype of our patients with the ones presented in recent re- to set an unequivocal molecular diagnosis and a more suitable genotype- ports. We also suggest some genes candidates for the most common clinical phenotype correlation for patients with MCA/DD. manifestations of deletion in long arm of 2 chromosome. We report our experience with the implementation of several array plat- PM11.052 forms (Affymetrix, Agilent and Illumina) and probe densities in clinical A de novo 432 kb deletion in the 17q22 region: a case report and diagnostic and scientific research of patients without conclusive diagnostic. review of the literature The results were confirmed by MLPA and/or FISH techniques. M. Kugaudo1,2, B. Nowakowska3, D. Gieruszczak-Białek1,4, K. H. Chrzanowska1, M. Thus this study evaluated the genome of 162 patients with MCA/DD. All Krajewska-Walasek1; patients were previously assessed by conventional cytogenetic analysis. 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Child and We identified several different genomic alterations in 137/162 (~84.6%) Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department patients, including deletion, duplication and loss of heterozygosity. Some of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of patients 41/137 (~30%) showed only one copy number variation in the Pediatrics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. genome, others 41/137 (~30%) presented two abnormalities and 55/137 (~40%) revealed three or more alterations on different chromosomes, may- be due to a complex rearrangements. Deletions involving the 17q22 region have been reported in the literature Our findings showed that the interpretation of genotype-phenotype corre- in nine patients. The size of the deletions reported to date is 8.18-1.98 Mb lations in patients with complex genomic rearrangements is a very difficult and a significant role of NOG and TBX has been suggested. Here we describe task but the results can directly contributes to the elucidation of new syn- a girl with a 432 kb deletion in the 17q22 band without deletion of these dromes. The array is a powerful tool to identification and characterization genes. To our knowledge, this is the smallest reported deletion. of genomic abnormalities and provides accurate diagnosis of unidentified The patient was born at term by cesarean section because of breech posi- or unexplained diseases suspected to have a genetic cause, contributing to tion, birth measurements were normal. On physical examination at the age appropriate clinical management of the patients. of 3 y, hypertelorism, upslanting and narrow palpebral fissures, epicanthal Grants: FAPESP: 09/53105-9 and FINEP-CT INFRA 0160/12 S P8
 folds, short bulbous nose, long philtrum, tapered, short fingers, mild 5th PM11.050 finger clinodactyly, and proximally placed thumbs were observed. Develop- Interstitial 1p32.3p32.1 deletion in a patient with multiple congenital mental milestones were significantly delayed, and marked hypotonia was anomalies present. She had an atrial septal aneurysm, visual problems (astigmatism, M. Kehrer1, K. Schäferhoff1, M. Bonin1,2, A. Jauch3, A. Bevot4, A. Tzschach5,1; hyperopia), and sensory processing disorder with a propensity for mutistic 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, and aggressive behavior. Hypercalcemia with a tendency for lithiasis was Germany, 2IMGM Laboratories GmbH, Martinsried, Germany, 3Institute of Human diagnosed. A 432 kb deletion encompassing 12 genes in the 17q22 band was Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4University Children’s Hospital, detected by aCGH analysis. The aberration was confirmed by FISH analysis 216 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOasT aL dAe NnoDvo, UdeKle t|i oWn.WW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S11
.055 The Frequency Of Disorders Of Sex Development (DSD) And Novel Here we demonstrate the phenotype differences between our patient and Genetic Associations In Children With Neurodevelopment Disorders - the data from the literature and the possible influence of the deletion. The Insights From The DDD Study patients share some facial features and developmental delay. We suggest G. E. Gazdagh1, D. DD Study2, E. Tobias3, S. Ahmed4, R. McGowan1; that in our patient, SUPT4H1 played an important role in development. 1West of Scotland Genetics Service, Laboratory Medicine Building Southern General The molecular study was financed by Fundacja na Rzecz Nauki Polskiej, Ho- Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust ming Plus/2012-5/9 „Identification of novel genes causing DiGeorge Syn- Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3School of Medicine, College of Medical Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, drome“. 4Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, Royal Hospital For Sick Children, P S11
.053 University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. Additional patient report with Delleman syndrome and lipoma: Oculo cerebro cutaneous syndrome (OCCS) or Encephalo cranio cutaneous lipomatosis (ECCL)? Context: Collaborative project to review the phenotypic and genotypic data L. Coppin1, N. Sannikoff2, E. Heylen3, Y. Sznajer1; from children recruited to the UK wide DDD study. 1Center for Human Genetic, Cliniques universitaires St Luc, U.C.L, Brussels, Belgium, Objective: To report the frequency and range of DSD phenotypes observed 2Dept of Pediatrics, Clinique Ottignies, Ottignies, Belgium, 3Pediatric neurology, Dept of in DDD participants who have one or more associated ’neurodevelopmental Pediatric, Clinique d‘Ottignies, Ottignies, Belgium. delay’ diagnostic Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) term. Methods: Retrospective review of anonymized data from participants in the DDD study. Delleman syndrome (or OCCS) is a very rare condition that has been repor- Results: Of 7439 DDD participants recruited, 603 (8%) had at least one HPO ted in 30 unrelated patients t date. The diagnosis is based on triad of ocular term in the ’abnormalities of the genital system’. Of these 603 children, 370 (cyst, anophthalmia, microphthalmia, coloboma), cerebral (cerebral cysts, (61%) had at least one ’neurodevelopmental delay’ diagnosis with a total of hydrocephaly, cortical atrophy or corpus callosum agnesis) and skin (focal 436 DSD phenotypes, the majority, 420 (94%) abnormalities of the external dermal hypo- or aplasia, periorbital protruding outgrowths) anomaly. The genitalia. Of the male external genitalia abnormalities, 212 (54%) were te- differential diagnosis has to be made with ECCS and oculo-auriculo-vertebral sticular, 74 (19%) were hypospadias, 57 (15%) were penile and 47 (12%) spectrum (Goldenhar association). We report on the natural history of a full were other abnormalities. Testicular abnormalities included: unilateral term boy, second child from caucasian unrelated healthy parents. Prenatal cryptorchidism, bilateral cryptorchidisms, hydrocele and other phenotypes. ultrasound diagnosed isolated ventricular dilation. Birth parameters inclu- Causative mutations were found in 14 DDG2P genes (https://decipher.san- de relative macrocephaly (weight  P50
, height:  P50
, OFC:  P95
). He presented ger.ac.uk/), confirming a range of syndromic diagnoses with associated DSD, tumour-like lesion on the right eyelid, bilateral periorbital skin appendages including: KBG syndrome, Meier-Gorlin syndrome, Alpha- thalassemia/ and skin hypoplasia with alopecia. Brain MRI showed left ventricular dilati- mental retardation syndrome, Kabuki syndrome and Donnai-Barrow syn- on, posterior midline shift to the right, cortical atrophy and extramedullary drome. Of these likely pathogenic mutations, 6 of 14 (43%) were found in lipoma leading to spinal cord compression. Ophthalmology examination sho- DDG2P genes not previously associated with DSD. wed epibulbar dermoid, non-reactive pupils with bilateral pale optic disk. Conclusions: A range of DSD phenotypes are found in patients with neu- SNP array was normal (Agilent 44k). The patient was hospitalized at week 9 rodevelopmental delay. Recognition of these associations should not be of life. He developed progressive neurologic demise and eventually died. overlooked in the management of patients with complex conditions. Exomic Phenotype in patients with OCCS may be highly variable. Some authors po- sequencing through projects like DDD increases diagnostic yield whilst the stulated on a continuum from ECCL to OCCS. In absence of any diagnostic identification of mutations in developmental genes may improve understan- marker, Alastair developed diagnostic criteria. In our patient, both syndro- ding about the pathogenesis of DSD. mes fit as ‘definite diagnosis’. The aetiology of OCCS remains so far unknown. Next generation sequencing (exome sequencing) could be the coming step to PM11.056 identify aetiology. A case of developmental delay and dysmorphic features with duplication 15q11q13 inherited from the mother PM11.054 S. Bertok; autosomal recessive developmental disorders Univ. Children‘s Hospital Ljubljana, Department of Endocrinology, Diabates and N. Akawi1, J. McRae1, W. Jones1, D. King1, J. Barrett1, H. Firth2, D. FitzPatrick3, M. Hurles1, Metabolic Diseases, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. The Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study; 1The Welcome Trust Sanger, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2The Welcome Trust Sanger, Cambridge University Hospitals Foundation Trust, Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC IGMM, University of Edinburgh, WGH, A 10-year old boy with speech delay, dysmorphic features, short stature, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. joint hyperlaxity, muscular hypotony and conductive deafness is presented. His father was diagnosed with X-linked spondilopehyseal dysplasia tarda. Birth parameters were normal. In the first months he developed motor de- Developmental disorders are a clinically and genetically heterogenous velopmental delay with muscular hypotony. At one year short stature was group of childhood conditions that involve serious impairment in specific diagnosed. Repeatedly he has been treated for mild middle ear infections developmental areas. To date, many types of developmental disorders have and a conductive hearing loss was diagnosed at 10 years. At this age (height been recognised with a wide range of clinical manifestations and variable 130,67 cm (-1.793 SDS); weight 28,25 kg (-1.194 SDS); head circumference severities. Next-generation sequencing technologies have uncovered the 55,5 cm (0.478 SDS)) he presented with two cafe au lait spots. Several dys- genetic bases for a substantial number of these disorders yet many still of morphic features were observed: long face, high vaulted palate, wide, retro- unknown causes. verted nostrils, low set ears, tag on the lobule, deep philtrum, tented upper In the DDD study, thousands of children exhibiting developmental disorders lip, joint hyperlaxity, proximal placed thumbs, wide spaced nipples and 2-3 were recruited and investigated using the latest molecular testing methods toe syndactily of the both feet. The boy had difficulties in fine motor skills, to identify the underlying genetic defects. Among the first 1000 trios investi- concentration, attention and social skills. At the age of 11,5 years suspect of gated in the study, two third of the diagnoses made were from de novo mu- autism spectrum disorder was made. tations. However, increasing the number of investigated trios has increased aCGH detected interstitial duplication of approximately 6.1Mb at the power to detect and diagnose inherited conditions, including autosomal 15q11.2q13.1 (arr[hg19] 15q11.2q13.1(22,765,628-28,940,098)×3 mat), recessive disorders. The anticipated power of such big data is: 1) to enable subsequently confirmed by FISH. Parental analyses identified the mother as the discovery of novel recessive genes, 2) to confirm the pathogenicity of a carrier of the same duplication. new recessive genes with slight evidence in the literature, 3) to expand the Several reports have suggested that maternally transmitted 15q duplicati- phenotypic spectrum of known disease-causing genes, 4) to shed light on ons were associated with autistic features with variable degrees of deve- pathways that are disrupted in a group of affected children. For example, lopmental delay, while paternally derived cases presented with no major several unrelated patients in our dataset were carrying rare loss-of-func- medical problems. Genetic counseling is vital to discuss the recurrence risks tion and non-synonymous biallelic-mutations in different genes encoding and options for prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnosis in familial Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins. Two of these genes were cases of 15q11q13 duplication. recently identified and few patients have been reported in the literature. P S11
.057 Therefore, our data endorse their pathogenicity and expand their clinical Unique familial 16q12.1-q22.1 duplication: clinical manifestations spectrums. and cytogenetic analyses All this expected knowledge could most likely create new opportunities for A. Pietrzyk1, M. Dera1, E. Studniak1, A. Ziemniarska1, N. Wujak2, M. Piechota2, S. genetic counselling, prevention, management and treatment of the disor- ders for the affected children andE/oSrH thGei r2 f0am15ili e|s G. LASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 217ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Zajaczek1; 1Cytogenetic Unit, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Centre for Medical Genetics Genesis, Poznan, Poland. telomerase variants in patients with DC and related disorders. Analysis of these variants, taking into account familial segregation and functional stu- dies, enabled us to categorise them into three groups; (a) disease causing, Background: Pure 16q duplications are rare chromosomal abnormality as- (b) bystanders and (c) status uncertain. Remarkably, these investigations sociated with dysmorphic features, intellectual disability, behavioral disor- identified families with disease causing variants where the mechanism of der and congenital anomalies. Even though the number of described cases disease inheritance is novel; one family has triallelic mutations in both telo- is small, three main groups have been proposed: proximal (16q11-q13), merase genes and in two families an epigenetic-like mechanism is at play. proximal- intermediate (16q21-16q22), intermediate- distal (16.q23-q24) We have constructed a diagnostic algorithm which may be useful for the ca- aberration, depending on the covered region of chromosme 16. Only 4 ca- tegorisation of uncharacterised telomerase variants in the future. This study ses of the proximal- intermediate 16q duplication have been reported so far, therefore highlights that telomerase variants have highly variable functio- with no familial cases described. nGarla anntds: cMlinRiCc,a Cl mhialdnrifeenst Watiiothn sC aanndc ererq uire thorough investigation to assess Report: We present a family of mother and two daughters, carrying duplica- their pathogenic contribution. tion 16q12.1- q.22.1. Two-year-old girl was evaluated due to mild facial fea- tures and delayed milestones. Her one-year-old sister manifesting distinct P S11
.059 dysmorphic phenotype, evident developmental delay, hypotonia and obe- Phenotypic overlap of dyskeratosis congenita with other syndromes sity was operated because of hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. Their mother identified through exome sequencing displayed neither dysmorphia nor congenital defects but had moderate in- A. Walne, T. Vulliamy, I. Dokal; tellectual disability. High resolution karyotype of peripheral blood lympho- Barts and the London school of medicine and dentistry, London, United Kingdom. cytes showed additional material on the long arm of chromosome 10. Array CGH analysis revealed duplication of 16q12.1- q22.1, estimated to be 16.54 Mb in size. Additional FISH analysis confirmed that duplicated material was The clinical presentation of dyskeratosis congenita (DC) and its allelic vari- of chromosome 16 origin in both sisters and mother. ants encompass a wide range of features including abnormal skin pigmen- Conclusion: The involved region contains 208 genes, some of which are tation, nail dystrophy, leukoplakia and bone marrow failure. Pathologically known neurotransmitters, receptors or cell cycle regulators what is consi- DC is characterized by selective exhaustion of highly proliferative cells that stent with clinical findings. Limited available data and varying size of du- have critically shortened telomeres. To date causal mutations in ten telome- plicated region does not allow for reliable genotype-phenotype correlation. re biology genes have been identified. DNAJ C3
, GRH L2
, LIG4 Every newly described patient and family is a valuable contribution for a Through whole exome sequencing on uncharacterized DC patients, we iden- further delineation of phenotypic spectrum for those particular chromoso- tified biallelic variants in four families in the genes that mal regions. have been associated with other diseases (APCHD, Ectodermal dysplasia, Li- PM11.058 gase IV syndrome, respectively) which have overlapping clinical phenotypes Triallelic and epigenetic-like inheritance in human disorders of with DC. This raises the question, if these variants are disease-causing as we telomerase believe, then how wide is the phenotype of dyskeratosis congenita? L. C. Collopy; The table emphasises the large degree of clinical overlap seen in these pa- Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom. tients with the diagnostic spectrum of phenotypes seen in DC as well as the Genetic variants in TERT and TERC are known to cause d diseases associated with the causal variants. These patients were referred with a suspected diagnosis of DC but based on the identified mutation, an al- yskeratosis conge- ternative diagnosis should be considered. Telomere length tends to be short nita (DC) and related diseases. These patients have impaired telomere elon- in most DC patients but is normal in these individuals. The outcome from gation causing stem cells to enter premature replicative senescence and/or this exome sequencing project highlights the difficulty in assigning a clinical apoptosis as telomeres becomTeE cRriCt icallyT sEhRoTr t. This explains the major im- lTaabbelel t1o a highly variable disease phenotype. It also suggests potential biolo- pact of the disease on highly proliferative tissues such as the bone marrow gical overlap of DC with other syndromes. and skin. However, variants in and are not always fully penetrant Grants: MRC, Children with Cancer and in some DC families disease causing variants are seen in asymptomatic family members. It is therefore challenging to determine whether a new va- riant is pathogenic or not. Over the last three years we have identified 19 Table 1 Phenotypic overlap between DC and other syndromes Ataxia com- bined cellular and periphe- Ectodermal dys- Dyskeratosis ral with hea- Ligase IV syndrome Family 1-DC plasia syndrome Family 2-DC Family 3-DC Family 4-DC overlap Congenita ring loss and (OMIM) (OMIM) diabetes mel- litus - ACPHD LIG4 DNAJ C3
 GRH L2
 GRH L2
 (DONMAIJM C3
) GRH L2
 LIG4 Mutated gene various (p.Arg814X and (variant identified) (p.Arg393X, hom) (p.Pro405Thr, hom) (Ile482Lys, hom) p.Lys424ArgfsX20) Nail dystophy >60% cases yes yes yes abnormal skin pigmen- >60% cases hyperkeratosis yes yes yes yes tation Bone marrow failure >60% cases yes yes yes Leukoplakia >40% cases yes yes yes yes Developmental delay >20% cases yes yes Microcephaly >20% cases yes yes yes Growth retardation >20% cases yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Dental problems >10% cases yes yes yes Oesophageal stricture <10% cases yes yes Ataxia <10% cases yes yes Gonadal abnormalities <10% cases delayed puberty yes Immunodeficiency <10% cases yes yes Ear abnormalities / <10% cases yes yes yes deafness Diabetes <10% cases yes yes recurrent Kidney abnormailities <10% cases kidney agenesis infections Short telomeres <1st centile unknown normal unknown normal normal unknown normal 218 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM11.060 Dysmorphology Services: a snapshot of current practices and a vision for the future. rare and predicted to be deleterious variants were found either as homozy- S. Douzgou1, E. Chervinsky2,3, Y. Gyftodimou4, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli5, S. Shalev2,3, E. Kanavakis5, gote within the MEOX2 gene or as compound heterozygote in exons of the D. Donnai1, J. Clayton-Smith1; GNB5, PHLDB3, SL C22
A1 and RRN3 genes. The validation of these findings 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Institute of Human Development, University through identification of more patients with mutations in these genes, in of Manchester and Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust as vivo complementation, as well as engineering of animal models is warran- part of the Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, ted. 2Genetics’ Institute, Ha’Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, 3The Rapapport Faculty of Among these candidate genes, we are currently focusing on the variant iden- Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 4Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University School of Medicine, tified in GNB5 gene. The paternal allele carries a missense variant positio- Athens, Greece. ned in the last nucleotide of the second exon of this gene. This variant alters splicing accuracy, as determined by RT-PCR followed by direct sequencing of the amplified products. The maternal allele variant is a stop gain that targets Dysmorphology concerns the recognition and management of rare, multiple transcripts to nonsense-mediated mRNA-decay. GNB5 is the fifth member of anomaly syndromes. Genomic technologies and software for gestalt reco- the heterotrimeric G-protein β-subunit family, involved in signal transduc- gnition will re-shape dysmorphology services. In order to reflect on a model tion receptors and effectors. Mice lacking Gnb5 exhibit markedly abnormal of the service in the post-Genomic era, we compared the utility of dysmor- neurological phenotype including impaired development, tiptoe-walking, phology consultations in two Mediterranean cities, Athens, Greece and Afu- motor learning and coordination deficiencies, and hyperactivity. Further, it la, Israel (MDS), the Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, a UK service controls the deactivation of retinal phototransduction and the proper func- with dysmorphology expertise (UKDS) and the DYSCERNE, digital service tioning of retinal bipolar cells in KO mice. Thus, Gnb5 may regulate dendritic (DDS). We show that it is more likely that Chromosome Microarray Analy- arborization and/or synapse formation. These findings bear a resemblance sis will be performed if suggested in the UKDS rather than in the MDS; this to some of the reported symptoms in the examined patients. most probably reflects the difference of access to genetic testing following P S11
.063 funding limitations in the MDS. We also demonstrate that in terms of achie- Clinical utility of exome sequencing as a first-tier molecular test in ved diagnosis, the first visit to a dysmorphology clinic is more significant infants suspected of having a monogenic disorder than a follow-up. We show that a confirmed syndrome diagnosis significant- Z. Stark1, T. Tan1,2, B. Chong1, G. Brett1, P. Yap1, M. Walsh1, D. Amor1,3, R. Savarirayan1,2, G. ly decreases the requests for other, non genetic, laboratory investigations. McGillivray1, A. Yeung1, P. Ekert4,2, C. Theda5, S. Cowie1, H. Peters6,2, A. Boneh6,2, J. Yaplito- Conversely, it increases the requests for reviews by other specialists and, Lee6, M. Ryan6,2, R. Leventer6,2, I. Macciocca7, N. Thorne7, Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, C. Gaff7,8, S. White1,2; most significantly (t-test 8.244), it increases further requests for screening 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of Melbourne for possible associated complications. This is the first demonstration of the Department of Paediatrics, Melbourne, Australia, 3University of Melbourne Department demands, on a health service, following the diagnosis of a dysmorphic con- of Paediatrics, Melborne, Australia, 4Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, Melbourne, dition. Australia, 5Royal Women‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 6Royal Children‘s Hospital, This study was supported by the Daniel Turnberg UK/Middle East Travel Melbourne, Australia, 7Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, Fellowship. The DYSCERNE project was funded by grants from the European 8University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Commission Public Health Executive Agency, the European Society of Hu- man Genetics and the Manchester Biomedical Research Centre. Single-gene disorders are a common cause of morbidity and mortality in in- P S11
.061 fants. Diagnosis can be challenging as the clinical presentation is frequently Severe scoliosis in a girl with Temple syndrome due to isolated undifferentiated or incomplete in the early stages. Individual disorders are imprinting defect on human chromosome 14q32.2 F. Jobic1, R. Gouron2, L. Cuisset3, B. Demeer1; rare, and often genetically heterogenous. This commonly results in extensi- 1Departement of Genetics, Amiens University Hospital, Amiens, France, 2Department of ve, protracted, costly and invasive diagnostic investigations in this patient Pediatric Orthopaedic Surgery, Amiens University Hospital, University Of Picardie-Jules group. Verne, Amiens, France, 3Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics APHP- We prospectively evaluated exome sequencing as a first-tier molecular test Cochin Hospital, Faculty of Medicine Paris Descartes University and Institut Cochin in 37 infants suspected of having a monogenic disorder. All participants were INSERM U567, Paris, France. less than 2 years of age, and 40% were less than 3 months of age. Infants ABSTRACT with pathogenic CNVs and those who had previously undergone singe gene sequencing were excluded. Exome sequencing with targeted phenotype- driven analysis occurred in parallel with standard investigations, including Human chromosome 14q32.2 contains an imprinted gene cluster. Maternal single gene Sanger sequencing when clinically indicated. The most common uniparental disomy of chromosome 14, paternal deletions and loss of me- indication for testing was the presence of multiple congenital abnormalities thylation at the intergenic differentially methylated region (IGDMR) result and dysmorphic features (54%), followed by suspicion of a neurometabolic in a distinct human phenotype known as “maternal uniparental disomy 14 disorder (20%). Exome sequencing resulted in a molecular diagnosis of 21 phenotype” also referred to as “Temple syndrome”. The condition was first genetic conditions in 20 infants, giving a diagnostic rate of 54%. Four rela- described in 1991 and is characterized by pre- and postnatal growth retar- tives received a genetic diagnosis following cascade testing, and 10 couples dation, hypotonia, early-onset puberty, truncal obesity, small hands and feet were identified as being at high risk (25% or 50%) of recurrence in future and feeding difficulty. pregnancies. By contrast, a molecular genetic diagnosis was reached in 20% To date, only seven patients with a primary epigenetic aberration confined using standard approaches in the same patient group. to the 14q32.2 IGDMR have been described. The present report concerns Employing exome sequencing as a first-line molecular test in selected in- a 1M3-EyGe3ar-old girl with a maternal uniparental disomy 14 phenotype who fants has the potential to considerably shorten the diagnostic process, im- displayed an isolated imprinting defect at the maternally expressed gene prove diagnostic yield, guide management, and enable accurate recurrence 3 ( ) locus and developed rapidly-progressing scoliosis that required risk counselling in a timely manner. surgical treatment. We also review published reports on patients with an PM11.064 epimutation. Eyebrow abnormalities as a suggestive feature for the diagnosis of PM11.062 multiple congenital anomalies syndromes Whole-exome sequencing in two sisters with severe hypotonia and C. Rusu1, A. Sireteanu2, M. Panzaru1, E. Braha1, L. Butnariu1, M. Gramescu1, R. Popescu1; hyporeflexia, cognitive deficit, and epilepsy 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Regional Institute of Oncology, P. De Nittis1, L. Gueneau2, D. Cocciadiferro1, A. Alfaiz2, V. Napolioni3, B. Augello1, M. Molecular Genetics Lab, Iasi, Romania. Pellico1, L. Zelante1, A. Reymond2, G. Merla1; 1IRCSS Casa Sollevo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Neurology Eyebrow abnormalities are relatively rare birth defects that could be highly and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, CA, United States. suggestive for the diagnosis of multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) syndro- mes. To confirm this hypothesis, we have selected 84 cases from our own experience with marked eyebrow abnormalities. All patients had a specific diagnosis confirmed with genetic tests in most of the cases. We have identi- We identified two Italian sisters with severe cognitive and psychomotor fied different types of eyebrows based on specific criteria like facial distribu- delay, language defects, epilepsy, nystagmus, generalized hypotonia, heart tion, sparseness, thickness or uniformity. The most common abnormalities rhythm abnormalities, osteotendinous hyporeflexia. Exome sequencing of in our group were diamond-shaped eyebrows (32% of cases), synophris the two affected siblings and their non-consanguineous healthy parents al- lowed circumscribing five genes EwSitHh Gpo t2e0nt1ia5ll y| cGauLsAatSivGe OvaWria,n StsC. TOhTesLeA N(D18, %U Kof |c WaseWs) Wan.dE SspHaGrse.O eRyeGbrows (17%), whereas the least com2m1o9nABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ones were linear and lowset, as well as thick eyebrows (4% each) and bushy OAVS. Functional studies by transient knockdown in zebrafish model evi- eyebrows (1% of cases). Each eyebrow pattern has been associated with denced gold1 as craniofacial cartilages architecture key factor. specific syndromes and based on our own experience and literature data In conclusion, we report GOLD1 as the first gene involved in Goldenhar syn- we have identified for every pattern the most commonly associated clinical drome. Future identification of others genes should allow a better under- features, making the association highly suggestive for the diagnosis. Clinical standing of molecular processes leading to OAVS. data will be illustrated with pictures. P S11
.067 In conclusion, we appreciate that Clinical Genetics still has a place within Three siblings with non-immune hydrops fetalis with gracile bones the Genomic Era, the recognition of suggestive clinical features being very and dysmorphic features: second report in the literature useful for MCA diagnosis in developing countries, where financial resources M. B. Duz1, E. Koparir2, M. Ozen1,3,4, E. Fenercioglu1, M. Seven1, H. Ulucan1; are limited and detailed molecular testing is not always available in daily 1Cerrahpasa Medical School, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Kanuni practice. This leads to a more specific diagnosis and increases the cost-effec- Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Biruni University, tiveness of genetic testing. Istanbul, Turkey, 45Department of Pathology&Immunology,Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. P S11
.065 Novel mutations in PIEZO1 cause an autosomal recessive form of Generalised Lymphatic Dysplasia A brother and a sister from a consanguineous family was first described by S. Martin-Almedina1, E. Fotiou1, M. Simpson2, S. Lin3, K. Gordon1, G. Brice1, G. Atton1, I. Jeffery1, D. Rees4, H. Jeffery1, C. Mignot5, J. Vogt6, T. Homfray1, M. Snyder3, S. Rockson3, S. Abbot et al. in 2008 (MIM 613124). They both had non-immune hydrops Jeffery1, P. Mortimer1, S. Mansour1, P. Ostergaard1; fetalis with gracile bones and dysmorphic features. They died after an hour 1St George‘s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2King‘s College London from birth due to respiratory insufficiency. School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 3Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United We here report three female siblings from a consanguineous Turkish fa- States, 4King‘s College Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, mily, who had non-immune hydrops fetalis, dysmorphic facial appearance, France, 6Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. and bone fractures. They were born at 36, 33 and 33+6 week gestation by PIEZO1 caesarean section due to malpresentation, respectively. All of siblings had similar facial dysmorphism with down-slanting palpebral fissures, low-set We have identified mutations that cause a form of autosomal reces- ears, short and upturned nose, long and smooth philtrum, narrow and high sive GLD which is characterised by a high incidence of non-immune hydrops palate, and short neck. Radiographic studies of the first child revealed frac- fetalis and chronic peripheral primary lymphedema. This may be lethal in tures of bilateral humerus and right femur, second child had fractures of left utero or in the neonatal period. However, it may fully resolve and present humerus and left femur, whereas last child had only left humerus fractures. later in childhood with four limb lymphoedema with facial oedema and a The siblings died after three days, forty-three days and nine days from birth, susceptibility to facial cellulitis with intermittent swelling. Some of the pati- due to respiratory problems, respectively. We suggest that our patients are ents have intestinal lymPIpEhZaOn1giectasia or pleural effusions. similar with those of Abbott et al. indicating a new autosomal recessive con- Whole exome sequencing was performed in three families and novel vari- dition. To elucidate this phenotype, molecular studies are still in progress. ants in only one gene, , were identified under the criteria of an auto- PM11.068 somal recessive disease. The whole coding region of the gene was Sanger se- Multiple Congenital Anomalies in two Boys with Mutation in HCF C1
 quenced in 10 unrelated individuals of similar phenotype. In total, we have and Cobalamin Disorder identified nine homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in six G. Morin1, M. Gérard2, A. Bourillon3, C. Colson2, S. Mathieu4, D. Rabier5, T. Billette de unrelated GLD families; three nonsense, four missense, and two splice site Villemeur4, H. Ogier de Baulny6, J. Benoist3; mutations. The missense mutations were located in evolutionary conserved 1Service de Génétique Clinique et Oncogénétique, Amiens, France, 2Service de Génétique residues and predicted to have damaging effects on the protein. The splice Clinique, Caen, France, 3Laboratoire de Biochimie - Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, variants caused exon skipping and the nonsense mutations affected PIEZO1 4Service de Neuropédiatrie - Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 5Service de Biochimie expression. RT-PCR and western blot were used to investigate the effect of - Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 6Service de Neuropédiatrie - Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. the identified variants on gene and protein expression. A skin biopsy was investigated and lack of initial lymphatics was found. Mutations in PIEZO1 have previously been reported to cause autosomal dominant DHS but our report suggests that biallelic mutations in this gene The cobalamin type C deficiency is a rare condition that results from impai- cause GLD. Therefore, it suggests that PIEZO1 has a role in the development red biosynthesis of both methylcobalamin (MeCbl) and adenosylcobalamin of lymphatic structures. This work was supported by the BHF, the Newlife (AdoCbl). Hemizygous mutations of the HCF C1
 gene explain the majority of Foundation for Disabled Children and the NIH. clinically and biologically compatible cblC patients without MMACHC muta- tions (OMIM 309541). We report a family with two maternal half-brothers PM11.066 with multiple congenital anomalies and HCF C1
 gene mutation in the second Identification of the first gene involved in Goldenhar syndrome Kelch domain. Both presented with dysmorphic features (flat profile, cleft E. Lopez1, M. Bérenguer1, S. Marlin2, A. Tingaud-Sequeira1, S. Charron1, H. de Belvalet1, G. Mathieu1, F. FECLAD3, P. Babin1, B. Arveiler1,4, D. Lacombe1,4, C. Rooryck1,4; lip for one), increased nuchal translucency, prenatal onset microcephaly and 1Laboratoire MRGM, EA4576, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 2Centre de hypospadias. Additionally to early onset intractable epilepsy and profound Référence des Surdités Génétiques, Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker, Paris, neurocognitive impairment, this familial observation suggests that HCF C1
 France, 3Fédération des Centres Labellisés pour les Anomalies du Développement, 8 gene should be considered in boys with midline malformations, even wit- centres, France, 4Service de Génétique Médicale et Centre de Référence Anomalies du hout proven cobalamin C deficiency. Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. P S11
.069 Diagnostic dilemma - Hidrolethalus syndrome V. Belengeanu1, G. Furau1, C. Popescu1, L. Paiusan1, M. Stoian2,3, H. Viskari4, D. Misceo5; The oculoauriculovertebral spectrum (OAVS, OMIM 164210) or Goldenhar 1University of West Vasile Godis Arad, Arad, Romania, 2Discipline of Medical Genetics, syndrome is a developmental anomaly involving the first and second bran- University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Carol Davila”, Bucharest, Romania, 3Personal chial arches. This pathology represents one of the most common congenital Genetics-Medical Genetics Center, Bucharest, Romania, 4Institute for Molecular craniofacial disorder, with a prevalence around 1/26,000 births. Main fea- Medicine, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, tures include facial asymetry resulting from maxillary and/or mandibular University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. hypoplasia, hemifacial microsomia, unilateral or bilateral ear anomalies, ocular defects, and vertebral malformations. To date, although various chromosome abnormalities have been associated with OAVS and several Hydrolethalus syndrome is a rare clinical entity including as main characte- candidate genes have been screened, the genetic etiology of this pathology ristics hydrocephalus, absent midline structures, polydactyly and lethality. remains largely unknown. The vast majority of the cases have been reported in Finland. We present For the present study, a project with national recruitment established a co- two Romanian newborns with severe malformations. The first case is a male hort of 156 patients with OAV spectrum. In order to determine the molecu- fetus. The fetus was delivered by caesarian section at 28 weeks of gestati- lar basis of Goldenhar syndrome, we performed exome sequencing in trios on, with hydrocephaly, microphtalmia, cheiloschisis, micrognathia, low set including selected patients with Goldenhar syndrome and their healthy ears, bilateral postaxial poydactyly with six fingers of the hand, preaxial and parents. We identified a nonsense mutation in GOLD1 gene, a poorly cha- postaxial polydactyly of the feet with seven toes and syndactyly of 5th and racterized transcription factor known to be involved in ear development. 6th. The fetus lived 20 minutes. Autopsy showed also laryngeal stenosis, Screening of the cohort identified a missense mutation in a second patient. palatoschisis, lissencephaly, agenesis of corpus callosum, classic open book I 2n 2te 0restingly, GOLD1 belongs to a geneticE eSnHvirGon 2m0e1nt5 w |i tGhiLnA a SpGarOaloWgo,n S COap Tp Lea Ara Nn Dce , o Uf Kth e | Wbra Win. W Th .Ee Sse Hco Gn .d O c Ras Ge is a feminine fetus, delivered by that was already involved in another Copy Number Variant associated with caesarian section at 29 weeks of gestation. She lived the 10 minutes. SheABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM11.072 Oligonucleotide array CGH analysis of a cohort of 220 patients with showed severe dysmorphia with true anophthalmia, arhinia, median cleft intellectual diability, developmental delay and multiple congenital upper jaw, very small lower jaw and small ears. She had right hand with anomalies polydactyly and bilateral syndactyly of 2th and 5th toes. Autopsy showed A. Saberi1,2, g. Shariati1,2, H. Galehdari3,2, M. Hamid4,2, N. Abdorasuli2; cerebral hemispheres open-book and the occipital keyhole images, agenesis 1Ahvaz Jundishpour university of medical sciences, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, of corpus callosum and lissencephaly. The right lung had two lobes, the left 2Narges genetic lab, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Ahvaz shahid chamran university, lung one lobe. Sequencing analysis of HYL S1
 and KIF7 genes did not iden- Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Pasteur Institute of Iran, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of. tify any pathogenic variants. The dilemma is the discordance between the presence of majority of the specific signs of the syndrome and absence the mutations in the so far causative genes. These cases with overlapping mani- festations of the hydrolethalus syndrome might be in fact another hydrolet- Array CGH (aCGH) enables genome wide investigation of copy number chan- halus syndrome or the syndrome is etiologically heterogeneous. ges at high resolution and have recently been implemented as a clinical dia- gnostic tool. In this study, a high resolution oligonucleotide chromosomal PM11.070 microarray was applied in an Iranian cohort of 220 patients with DD/ID and A new homozygous IGF1R mutation defines an autosomal recessive multiple congenital anomalies: male;114, female:116, aged 7days- 20 years. form of SHORT syndrome characterized by developmental delay and DNA extracted from peripheral blood cells were analyzed with CytoChip_ marked progeroid appearance. ISCA_4x180 oligo array. The imbalances were confirmed by FISH or MLPA. L. Micale1, V. Ottaviani1, I. Isidori2, C. Fusco1, B. Augello1, D. Rogaia3, A. Mencarelli3, C. We considered copy number variants (CNVs) as pathogenic if the variant was Ardisia3, G. Stangoni3, G. Merla1, P. Prontera3; 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, San Giovanni responsible for a known syndrome, encompassed gene/s of known function, Rotondo (FG), Italy, 2INeurology Unit, University and Hospital of Perugia, Perugia, Italy, occurred de novo or, if inherited, the parents was variably affected and/or 3Medical Genetics Unit, University and Hospital of Perugia, Perugia, Italy. the involved gene/s had been reported with DD/ID and multiple congenital anomalies. aCGH identified 39 clinically significant microdeletions and 18 microduplications in 23.6% (52/220) patients, with size of aberrant regions Insulin-like growth factors I (IGF-I) is essential for pre and post-natal soma- ranging from 39kb to 24.2Mb. 26.3% (15/57) of the copy number variant tic growth and cellular proliferation. The binding of IGF-I to IGF1R leads to (CNV) detected corresponded to well-known microdeletion and microdupli- receptor autophosphorylation resulting in recruitment of cytoplasmic com- cation syndrome (Williams, Digeorge, prder-Willi, kabuki, WolfHirschhorn, ponents of multiple downstream signalling pathways, including the PI3K/ Tar, Reiger, Potoki-lupski and Mitochondrial complex deficiency IV syndro- Akt and MAPK/Erk pathways, which are important for cell survival and cell me). 61% (35/57) of the detected CNVs were de novo, 26% (15/57) inhe- growth. rited and 12% (7/57) unknown. We also identified two novel CNVs, one at Here, using exome sequencing, we identified and characterized a new ho- 9p11.2-p13.1 and the other at 10p12.1 as a pathogenic submicroscopic CNV. mozygous c.2201G>T mutation in the IGF1R gene in a female patient, born Our study provides further evidence of the high diagnostic yield of aCGH for from consanguineous parents, showing very high IGF-I levels and clinical genetic testing of patients with DD/ID and unexplained multiple congenital features of SHORT syndrome plus developmental delay, CNS defects, and anomalies. marked progeroid appearance. This mutation cosegregated in the hetero- P S11
.073 zygous state in the parents and other relatives, which show a milder phe- 2q22.1q22.3 deletion, upstream ZEB2, causes intellectual disability, notype. myoclonic epilepsy, omphalocele, genital anomalies and facial Based on a bioinformatics analysis, the c.2201G>T mutation was predicted similarities with Mowat-Wilson syndrome to cause an alternative splicing event that we confirmed by RT-PCR followed N. Revencu1, M. Ravoet1, F. Christiaens2, A. Beleza-Meireles1; by direct sequencing of amplified products. This event causes an aberrant 1Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique isoform that adds 25 aminoacids after the proline at codon 733, predicted to de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Pediatric Neurology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, be damaging and causing dramatic structural changes of the protein. Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. Functional studies using primary dermal fibroblast cultures obtained from affected and healthy individuals revealed a lower IGF1R protein expression in both homozygous and heterozygous fibroblasts. Furthermore, decreased BACKGROUND IGF-1R content affects IGF-I signalling, as showed by a reduction of IGF-I- Array-CGH has improved the diagnostic yield in patients with intellectual dependent Akt phosphorylation and IGF-IR auto-phosphorylation. disability (ID) and/or multiple congenital anomalies (MCA), allowing the This study provides valuable insights into the pathophysiological and phe- definition of novel microdeletion and microduplication syndromes. notipical consequences caused by loss of IGF1R function. CASE REPORT We report a boy with severe ID, dysmorphisms, myoclonic epilepsy, thin corpus callosum, omphalocele and chordee. He presents di- P S11
.071 stinctive facial features comprising large, prominent forehead, thick ey- A Germline mTOR Mutation in Aboriginal Australian Siblings with ebrows, deep-set eyes, strabismus, wide nasal bridge, bilateral epicanthus, Intellectual Disability, Dysmorphism, Macrocephaly and Small large ear lobes, prominent, rounded nasal tip, deep philtrum, open, large Thoraces. mouth with M-shaped upper lip, small teeth and pointed chin, which were G. S. Baynam1,2,3, M. Davis4, K. Mina4, L. Schofield2, R. Allcock1, N. Laing1, M. Cook5, H. Dawkins6, J. Goldblatt7; somewhat evocative of Mowat-Wilson syndrome. He has wide-spaced nipp- 1University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, 2Murdoch University, Perth, Australia, les and prominent finger pads in hands and feet. 3Telethon Kids Institute, Perth, Australia, 4PathWest, Perth, Australia, 5Australian RESULTS National University, Canberra, Australia, 6Office of Population Health Genomics, Public Array-CGH identified a de novo 2q22.1q22.3 (140,509,156-144,980,623) Health and Clinical Services Division, WA Department of Health, Perth, Australia, deletion, comprising the LR P1
B, KYNU, ARHGA P15
 genes and partially the 7Genetic Services of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. GTD C1
 gene. Interestingly, the ZEB2 gene, responsible for Mowat-Wilson syndrome, is located about 150Kb downstream the deletion. DISCUSSION The Australian Desert, a new familial phenotype and a global search for func- Two other patients have been previously reported with de novo similar de- tional studies to support potential drug repurposing. We report 3 Aborigi- letion and no other genomic rearrangement: nal Australian siblings with a unique phenotype which overlaps with known - in DECIPHER, patient 1607 (del 139,813,180-145,063,389), who presents megalencephaly syndromes and RASopathies, including Costello syndrome. ID, craniofacial dysmorphism, strabismus, absent nipples, and prominent A gain of function mutation in mTOR was identified and represents the first fingertip pads reported human condition due to a germline, familial mTOR mutation. We - in the literature, Mulatinho et al describe a Brazilian patient (del describe the findings in this family to highlight i) that the path to determina- 138,750.000-144.750.000) presenting ID, lack of speech, craniofacial dys- tion of pathogenicity was confounded by the lack of genomic reference data morphism, omphalocele, hypospadias and cryptorchidism. for Australian Aboriginals and that ii) the disease biology, functional analy- CONCLUSION ses in this family and studies on the Tuberous Sclerosis Complex support A novel case of 2q22.1q22.3 deletion is documented, defining a rare, but re- consideration of an mTOR inhibitor as a therapeutic agent cognizable, ID/MCA syndrome, bringing the total number of known cases to 3. Omphalocele and genital anomalies are present in 2 of the 3 patients. Pa- tients present similar craniofacial features, somewhat evocative of Mowat- Wilson syndrome, suggesting a possible positional effect over ZEB2. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 221ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM11.074 Effectiveness and costs of whole exome sequencing compared to traditional diagnostic investigations in children with complex microcephaly, strabismus, low-set ears, bilateral epicanthic folds, broad neurological disorders nasal bridge and tented moutihn wsiittuh slightly everted upper lip. The small G. R. Monroe1, G. W. Frederix2, S. Savelberg1, K. Duran1, T. de Vries1, N. Verhoeven-Duif1, metacentric marker chromosome was identified by conventional cytogene- J. J. van der Smagt1, P. Terhal1, P. van Hasselt3, M. M. van Haelst1, G. Visser3, A. Hövels2, G. tic analysis and fluorescence hybridization (FISH) as i(18p) in the van Haaften1; proband with the karyotype 47,XX,+i(18)(p10). In the second case we pre- 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Utrecht University sent a prenatally detected mosaic isochromosome 18p with the karyotype Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Division of 47,XY,+i(18)(p10)[30]/46,XY[29] by amniocentesis. Interphase FISH ana- Pediatrics, Department of Metabolic Diseases, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, Utrecht, lysis of stimulated cultured cord blood lymphocytes showed 2% (6/306) Netherlands. mosaicism for tetrasomy 18p. The pregnancy was terminated. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) confirmed the dia- gnosis of tetrasomy 18p molecularly and revealed a 14 Mb triplication at Introduction: A systematic evaluation of whole exome sequencing (WES) 18p11.32p11.21 in the first case. In the second case a 14 Mb duplication diagnostic yield and assessment of the costs associated with implementing at 18p11.32p11.21 was characterized by aCGH. The parental origin of the WES in the clinic is currently lacking. We determine the increased diagnostic isochromosome was determined based on a variety of short tandem repeats yield and provide a thorough cost analysis of the clinical care prospectively and was found to be maternal in both cases. with WES compared retrospectively to care without WES. Materials and Methods: Seventeen children of healthy, unrelated parents P S11
.077 were randomly selected from the 2011 patient population at the Sylvia Toth Growth and growth hormone in 15 children with Kabuki syndrome Center (STC; Utrecht, the Netherlands), a specialized center for children M. Klaassens, E. Janssens, D. A. Schott, W. J. M. Gerver, L. J. Zimmerman, C. T. R. M. Stumpel; with complex neurological disorders and diverse phenotypes. WES was per- Maastricht University Medical Center+, Maastricht, Netherlands. formed on Illumina HiSeq 2500. In parallel, the clinical records of patients were obtained and a comprehensive cost summary of medical treatments, hospital visits, and all other resource use was compiled per patient. This cost Introduction was then compared to the cost of care using WES, assessed prospectively. Kabuki Syndrome (KS; OMIM 147920) is a congenital anomaly/intellectual Results: The diagnostic yield in this patient cohort is 18%, confirming past disability syndrome caused by a mutation in the KMT2D or KDM6A gene. studies’ diagnostic yields on intellectual disability cohorts. The three mu- Children with KS have a spectrum of clinical features, one of the key features tations detected are in genes recently associated with intellectual disabi- is postnatal growth deficiency. lity (ANKRD11, CTNNB1, ANDP), and the mutations are all heterozygous Mutations in KMT2D gene, encoding an H3K4 histone methyl transferase, de novo frame-shift deletions resulting in protein truncation. In addition, act as an epigenetic transcriptional activator during growth and develop- strong candidate genes (HNRNPU, CHD4) have been identified. ment. As for the KDM6A mutation, no molecular cause for growth retarda- Conclusions: The increased diagnostic yield and fractional increase in total tion has been described. overall price in the cost of care for these patients suggests that WES should GH deficiency has been reported in KS but in the majority of children with be implemented early in patient care for similar centers that have patient KS no cause for small stature has been found. We studied the growth hor- populations for whom providing a diagnosis is both difficult and expensive. mone and IGF-I pattern in order to learn more about a possible mechanism P S11
.075 involved in this postnatal growth retardation. Interstitial deletion 6p21.2-p21.1: characterization by array-CGH and Methods phenotype description Currently, we have assessed 15 KS children (age 3-10 years old, 6.44±2.29) I. M. P. O. Rizzo, K. T. Abe, L. L. Roese, D. R. Carvalho, C. E. Speck-Martins; with a known KMT2D or KDM6A mutation. Height was variable, with a SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasília – DF, Brazil, BRASÍLIA, Brazil. mean height SDS of -2.38 ±1.41. Both clonidine (CLO) and arginine (ARG) were used for stimulation. GH and IGF-1 were measured according to inter- national standard. Deletions in the short arm of chromosome 6 represent a rare genetic altera- Results and Conclusion tion and small number of cases was described, frequently about telomeric Growth hormone deficiency was present in 4 of 15 (26.67%) children. Ap- region. The number of patients identified with microdeletion syndrome has parently growth hormone deficiency is not the only cause for small height been increasing significantly with widespread application of high-resoluti- in KS patients. In addition, in 2 children the GH tests showed a tendency to on genome analysis technologies such as array comparative genomic hybri- GH resistance, although no one actually met the defined criteria. Further re- dization (array-CGH). search is necessary to determine the underlying cause of growth retardation We identify a 6,295Mb interstitial deletion at 6p21.2-p21.1 by array-CGH. in the majority of KS patients. This region encompasses fifty-seven genes cataloged at OMIM. Currently we are performing a clinical study with growth hormone in child- The patient was a seven years old girl with mental retardation, neurosen- ren with Kabuki syndrome; the results are pending but promising. sory deafness, facial dymorphism, obesity beginning in infancy and atopic PM11.078 dermatitis. Kapur-Toriello Syndrome: a further case report and expansion of the The comparison genotype/phenotype has been done and six genes whose phenotype function is known and correlated have been identified. The consequences of H. Lefroy, U. Kini; haploinsufficiency of GL P1
R, MOC S1
, TREM2, GNMT, PEX6 and CU L7
 in this Department of Clinical Genetics, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United case have been debated. Kingdom. Individually, none of the identified genes encompasses all findings in pati- ent, however could be contributing in the phenotype. PM11.076 Kapur-Toriello syndrome (KTS) is a rare multiple congenital abnormalities Two cases with a rare chromosomal abnormality: isochromosome syndrome first described by Kapur and Toriello in 1991. We present a new 18p case, taking the total number reported in the literature to six. V. Cejnova1, L. Liskova1, V. Harmas1, M. Tothova2, A. Klimova1, M. Soukupova1, J. With gradual expansion of the cohort, evidence is emerging for several key Lastuvkova1; features including bilateral cleft lip / palate, a distinctive nose, low set ears, 1Regional Health Corporation, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic, 2GENVIA, Prague, Czech ocular, cardiac, intestinal and brain malformations. Other features seen less Republic. commonly in previous cases, but which our case adds evidence for, include growth retardation, digital abnormalities, short stature and a short, wide neck. Tetrasomy 18p, one of the most commonly observed isochromosomes, con- Structural pituitary abnormalities associated with growth hormone defici- sists of two copies of the p arms on chromosome 18[i(18p)]. It has a preva- ency have not been previously reported in patients with KTS, although short lence of 1/140,000-180,000 live births and affects both genders equally. Te- stature and growth retardation have been frequently noted. To our know- trasomy 18p syndrome is characterized by nonspecific morfologic features; ledge, our patient is the first with KTS to receive growth hormone therapy. low birth weight, microcephaly, low-set ears, strabismus, abnormalities in It would therefore seem appropriate to monitor growth hormone levels in muscle tone and deep tenddoen nroevfloex. Feeding difficulties and developmental patients with KTS presenting with short stature. dedlaey nso avroe also followed. Autosomal recessive inheritance has previously been suggested. As this is We present two cases with tetrasomy 18p. In the first case we report the fourth case with a single affected individual born to non-consanguineous a tetrasomy 18p in a female dysmorphic child with delayed psy- c2h2om2otor development and hypotonia. TEheS HphGys i2ca0l 1ex5a m| GinaLtAioSn GshOowWed, :S COpaTrLenAtsN, iDt r,a iUseKs t|h We pWossWib.iElitSy HofG au.OtoRsoGmal dominant inheritance. With so few documented cases of KTS, it is important for new cases to beABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index reported so that the clinical phenotype may be better delineated. As whole retardation (MCLMR) (MIM #152950) is a rare autosomal dominant con- genome sequencing becomes increasingly available, we hope that a molecu- dition. The causative gene, kinesin family member 11 (KIF11) was identi- lar cause for this rare syndrome may soon be identified. fied in 2012. KIF11 mutations were found in individuals with and without P S11
.079 lymphoedema. To further delineate this condition, we collected the clinical KBG syndrome: a series of 20 French patients details of thirty seven individuals from twenty two families, all with KIF11 T. Busa1, A. Tessier2, F. Riccardi3, A. Jacquette4, D. Genevieve5, V. Gatinois6, D. Lacombe7, mutations. V. Michaud8, M. Rossi9, C. Lebreton9, B. Leheup10, C. Vincent-Delorme11, A. Delahaye12, L. The condition arose de novo in 40% of cases where parental results were Van Maldergem13, P. Cacciagli1,14, H. Scheffer15, P. Saugier-Weber16, A. Goldenberg17, N. available. In our cohort, 86% had microcephaly, 78% had an ocular abnor- Philip1,18; mality consistent with the diagnosis, 46% had lymphoedema, 73% had 1Departement de Genetique medicale. Hopital d‘Enfants de la Timone. Assistance mild-moderate learning difficulties, 8% had epilepsy and 8% had a cardiac publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France, 2Service de génétique CHU de Rouen, anomaly. We identified three individuals with KIF11 mutations, but no cli- Rouen, France, 3Département de Génétique Médicale.Hopital d‘Enfants de la Timone. Assistance publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France, 4Unité de Genetique nical features of MCLMR demonstrating reduced penetrance. The variable Clinique. Groupe Hospitalier Pitie-Salpetriere, Paris, France, 5Departement de Genetique expression of the phenotype and presence of mildly affected individuals medicale et Cytogenetique. CHRU de Montpellier, Marseille, France, 6Laboratoire de indicates that the prevalence may be higher than expected, and we would Genetique des maladies rares et autoinflammatoires. Hopital A De Villeneuve. CHRU therefore recommend a low threshold for genetic testing. Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 7Service de Genetique Medicale . Hopital Pellegrin. Our data suggests that mutations in KIF11 cause a variable spectrum of clini- CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 8Servce de Genetique medicale. Hopital Pellegrin. cal features. Not only is the microcephaly variable, the ocular abnormalities CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 9Service de Genetique. Groupement hospitalier Est. are also variable with chorioretinopathy being the most prevalent. Recently Hopitaux de Lyon, Lyon, France, 10Service de Médecine Infantile et Génétique Clinique Pôle Enfant CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 11Service de Genetique Clinique Guy Fontaine. a series of cases with retinal detachment mimicking FEVR have been repor- Hopital Jeanne de Flandres., Lille, France, 12Hopital jean Verdier, Bondy, France, 13Centre ted suggesting a broader spectrum of ocular manifestation than originally de Genetique Humaine. CHU de besançon, Besançon, France, 14Aix Marseille Université, suggested. Our review will explore and summarise the relationship between INSERM, GMGF UMR_S 910, 13385, Marseille, France, Marseille, France, 15Afdeling the KIF11 genotype and some of the major, phenotypic characteristics of Genetica Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 16laboratoire de genetique moleculaire. MCLMR identified to date. This work was funded by BHF. Faculte de medecine et de pharmacie de Rouen., Rouen, France, 17Unite de genetique clinique. Service de genetique CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 18Aix Marseille Université, P S11
.081 INSERM, GMGF UMR_S 910,, Marseille, France. New insights and broader spectrum of lissencephaly including a definition of a novel subtype. ANKRD11 N. Di Donato1,2, S. Chiari3, C. Adams1, S. Collins1, R. Guerrini3, W. B. Dobyns1, G. Mirzaa1; 1Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children‘s Research Institute, Seattle, WA, Mutations and deletions of the gene are known to cause KBG United States, 2Institut für Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Pediatric syndrome. We report a series of 20 AFrNeKnRchD 1p1atients with KBG syndrome Neurology Unit, Children‘s Hospital A. Meyer, University of Firenze, Florence, Italy. including 3 families. Molecular anomalies consisted of 9 mutations and 8 deletions involving at least part of the gene. The 9 mutations were identified by targeted sequencing of the gene, following clinical diagnosis Introduction: Lissencephaly (LIS), the most severe malformation of neuro- of KBG syndrome. The age at diagnosis ranged from birth to 65 years. All nal migration, is characterized by broad or absent gyri and abnormally thick mutations were loss of function and were clustered in the largest exon. The (12-20 mm) cortex. Several patterns and syndromes are known including size of deletions ranged from 127kb to 1.2Mb. There were no significant the less severe variant subcortical band heterotopia (SBH), but rapidly in- clinical differences between mutated and deleted cases. Facial gestalt was creasing knowledge requires revision of the current classification. characteristic in all cases, and allowed the diagnosis even in young children. Materials and Methods: We reviewed brain scans, clinical and molecular fin- Deafness was present in 25%, short stature in 55%. Interestingly, the teeth dings for 129 LIS patients ascertained from 2009-2014 and grouped them were considered as normal in 3 adult patients and two patients exhibited a by severity (LIS grade 1-6), gradient (diffuse vs. anterior or posterior), and caudal appendage. In most patients, intellectual level ranged from borderli- presence of other malformations. ne intelligence to mild/moderate intellectual deficiency. A single patient had Results: Posterior predominant LIS grade 3 (27%) followed by diffuse LIS severe ID. Two had epilepsy and behavioral problems were noted in 20%. or SBH (17%) due to mutations of LI S1
 and DCX were the most common From an epidemiological point of view, our study confirms the high rate of forms. All other LIS patterns were less frequent (2-9%) with anterior predo- familial cases. All cases with a mutation were recruited from two French minant forms significantly less frequent than posterior predominant forms. centers, whereas the 8 16q24.3 deletions identified by array-CGH deletions Recognizable tubulinopathies accounted for 10% of patients (grade 4 LIS were recruited through a national network. We postulate that mutations are with atypical mixed pachygyria-microgyria). This is the only group lacking probably more frequent than deletions but remain undiagnosed. Diagnosis the consistent anterior or posterior gradient characteristic of LIS. In additi- is clinical on the basis of typical facial features and similarities with Cornelia on, we recognized a novel anterior predominant “thin” LIS (cortex 5-7 mm; de Lange syndrome may be striking. normal is 3-4 mm) with reduced number of gyri and shallow sulci. When PM11.080 combined with severe cerebellar hypoplasia this variant is caused by muta- A review of the phenotype in Microcephaly with or without tions in RELN or VLDLR. However, 8 patients had “thin” LIS with a normal Chorioretinopathy, Lymphoedema or Mental Retardation (MCLMR) cerebellum. None had mutations in the known LIS genes. Based on high per- associated with KIF11 mutations centage of homozygosity in SNP arrays in several of these patients, we stron- G. E. Jones1, P. Ostergaard2, A. T. Moore3, F. C. Connell4, D. Williams5, O. Quarrell6, A. gly suspect autosomal recessive inheritance. We will present more detailed F. Brady7, I. Spier8, F. Hazan9, O. Moldovan10, D. Wieczorek11, B. Mikat11, F. Petit12, C. diagnostic criteria and updated results of molecular testing. Coubes13, R. A. Saul14, G. Brice15, K. Gordon16, S. Jeffery2, P. S. Mortimer16, P. C. Vasudevan1, S. Mansour17; PM11.082 1Leicester Clinical Genetics Department, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Molecular & Cell Diagnostic yield of targeted next generation sequencing panel for Sciences Research Centre, Cardiovascular & Cell Sciences Institute, St George‘s University cortical malformations of London, London, United Kingdom, 3Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, G. M. Mancini1, M. Wilke1, R. Oegema1, R. Schot1, M. Wijgerde1, W. B. Dobyns2, D. J. J. 4Clinical Genetics Department, Guys & St Thomas’ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, Halley1, M. A. van Slegtenhorst1; 5Clinical Genetics Department, Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United 1ErasmusMC, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Children‘s Kingdom, 6Sheffield Clinical Genetics Department, Sheffield Children’s NHS Trust,, Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States. Sheffield, United Kingdom, 7Clinical Genetics Department, Kennedy Galton Centre, North West London Hospitals NHS Trust,, London, United Kingdom, 8Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Dr. Behçet Uz Children’s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey, 10Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Malformations of the brain cortex development (MCD) are rare di- Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, 11Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum seases diagnosed by MRI scan and are classified into proliferation Essen, Universität Dusiburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 12Service de Genetique Clinique, disorders(microcephalies and megalencephalies), disorders of neuronal Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France, 13Department migration (lissencephaly, cobblestone malformation and heterotopia) and of Medical Genetics, Arnaud de Villeneuve’s Hospital, Montpellier, France, 14Childrens disorders of cortical organization (polymicrogyria and schizencephaly). Hospital, Greenville, SC, United States, 15South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St Identification of many genes has improved etiological diagnosis, but genetic George’s Healthcare NHS Trust,, London, United Kingdom, 16Department of Dermatology heterogeneity makes testing of individual genes unpractical. In Rotterdam a & Lymphovascular Medicine, St George’s Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 17South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George’s Healthcare NHS diagnostic custom-made panel for high throughput sequencing of 103 genes Trust, London, United Kingdom. involved in MCD, belonging to all three ategorLieISs1 h, aDsC bXe, eFnL dNeAv, eAloRpXe, dG. PARb5o6ut 168 patients have been tested in two years. Most of the patients had no mu- tation in one or more candidate genes (e.g. ), ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 223 Microcephaly with or without chorioretinopathy, lymphoedema, or mental previously tested by Sanger sequencing. The diagnostic yield of the panleABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S11
.085 A review of the spectrum of KIF11 mutations causing Microcephaly was about 6%. Most diagnoses have been achieved in the group of primary with or without chorioretinopathy, lymphoedema, or mental microcephalies, and the least in the group of polymicrogyria, although the retardation (MCLMR) latter was the most common indication for the test. Expert post-test clinical E. Fotiou1, H. Jeffery1, G. Jones1, D. Williams2, K. Karaer3, G. Brice1, K. Gordon1, P. and radiological re-phenotyping RhNaUs 4leadta tco recAlaCsTsBificKaItAioAn1 2o7f9 thCeE dNiPsJe aasned, Mortimer1, S. Jeffery1, P. Vasudevan2, S. Mansour1, P. Ostergaard1; RbrEoLaNdening the phenotypic spectrum of known disorders, as for mutations 1St George‘s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2University Hospital in the small nuclear RNA coding , for , , TUBB2B Leicester NHS Trust, Leicester, United Kingdom, 3Dr Ersin Arslan State Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey. P.I KD3iaRg2n oses also included cases with insufficient radiological data for appropriate classification. Low-abundance mosaic mutations, e.g. KIF11 and that we observed, remain a challenge to detect. When applied as first-tier test, targeted NGS panels can be cost-effective for the diagnosis Mutations in cause microcephaly with or without chorioretinopathy, of MCD, without the drawbacks of unsolicited findings. However these preli- lymphoedema, or mental retardation (MCLMR, MIM #152950) which is a minary data underpin the etiological heterogeneity of MCD and the need for rare autosomal dominant condition. MCLMR can be de novo or inherited. collaborative research efforts. The phenotype is variable, often displaying mild-to-severe microceKpIhFa1l1y plus any of the following: ocular abnormalities, lymphoedema, and learning P S11
.083 difficulties. This report further expands the molecular spectrum of Skeletal dysplasia may be a feature of Meckel syndrome type 9 variations. (MK S9
), a rare entity caused by B9D1 mutations Previous investigKaItFio1n1s have identified and reported a total of 50 cases. We G. A. Gradek1, K. Bakke2, E. B. Budal3, K. Rosendahl4, G. Houge1, P. M. Knappskog1, S. have screened another cohort of 28 unreported, unrelated MCLMR subjects Johansson1; 1Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, for mutations in by Sanger sequencing. We found 15 mutations in 17 N-Bergen, Norway, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Haukeland University subjects; one variant had previously been reported. A variety of mutations Hospital, N-Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital, were identified including a synonymoKusIF m11utation (c.2922G>A) in two un- N-Bergen, Norway, 4Department of Radiology, Haukeland University Hospital, N-Bergen, related subjects, which we show has an impact on splicing. This is the first Norway. report of a synonymous mutation in being responsiblKe IfFo1r1 c ausing INTRODUCTION: disease. KIF11 Identifying further mutations in this gene supports the role of as con- Meckel Syndrome (MKS) is a genetically heterogeneous tributory to MCLMR. A review of the spectrum of mutations in the mu- recBes9sDiv1e ciliopathy presenting in fetal life with multiple malformations, of tation positive subjects in this cohort and all published cases (i.e. a total of which occipital encephalocele is the most characteristic. MKS type 9, caused 67 cases under review) shows that nonsense mutations were most common bMyA TERI AmLuSt aAtiNoDns ,M isE aT rHaOreD eSn:tity with only two published cases so far, and (K3IF31%1), followed by frameshift mutations (27%), missense and splice-site none of them had a skeletal phenotype. mutations (20% each). The mutations are distributed evenly throughout the An unrelated couple lost four fetuses due gene. No mutations were identified in 11 unrelated individuals with to malformations consistent with MKS. Fetal DNA was collected from CVS clinical features consistent with MCLMR, suggesting genetic heterogeneity or spleen and subjected to 6.0 SNP-array-based copy number analysis, ha- associated with this condition. This work was funded by BHF and Newlife pRlEoStyUpLeT Sa:n alysis, and finally whole-exome sequencingM (KW S1
ES) analysis of a Foundation for Disabled Children. ciliopathy-related gene panel. Whole body X-rayN PwHaPs 3p,e TrfMoErmMe6d7 ,o Bn9 fDet1u, s 4. PM11.086 B9D2. 6.0 SBN9DP-1a rray and Sanger sequencing of the -gene were nor- Clinical phenotype of 5q31.1 - q31.2 microdeletion mal. Fetus 1 and 2 shared haplotypes around and A. Cieślikowska, M. Kucharczyk, M. Kugaudo, M. Krajewska-Walasek, K. Chrzanowska; Only in compound heterozygosity for pathogenic variants were Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, detected by the ciliopathy panel andlater verified by Sanger sequencing. Poland, Warsaw, Poland. UCOltNraCsLoUunSdIO aNn:d X-ray examination of fetus 4 displayed anguBla9tDe1d tibiae and radii and a large calvarium. Only four patients with a ciliopathy due to mutaBti9oDn1s Interstitial deletions of chromosome band 5q31 are rather uncommon, only have so far been described, two with MKS and two with Joubert syndrome several patients have been reported to date. We report on a case of a 12- (JS). Here we expand the severe end of the phenotypic spectrum of year-old girl patient with a de novo 4.19Mb interstitial deletion of chromo- mutations, adding skeletal dysplasia to the list of possible manifestations. some bands 5q31.1-q31.2 detected by whole-genome oligonucleotide mi- PM11.084 croarray analysis. Clinical manifestations in this patient included: failure to X-linked microcephalic primordial dwarfism syndrome in two thrive, psychomotor retardation, short stature, muscular hypotonia, skeletal siblings anomalies, microcephaly, cleft palate, hand and foot anomalies and dysmor- F. G. Debray1, V. Dideberg1, A. Jacquinet1, J. H. Caberg1, O. Bauraind2, R. Stevens2, A. phic features. Verloes3; Overlapping microdeletions have been previously reported [Rosenfeld et al., 1CHU Liège, Liège, Belgium, 2Clinique de l‘Espérance, Liège, Belgium, 3APHP-Robert 2011: DECIPHER 249028; Kleffman et al. 2012].In these patients microdele- Debré university hospital, Paris, France. tions were rather larger (5.0 - 8.1Mb) and extend distally into 5q31.3. Carri- ers of larger microdeletions which include subbands 5q31.1 and/or 5q31.3 seem to be more severely affected with congenital malformations, growth A boy was born at term from non-consanguineous parents with a birth anomalies, and severe encephalopathies. No common occurrence of the weight of 2130 gr (-3 SD), length of 45 cm (-2.5 SD) and OFC of 30.5 cm (-4 smallest region of overlap has been observed. Compared to the previously SD). Pregnancy was complicated by oligohydramnios and IUGR. Facial dys- reported patients, severe feeding difficulties, weakness and fatigue of calf morphism was noted at birth including blepharophimosis, stubby nose and muscle and unusual tiredness are unique features only to our patient, which thick columella, mild retrognathia, and posterior cleft palate. Cerebral ima- might be due to different sizes and positions of the individual deletions. ging showed bilateral cysts of the choroid plexus and mild enlargement of In conclusion, this case increases our knowledge of phenotypic conse- the cerebral ventricle. Auditory evoked potentials suggested sensorineural quences of interstitial 5q31 deletions. There has been considerable inte- deafness. He had subsequent developmental delay and growth retardation. rest in mapping the smallest region of overlap for this syndrome in order Hypsarythmia occurred at age 9 months. He died from status epilepticus. His to identify the critical pathogenic genes and establish genotype-phenotype young brother, born at term with a birth weight of 3090 gr (-0.8 SD) and OFC correlations. of 31.5 cm (-3.5 SD) had similar dysmorphism, including blepharophimosis This study was supported by the MNiSW Grant No. 0193/I P1
/2013/72. and cleft soft palate. Subsequently, he presented severe developmental delay, P S11
.087 feeding difficulties and gastro-esophageal reflux. Seizures appeared at the Heterozygous ACTG2 mutations impair binding to actin filaments and age of 1 year. Aged 13.8 year, his weight is 15.0 kg (-4 SD), height 111 cm (-6 cause megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome SD) and OFC 44.5 cm (-7 SD). He is unable to walk or speak. Clinically, the- D. Halim1, L. Signorile2, R. Verdijk3, F. Muller4, J. Kerner5, J. B. Verheij6, C. S. van der Werf6, se patients, originally reported as blepharophimosis-MR syndromes, share R. M. H. Wijnen7, D. Tibboel7, Y. van Bever1, R. M. W. Hofstra1, A. Brooks1, M. M. Alves1; similarities with Juberg-Marsidi syndrome. Array CGH was normal. Whole 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, exome sequencing identified a hemizygous mutation in a gene located in Netherlands, 2Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Xp11.22, affecting a highly conserved amino-acid, and predicted, in silico, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Pathology, Erasmus University Medical Center, to be pathogenic. This mutation was present in both siblings, the mother Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Biochimie Prenatalé, Hôpital Universitaire Robert Debré, and maternal grand-mother but absent in another male maternal relative. Paris, France, 5Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, Lucile Packard Children Hospital, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United X chromosome inactivation and functional studies are currently underway. T2h2is4 work was supported by a FIRS grant EfrSomH Gthe 2  C0
H1U5 L i|è gGeL, BAelSgGiumO.W, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index States, 6Department of Genetics, Groningen University Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 7Department of Pediatrics Surgery, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. pSM.IlAe5D040Val, and p.Ile500Met) have been described in several unrelated sub- jects with MYHRS. Here we report on a 10-year-4o9l6d girl with a heterozygous missense mutation affecting residue Arg . So far this mutation have Introduction: Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome been described in only three male patients. Our patient presented with stri- (MMIHS) is a rareA cCoTnGg2enital disease characterised by severe dysfunctions king dysmorphic features and precocious puberty with normal hormonal of the bladder and the intestine. Recently, mutations in the enteric smooth studies. Her radiological survey shows typical abnormalities including: nar- muscle actin γ-2 ( ) have been associated with MMIHS. ACTG2, one of row pelvic, thickened calvarium, flattened vertebrae with enlarged pedicles. the six actin isoforms, is specifically expressed in smooth muscle ceAlClsT oGf2 the But apart from this she had normal psychomotor development and her in- enteric organs. telligence is within normal limits. She attends regular school without any Materials and Methods: In order to confirm the involvement of in learning problems. She has normal soft skin, no stiffness of joints and no MMIHS development, we sanger seqAuCeTnGc2ed a cohort of sporadic MMIHS pa- muscle hypertrophy. SShMe AalDso4 has no heart defect, no arterial hypertension tienint sv tiotr odetermine mutation frequency, and further investigated the mole- nor deafness. She also has no growth delay. Our findings provide further cular pathogenesis associated with mutations by performing a series information about the mutation spectrum in MYHRS and we present of assays and molecular modelling analyses. We also investigated the clinical case with rathe5r0 0milder phenotype in comparison to patients whether these mutations lead to histopathologic abnormalities, and for that with mutations affecting Ile . we performed immunohistochemistry on intestinal AtiCsTsuGe2 from patients and PM11.090 controls. Exome sequencing resolves a case of myoclonic epilepsy and Fanconi Results: Our results showed that heterozygous mutations were syndrome present in all MMIHS patients included in this study. We also determined E. G. Seaby1, R. D. Gilbert1, R. J. Pengelly1, G. Andreoletti1, A. Clarke2, S. Ennis1; that the identified mutations inhibited ACTG2 incorporation into the actin 1University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2St George‘s Hospital, filaments, and contributed to reduce contractility. Molecular modelling of London, United Kingdom. ACTG2 mutants confirmed our results, and showed significant changes in the protein structure that likely affect polymerization of ACTG2. Finally, by immunohistochemistry we detected ACTG2 expression in all intestinal lay- Progressive myoclonic epilepsy encompasses a syndrome of myoclonic ers formed by smooth muscle cells in different stages of human embryonic seizures and progressive neurological decline caused by a group of rare development. Interestingly, no histopathologic abnormalitAieCsT Gw2ere found in genetic disorders including lysosomal storage and mitochondrial diseases. patients. The associated aetiological heterogeneity of progressive myoclonic epilepsy Conclusions: Taken together, our data confirmed that mutations poses a diagnostic challenge, yet the application of high throughput sequen- cause MMIHS and showed that reduced incorporation of ACTG2 into actin cing technologies has allowed the identification of rare causal variants in filaments affect contractility, and therefore underlies the pathogenesis of Mendelian diseases such as these. Sodium valproate is a common anticon- MMIHS. vulsant drug that is used therapeutically in epileptic disorders, but has been PM11.088 associated with Fanconi syndrome, particularly in severely disabled indivi- 10q26.1 Microdeletion: a New Case Redefines the Critical Regions for duals who are tube fed. We discuss the case of an 8 year old Pakistani boy, Microcephaly and Genital Anomalies with a complex phenotype of myoclonic epilepsy with severe myopathy, se- N. Choucair Alam1,2,3, J. Abou Ghoch1, A. Fawaz4, A. Mégarbané5,6, E. Chouery1; vere developmental disability, Fanconi syndrome, pyrexia of unknown ori- 1University of Saint Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 2Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France, gin and a family history of Leigh syndrome. An initial clinical diagnosis of a 3Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, UMR_ S910
, Marseille, France, mitochondrial disorder was made and supported by a marginally decreased 4Neuropediatrics Department, Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon, 5University of Saint level of complex V within the electron transport chain on muscle biopsy. Mi- Joseph, University of Saint Joseph, Lebanon, 6Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Beirut, Lebanon. tochondrial DNA tests revealed no mutations in m3243A>G or m8344A>G, yet mitochondrial DNA depletion showed an intermediate result of 44% of mean normal levels. Genomic DNA was extracted and sent off for whole exo- Distal 10q deletion syndrome is a well characterized chromosomal disorder me sequencing and was analysed using an in-house pipeline. Despite a prior consisting of neurodevelopmental impairment, facial dysmorphism, cardiac hypothesis that our patient had a mitochondrial disorder, we identified a malformations, genital and urinary tract defects as well as digital anomalies. causal variant in KCTD7 (p.Leu108Met) which provided a diagnosis of pro- Patients with interstitial deletions involving band 10q26.1 present a pheno- gressive myoclonic epilepsy type 3. This enabled us to reflect on our prior type similar to the ones with the distal 10q deletion syndrome, which led to hypothesis and infer the cause of his Fanconi syndrome to be secondary to the definition of a causal 600 kb smallest region of overlap (SRO). valproate therapy. In this report, we describe a male patient with an interstitial 4.5 Mb deletion P S11
.091 involving exclusively the 10q26.1 segment. He had growth and psychomo- Congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a rare association with Nager tor retardation, microcephaly, flat feet, micropenis, and cryptorchidism. The syndrome due to SF3B4 mutation? patient‘s deleted region does not overlap the 10q SRO. We reviewed the cli- H. Linden1, J. Taylor2, M. Anthony3, E. Adams3, E. Blair1; nical phenotype of patients with similar deletions and suggest the presence 1Clinical Genetics Department, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Molecular of two new SROs, one associated with microcephaly, growth and psychomo- Genetics Laboratory, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Department of tor retardation, and the other associated to genital anomalies. Interestingly, Neonatal Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital,, Oxford, United Kingdom. we narrowed those regions to segments encompassing five and two genes respectively. FGFR2, NSMC E4
A, and AT E1
 were suggested as candidates for facial dysmorphism, growth cessation, and heart defects respective- Nager syndrome is a rare congenital malformation syndrome resulting from ly. WDR11 was linked to idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and hypoplasia of the first and second branchial arches. It is a form of acrofacial Kallmann syndrome. Its haploinsufficiency could play a crucial role in the dysostosis characterized by craniofacial and limb anomalies. Mutations in genital anomalies of these patients. the SF3B4 gene have been confirmed as the cause of this condition in most P S11
.089 affected individuals. The first female patient with Myhre syndrome and rare R496C We report the case of a female neonate with an antenatal diagnosis of dia- mutation in SMAD4 gene. phragmatic hernia, severe micrognathia and polyhydramnios. At birth addi- A. Skórka1,2, D. Gieruszczak-Białek1, A. Pollak3, M. Krajewska-Walasek2, R. Płoski4; tional features of cleft palate and ventricular septal defect were noted. The 1Department of Pediatrics Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department severe micrognathia was associated with temporomandibular joint ankylo- of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, sis requiring a tracheostomy. Other salient craniofacial features included low 3Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, set ears with bilaterally small external auditory meatus and down slanting Poland, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, palpebral fissures. No significant upper limb abnormalities were detected. Poland. A previously unreported heterozygous frameshift mutation (c.1175dupC) in exon 6 of the SF3B4 gene was identified by exome sequencing, confirming a diagnosis of Nager syndrome. Myhre syndrome (MYHRS, OMIM 139210) is an autosomal dominant dis- Diaphragmatic hernia has been described in only three previous cases of order characterized by developmental and groSMwAthD d4e lay, athletic muscular Nager syndrome, two of which had a confirmed molecular diagnosis. There- built, cognitive deficits, skeletal anomalies, stiffness of joints, distinctive fore, this case adds evidence to suggest that diaphragmatic hernia should facial dysmorphism and deafness. Recently, (OMIM 600993) was be considered to be a rare feature of the condition. In addition, our case is identified by exome sequencing as the disease gene muta50t0e d in MYHRS. unusual in exhibiting no significant upper limb anomalies. To date the majo- Previously only three missenseE SmHuGtat i2o0ns1 5af f|e GctiLnAg SIlGeOW(p.,I lSe5 C0
O0TThLr,A ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 225 rity of cases of Nager syndrome have been reported with thumb hypoplasia/ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index aplasia. Therefore, this case highlights a milder upper limb phenotype. This Noonan syndromSeO (SN1S) is a relatively common RASopathy caused by acti- case contributes to the understanding of the fetal and neonatal phenotype vating mutations in 14 genes associated with the Ras/MAPK signal trans- of Nager syndrome. duction cascade. is one of the major NS-related genes, underlying the PM11.092 disease in about 10-13% of affected individuals. Clinical, immunological and genetic characteristics in a family with We presentS Oa Sf1amilial case of a NS patient, her affected brother and father Nijmegen breakage syndrome with a novel heterozygous variant c.2013T>A (p.Ser671Arg) identified in D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, R. Emilova2, S. Mihailova3, I. Boneva4, H. Kathom1, E. Naumova3, exon 12 of , located in theRAS-exchange motif (REM) domain. The Mu- R. Tincheva1; tation Taster prediction algorithm defined this variant as probably dama- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Medical University, ging, additionally, substitution segregated with the disease in the family. Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Cytogenetic laboratory, University Pediatric Hospital, The female patient was assessed by a clinical geneticist at the age of 5.5 Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Clinical Immunology, University years due to a ‘peculiar’ facial appeathrance in a child with a heart murmur. Hospital Alexandovska, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Cytogenetic laboratory, University Pediatric Her height and OFC were at the 25 centile and she presented with a di- Hospital, Medical University,, Sofia, Bulgaria. stinctive phenotype suggesting NS: high and broad forehead, hypertelorism, sparse eyebrows, posteriorly rotated ears, curly scalp hair, broad chest, and hyperkeratotic palmar skin. No congenital cardiac anomalies were found on Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is an autosomal recessive disease echocardiography. Additionally, electrocardiography did not show arrhyth- caused by mutations in the NBS 1 gene, located on chromosome 8q21. The mia or hypertrophy, however heart enlargement was documented on a chest gene product, nibrin is involved in DNA double strand break repair. The vast X-ray (index 0.55). Her affected father and brother exhibited anthropome- majority of NBS patients are of Slavic origin and share the founder NB S1
 tric characteristics similar to the probant, however the boy was discordant mutation (657D5). Essential features found in NBS were microcephaly, typi- for facial features and haSdO sSt1raight hair. cal face, immunodeficiency, chromosomal instability, and a highly increased Members of the reported family did not display clinical manifestations risk for malignancies. frequently observed in mutation-positive individuals (i.e. congenital We report three siblings with NBS, born to nonconsanguineous parents. The heart defects, macrocephaly), but all three had mild cognitive deficits, which patients presented with obvious microcephaly, bird-like face, café au lait are a feature less commonly correlated with this gene. spots and normal intelligence. Cytogenetic analysis of children and healthy The research was supported by projects: NCN-UMO-2011/03/N/ parents showed increased spontaneous chromosome breakage. The majori- NZ2/00516, CMHI- S140
/2014. ty of the breaks involved four fragile sites on chromosomes 7 and 14 - 7p15, 7q36, 14q12, and 14q32. Immunological studies demonstrated a marked P S11
.095 decrease in both B and T cell number and function. Mutation screening of High-resolution genome wide SNP array analysis in patients with the NB S1
 gene revealed that children were homozygous for the 657del5 al- oculo-auriculo vertebral spectrum lele in exon 6, their parents are heterozygous for the same mutation. V. Guida1, L. Bernardini1, M. Pagnoni2, L. Sinibaldi1, D. Cocciadiferro1, M. Puzzo1, S. Loddo1, K. Margiotti3, S. Bianca4, M. Castori5, R. Tenconi6, P. Prontera7, S. Briuglia8, F. First child died at 8 years of age from pneumonia. Second child had no hi- Forzano9, F. Buzi10, D. Melis11, F. Brancati12, A. Novelli1, T. Fadda2, B. Marino13, M. Digilio14, story of recurrent infections. Third child had recurrent gastrointestinal and B. Dallapiccola15, G. Iannetti2, A. De Luca1; pulmonary infections since birth. 1IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, In conclusion patients with the same NB S1
 genotype may show a variety of 2Departement of Maxillo-Facial Surgery, Policlinico Umberto I,, Rome, Italy, 3Laboratory phenotypes. Other gene/epigenetic factors seem to play a role in phenotype of Molecular Medicine and Biotechnology, CIR, Campus Bio-Medico University of Rome, presentation. Rome, Italy, 4Genetica Medica ARNAS Garibaldi Nesima, Nesima, Italy, 5Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, San Camillo- P S11
.093 Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 6University of Padova, Genetics Paediatrics, Padua, p.Arg1809Cys substitution in neurofibromin is associated with a Italy, 7Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital “S. M. della Misericordia”, University of Perugia, distinctive NF1 phenotype without neurofibromas Perugia, Italy, 8Genetics and Pediatric Immunology Unit, Department of Pediatric V. Pinna1, V. Lanari1, F. Consoli1, E. Agolini1, K. Margiotti1,2, I. Bottillo1,3, I. Torrente1,4, A. Sciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 9Division of Medical Genetics, Galliera Bruselles5, C. Fusilli1, A. Ficcadenti6, S. Bargiacchi7, E. Trevisson8, M. Forzan8, S. Giustini9, Hospital, Genova, Italy, 10Department of Pediatrics, “Carlo Poma” Hospital, Mantova, C. Leoni10, G. Zampino10, M. C. Digilio11, B. Dallapiccola11, M. Clementi8, M. Tartaglia5, A. Italy, 11Welfare Department of Pediatrics, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Federico De Luca1; II, Naples, Italy, 12Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, Gabriele 1IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Campus D’Annunzio University of Chieti, Pescara, Italy, 13Department of Experimental Medicine, Bio-Medico University, Rome, Italy, 3San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Sapienza University, Policlinico Umberto I, Sapienza University of Romeel Institute, Rome, Italy, 14Bambino Rome, Italy, 4San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Ematologia, Gesu` Pediatric Hospital,, Rome, Italy, 15Bambino Gesu` Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy. Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 6Department of Clinical Science, Rare Diseases Regional Centre, Polytechnic University of Marche Ospedali Riuniti, Ancona, Italy, 7Genetics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Anna Meyer Oculo auriculo vertebral spectrum (OAVS) is a rare congenital disease cha- Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 8Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Woman and Child Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 9Department of racterized by aural, oral, mandibular and vertebral defects often associated Dermatology, Sapienza University of Rome, Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy, 10Istituto with cardiac, pulmonary, renal, skeletal, and central nervous systems ano- di Clinica Pediatrica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 11Bambino Gesù malies. The etiology of OAVS is still unknown. A number of chromosomal Children Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. abnormalities containing genes potentially involved in the disease patho- genesis has been described. In the current study, we used a high-density Affymetrix SNP 6.0 array platform to evaluate the contribution to OAVS of Analysis of 786 NF1 mutation-positive subjects with clinical diagnosis rare submicroscopic chromosomal anomalies. Minimal diagnostic criteria of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) allowed to identify the heterozygous for inclusion in the study were the presence of at least three of the following c.5425 C4
T missense variant (p.Arg1809Cys) in six (0.7%) unrelated pro- clinical characteristics: hemifacial microsomia, ear anomalies and preauri- bands (three familial and three sporadic cases), all exhibiting a mild form cular pits or tags. A total of 60 subjects (34 females and 26 males) including of disease. Detailed clinical characterization of these subjects and other 55 sporadic and 5 familial cases were studied. Thirty rare copy number va- eight affected relatives showed that all individuals had multiple cafè-au-lait riants (CNVs), ranging from 100 Kb to 1 Mb, were identified in 27/60 indi- spots, frequently associated with skinfold freckling, but absence of discrete viduals. Of these, four had de novo origin in sporadic patients, whereas thir- cutaneous or plexiform neurofibromas, Lisch nodules, typical NF1 osseous teen had been inherited from an unaffected parent. None of detected CNVs lesions or symptomatic optic gliomas. Facial features in half of the indivi- was listed in the database of genomic variants as well as in 80 ethnically duals were suggestive of Noonan syndrome. Our finding and revision of the matched Caucasian control subjects. Despite none of the identified CNV was literature consistently indicate that the c.5425 C4
T change is associated with recurrent, three independent chromosomal aberrations contained genes in- a distinctive, mild form of NF1, providing new data with direct impact on volved in the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach regulatory network. Current results suggest genetic counseling and patient management. that individually rare CNVs are collectively significant contributors to the PM11.094 genetics of OAVS. Moreover, the CNVs detected in the present study suggest Clinical variability in a family with a novel SO S1
 variant correlating a number of OAVS candidate genes that warrant further investigation. with Noonan syndrome phenotype PM11.096 K. H. Chrzanowska1, M. Pelc1, M. Kugaudo1, E. Ciara1, W. K. Wiszniewski2, M. Krajewska- Novel syndromal obesity genes identified by custom targeted Next- Walasek1; Generation-Sequencing of 255 (candidate) genes. 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Baylor College of Medicine, B. van der Zwaag1, G. Monro1, I. de Lange1, M. Stokman1, E. van den Akker2, L. van Houston, TX, United States. Rossum2, I. Janssen3, F. Berendse3, P. Teeuwen3, H. Ploos van Amstel1, N. Knoers1, G. van 226 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Haaften1, M. M. van Haelst1; 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Centrum Gezond Gewicht, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Dept. of anomalies in OFD1, both sphenoidal encephalocele and moyamoya disease Surgery, Rijnstate Hospital, Arnhem, Netherlands. have never been reported. Materials and Methods: The only child showed bilateral MGDA and colo- boma, sphenoidal encephalocOelFeD, m1oyamoya diseasen oavnedl mild clinical fea- Syndromic obesity is defined by obesity in association with intellectual defi- tures of OFD1. cit and/or other congenital anomalies. An underlying genetic cause has not Results: Sequence analysis of gene detected a heOmfdiz1ygous mis- been identified in the majority of affected patients. sense variant, c.1081T>C, resulting in p.Tyr361His mutationO cfhda1nge. The recent developments of Next-Generation-Sequencing techniques provi- Conclusions: Similarly to other ciliopathies, inactivation of transcript de a time- and cost efficient method to identify new obesity genes. We deve- is associated with defective Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway. inactivati- loped a custom NGS enrichment probe set, the ‘Obesitome kit V1’, aimed at on in zebrafish produces several malformations including retinal coloboma, enrichment and sequencing of 582 obesity related genes. Genes were selec- whereas in mutant mouse it exerts a crucial role in developing of forebrain ted on (presumed) obesity relevance, based on information from multiple through the regulation of Shh signaling. On the other hand Shh is a criti- publically available databases, pathway resources and scientific publicati- cal pathway yielding a pleiotropic effects in many developmental proces- ons. ses such as in modulating the closure of the buccohypophyseal cananl oavnedl Based on the initial results of 55 morbid obese syndromal cases, we subse- the vessel formation. HOeFrDe1 we report the first case of bilateral MGDA and quently refined our enrichment to include the 255 most interesting obesity coloboma, sphenoidal encephalocele and moyamoya disease dOuFeD t1o a related genes (‘Obesitome kit V2’). Of these 255 genes, 53 are routinely of- missense mutation in gene contributing to expand the phenotype of fered for NGS analysis in our DNA diagnostics section, the remaining genes OFD1. Moreover we speculate on a possible pathogenic role of gene in can be used for extended research analysis. patients with moyamoya disease, basal encephalocele and MGDA. Here we present clinical, molecular and functional follow-up study results of P S11
.099 the first cohort (n=450) of (syndromal) morbid obesity patients. We identi- Haploinsufficiency of PCSK1 in a father and a son without obesity fied known and novel pathogenic obesity gene mutations in approximately D. Niedrist, B. Oneda, R. Baldinger, R. Asadollahi, A. Rauch; 15% of the investigated patients. These results will increase our understan- Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zürich-Schlieren, Switzerland. ding of the pathophysiological mechanisms of obesity and ultimately lead to personalized medicine of morbid obesity. P S11
.097 The PCSK1 gene was within the first genes implicated in the literature in Identification of a novel truncating mutation in the distal part of severe early-onset obesity. Autosomal recessive congenital PCSK1 deficien- KAT6B exon 18 in a girl with a typical Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young- cy was shown to cause neonatal diarrhea and midchildhood severe obesity. Simpson phenotype Recently Philippe et al. (2014) also reported nonsense mutations in PCSK1 M. Krajewska-Walasek1, M. Pelc1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Kucharczyk1, A. Jezela-Stanek1, R. likely causing dominantly inherited human obesity. Płoski2, E. Ciara1; We now report on a father and son with haploinsuffiency of PCSK1 without 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Warsaw Medical University, obesity. The 2 year-old boy was referred to our outpatient clinic because Warsaw, Poland. of psychomotor developmental delay. In the boy and his father we detec- ted the microscopically balanced translocation : 46,XY, t(5;12)(q15;p13.1). By chromosomal microarray analyses (CMA) there was a deletion of about Among a group of disorders collectively known as the blepharophimosis- 157kb in the chromosomal band 5q15 encompassing the PCSK1 gene. The mental retardation syndromes, the most distinctive phenotype is presen- translocation was de novo in the father with behavioural problems in school ted by patients with Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson syndrome (SB- and epileptic seizures in childhood until puberty. When we saw the boy at BYSS). the age of 17 months his measurements were within the normal percentiles. SBBYSS is a rare multiple congenital anomaly syndrome characterized by a The paternal grandmother reported the psychomotor development of the distinctive facial appearance (severe blepharophimosis, immobile mask-like boy as comparable with 2the one his father had. The BMI of the father at the face, bulbous nasal tip, small mouth with a thin upper lip), skeletal problems age of 40 was 25.2 kg/m. (joint laxityd, leo nnogv toh uKmATb6s Band great toes, dislocated or hypoplastic patellae), The only gene deleted by CMA in this family was PCSK1. This gene is up to hypothyroidism, and global developmental delay. Recent studies demon- now not reported to be involved in developmental delay. The breakpoint on strate that mutations causing SBBYSS occur either throug- chromosome 12p13, however, may be responsible for the borderline deve- hout the gene, or cluster in a more distal (3’) region of exon 18. lopmental delay in this family: possibly involved gene: GRIN2B (12p13.1, We present a 16d-ey enaorv-oold girl with the typical, clinically recognizable pat- mental retardation, autosomal dominant 6). tern of SBBYSS featurKeAsT a6nBd a novel c.5 819delA (p.Gln1940Argfs*11) mole- In our family there was a haploinsufficiency of PCSK1 and definitively no cular variant of origin. The deletion is within the highly conserved obesity supporting recessive inheritance of obesity in PCSK1 defects. C-terminal region of and causesframeshift and occurrence of prema- PM11.100 ture stop codon. Penta X syndrome diagnosed in a newborn girl Our patient with moderate psychomotor delay, hypotonia, hypothyroidism, S. Markholt1, S. E. B. Thim1, B. Høst1, J. Graakjaer2, A. Skytte1; dislocated patellae and long thumbs also presents all of the facial features 1Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. described so fKaAr Tin6 BSB BYSS. Our data contribute to the current knowledge on allelic heterogeneity ob- served at the locus in classical SBBYSS and provide further evidence We present a detailed prenatal and postnatal clinical description and exten- on the genotype–phenotype correlation in this rare disorder, expanding ded DNA analyses in a case of Penta X syndrome diagnosed in a newborn the locus-specific mutation database established so far. Dysmorphologists girl. shKoAuTld6 Bk eep this syndrome in mind during evaluation of patients with ble- The pregnancy was uneventful until gestational age (GA) week 28, there pharophimosis and mild mental retardation, as the likelihood of identifying were normal fetal ultrasonographic examination at GA 13+1 weeks, and no a mutation in individuals with typical SBBYSS is high. abnormalities diagnosed at the 20 weeks prenatal anomaly scan. At week The study was financed by NCN Project Harmonia 4 No. UMO-2013/08/M/ 28 polyhydramnios was suspected leading to extra prenatal scans. Which NZ5/00978 revealed polyhydramnios, dilated intestines, suggesting possible intestinal PM11.098 atresia, IUGR with -23,1% to -30,7% weight deviation and short femora An atypical presentation of OFD1 syndrome (-2,8 SD). Because of suspected brain sparing the birth was initiated at GA A. Accogli1,2, M. Pacetti3,2, P. Fiaschi3,2, A. Consales1, M. Pavanello1, V. Capra1; 38+3 weeks and the girl was born with a birth weight of 2,484 g. 1Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Università degli Studi di Genova, Genova, Italy, She had hypertelorism, abnormal configuration of the ears, cleft palate (in 3Ospedale San Martino-IST, Genova, Italy. the soft palate), bilateral single transverse palmar creases, bilateral clinodac- tyly, short lower limbs compared to the rest of the body, mild hypotonia and a shrill animal like cry. Echocardiography showed mild stenosis of the right Introduction: Morning glory disc anomaly (MGDA) is a congenital abnorma- pulmonary artery and mild coarctation of aorta, none of which were thought lity of the optic disc reported as an isolated condition or associated with to have clinical significance. various anomalies including basal encephalocele and moyamoya disease. Quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) was perfor- However the co-occurrence of these three entities is rare and the pathoge- med on DNA extracted from a peripheral blood sample and showed a dial- nesis is still poorly understood. On the contrary Oral-Facial-Digital Syndro- lelic pentasomic pattern in 2 of 3 markers on the X-chromosome. The third me type 1 (OFD1; OMIM 311200) is a well recognized X-linked-dominant ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANmDa,r UkeKr w | aWs bWorWder.ElinSeH wGit.hOinR nGormal range. Chromosome analysis wi2th2 Q7- developmental disorder belonging to ciliopathies. Among brain structuralABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index banding was performed on cultured peripheral blood lymphocytes from the Mutations in the PIK3CA gene have been found to cause several conditions patient and revealed the karyotype 49,XXXXX in all examined metaphases. related to overgrowth of tissues. These conditions include disorders of the Results of the extensive molecular analyses including parental analyses and brain such as Megalencephaly-Capillary malformation syndrome (MCAP) SNP-array will be presented. and hemimegalencephaly as well as segmental body overgrowth disorders P S11
.101 like fibroadipose hyperplasia or Congenital, Lipomatous, Overgrowth, Vas- Clinical and molecular characterisation of Pierre Robin Sequence cular Malformations, Epidermal Nevi and Spinal/Skeletal Anomalies and/ with additional anomalies (“PRS-Plus”) or Scoliosis syndrome (CLOVE). PIK3CA-associated disorders are caused by J. Xu1, N. Baker1, S. Raj1, N. Kilpatrick1, T. Penington1,2, P. G. Farlie1, T. Y. Tan3,2; postzygotic activating mutations which are present in the mosaic form pri- 1Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 2Royal marily in affected tissues of the body. The most frequent somatic mutations Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 3Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, in PIK3CA identified in overgrowth syndromes occur in exons 9 and 20 (oc- Parkville, Melbourne, Australia. casionally referred to as exons 10 and 21). We routinely sequence exons 9 and 20 of PIK3CA using both Sanger and Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) methodologies. Here, we present our Pierre Robin Sequence (PRS) comprises micrognathia, cleft palate, glosso- diagnostic strategy for a patient referred with clinical features suggestive ptosis and upper airway obstruction affecting 1 in 6000 neonates, often of MCAP syndrome. Molecular analysis performed on DNA extracted from resulting in airway and feeding difficulties. Although syndromic forms of blood of the MCAP patient has produced results which required subsequent Pierre Robin Sequence are well known, the full phenotypic spectrum of non- evaluation. Identification of a low-level somatic mutation is challenging and syndromic PRS is less defined. We sought to provide an accurate phenoty- may require more than one tissue to be tested. Moreover lack of detection of pic characterisation of a large cohort of 141 non-syndromic Pierre Robin a mutation in PIK3CA gene does not exclude the clinical diagnosis of PIK3- Sequence patients managed at the Royal Children’s Hospital in Melbour- CA-associated disorders due to limitations in detecting mosaicism from dif- ne from 1985 to 2012. We categorised patients into either “Isolated PRS” ferent tissue samples. (n=83) or “PRS-Plus” (n=58) groups. Patients in the PRS-Plus group had ad- Results of further investigation of this case together with the potential role ditional anomalies beyond the craniofacial system, with the musculoskeletal of NGS technologies in a diagnostic strategy for mosaic disorders will be and ocular systems most commonly involved. Choanal stenosis/atresia was presented. the single most common co-existing craniofacial malformation. Compared P S11
.105 to those with isolated PRS, PRS-Plus patients had worse outcomes at birth Trisomy of 14q32 in a patient with Prader-Willi Syndrome-like and during the neonatal period, with a higher proportion being born small- phenotype for-gestational-age, have failure to thrive and require surgical intervention I. Garin1, I. Llano2, N. Olabarrieta3, C. Hernando4, I. Lesende5, O. Villar4, B. Gener2, G. for airway and feeding. A subset of patients with a family history of cleft Perez de Nanclares1; and/or a musculoskeletal anomaly was selected for targeted DNA sequen- 1Molecular (Epi)Genetics Lab, Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Araba, Vitoria- cing of the SOX9 conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) at chromosome Gasteiz, Spain, 2Servicio de Genética, BioCruces Health Research Institute, Hospital 17q24. In one patient with PRS, talipes equinovarus and pectus excavatum, a Universitario Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain, 3Servicio Neuropediatria, Hospital Universitario single nucleotide substitution was identified in CN E1
, at a consensus GATA1 Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain, 4Qgenomics, Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, Barcelona, Spain, 5Health in Code, Hospital Marítimo de Oza, A Coruña, Spain. transcription factor binding site; however the functional significance of this variant is currently being investigated. PM11.102 Introduction: The main clinical features of Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) are Somatic mosaicism for the mutation in PIK3CA and significant hypotonia, hyperphagia, obsesity, hypogonadism, short stature, small hands activation of Akt/mTOR signaling in a girl with segmental overgrowth; and feet, mental disabilities, and behavioral problems. Signs and symptoms Clinical report of PROS of PWS could also be found in patients who show other types of chromoso- S. MIZUNO1, Y. Enokido2, T. Morishita3, N. Hanada4, Y. Muramatsu1, N. Wakamatsu5; mal abnormalities, among others Temple Syndrome (mat14UPD). 1Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan, 2Institute of developmental research, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan, 3Aichi Materials and Methods: We report a case referred for genetic study with Children‘s Health and Medical Center, Obu, Aichi, Japan, 4Hanada children‘s clinic, clinical suspicious of PWS due to the presence of hypotonia, hyperphagia, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan, 5Institute of Developmental Research, Aichi Human Service Center, mood fluctuations, temper tantrums and developemental delay. 15q11 MS- Kasugai, Aichi, Japan. MLPA test was normal so 14q32 MS-MLPA was carried out. Microsatellites of 14q32 region, CGH array and FISH study were analysed. Finally, deep ge- nome sequencing of the 14q32 region was performed. Here, we report the case of a girl who presented with hyperplasia of the Results: The patient showed a gain of methylation and copy at MEG3-DMR. lower extremities, macrodactyly, and multiple lipomatosis. We made a cli- The microsatellites study revealed that the patient presented both paternal nical diagnosis of PIK3CA-related overgrowth, which was subsequently and one maternal chromosomes. FISH study of the patient pointed out that confirmed by direct gene sequencing. The patient was born to healthy un- added copy could have been incorporated in tandem. CGH array and deep related parents at 39 weeks of gestation. At birth, she presented with enlar- sequencing of the region revealed the exact boundaries of the insertion of ged syndactyl toes, a broad foot, and a mass in her inguinal region. Her feet the genomic extra material. Parents showed no (epi)genetics alterations of rapidly increased in size to almost twice the average size, and more so for this region, so de novo origin was inferred. her left foot. Adipose tissue was reduced in her upper extremities and torso. Conclusions: We report a patient with an interstitial trisomy of 14q re- She underwent surgery several times to reduce adipose tissue in order to sulting from the insertion of part of 14q32 region of the paternal allele. It manage overgrowth. The patient’s phenotype differed from that of Proteus seems that the rearranged genomic segment was flanked by homologous syndrome, Klippel-Trénaunay-Weber syndrome, and CLOVES syndrome as low copy repeat (LCR) structures. These LCR could have acted as recombi- follows. Her facial appearance was symmetric and nondysmorphic, over- nation substrates for non-allelic homologous recombination, leading to the growth was limited to the lower extremities, her skin showed no nevi or he- gain of dosage of the region analyzed. mangiomas, and no cerebriform skin was observed on hypertrophic regions Grants:[PI13/00467;C P03
/0064;SIVI 1395/09 to GPdN] (characteristic of Proteus syndrome). Histological analysis of the resected PM11.106 tissue revealed mature adipose tissue of normal morphology. We identified Primary amenorrhea, visual impairment and intellectual disability the patient as having the recently proposed clinical entity PROS (PIK3CA- in a girl with a complex rearrangement involving 5q33.3 and 9q21.2 related overgrowth spectrum). Using direct sequencing, a PIK3CA mutation microdeletions (p.His1047Arg) was identified in DNA obtained from dissected hyperplasic G. Kayhan1, M. A. Ergun1, T. Liehr2, M. Yirmibes Karaoguz1, E. F. Percin1; adipose tissue; this was absent in DNA obtained from her blood lymphocy- 1Medical Genetics Department, Gazi University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 2Institute of tes. Significant activation of Akt/mTOR signaling was also observed in the Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany. patient’s adipose tissue. This report contributes to the dysmorphological diagnosis of the phenotypic spectrum of mosaic PIK3CA mutations. P S11
.103 Case: We report a 21 year-old girl with primary amenorrhea, speech delay, Testing strategies for PIK3CA-associated overgrowth disorders. mild intellectual disability, visual impairment, clinodactyly and low hairline. A. Tanska, P. Rehal, J. Bell; Total testosterone and 17 OH-progesteron levels were slightly increased. West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women’s NHS Foundation Trust, The other hormonal profile, brain MRI and pelvic USG were normal. Birmingham, United Kingdom. Methods and results: A cytogenetically balanced de novo complex chromoso- me rearrangement between chromosome 5 and 9 was detected by GTG and 228 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOmTulLtiAcoNloDr b, aUnKdi n|g W (MWCBW) .tEecShHniGqu.eOs:R 4G6,XX,der(5)(5pter->5q13.3::5q33-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index >5q13.3::9q22.3->9q21.2::5q33->5qter),der(9) Results: 297 articles and abstracts describing 682 presumably unique indi- (pter->q21.2::q22.3->qter) dn. Affymetrix 2.7K SNP array revealed 0.98 Mb viduals were identified in the study. Clinical traits included in established and 0.94 Mb deletions on two of the breakpoint regions 5q33.3 and 9q21.2, criteria for PTEN related syndromes occurred with high frequency. Patients respectively: arr 5q33.3(158,709,846-159,688,769)x1,9q21.2(79,573,426- with germline PTEN mutation displayed mixed polyposis as well as vascular 80,513,997)x1. Completely deleted genes were I L12
B, ADRA1B, TT C1
, malformations, and several novel traits were noted similar to observations PWW P2
A, FAB P6
, FOXB2, VP S13
A, GNA14 and the disrupted genes were seen in mouse models of PTEN deficiency. Germ cell/gonadal malignancies UBLC P1
, CCNJL and GNAQ in these regions. were significantly more prevalent among the study population compared to Conclusions: Somatic mosaic mutations of GNAQ cause Sturge-Weber Syn- general population. Further, Cowden syndrome appeared to be diagnosed drome which may include intellectual disability. In DECIPHER, intellectual more frequently among females, and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome disability and speech delay have been reported in many patients with larger more frequently among males, potentially resulting from gender weighting deletions on 9q21 overlapping with FOXB2, VP S13
A, GNA14, GNAQ and in a in the diagnostic criteria. patient with a deletion involving last exon of GNA14 and first two exons of Conclusion: The phenotype associated with PTEN mutations seem to be wi- GNAQ. Thus, disruption or haploinsufficiency of GNAQ and GNA14 may be der than believed, and further study is needed for understanding the pre- related to intellectual disability. In addition, these changes may also be asso- valence of novel clinical characteristics among mutation carriers and their ciated with primary amenorrhea and visual loss, because GNAQ and GNA14 ramifications. play role in GnRH, estrogen, relaxin, androgen, serotonin and visual signa- P S11
.109 ling pathways. However, it should be considered that the other breakpoints New mutations associated with Rasopathies identified by Sanger and may also contribute to the phenotype. next generation sequencing in a Central European population P S11
.107 M. Čižmárová1, K. Hlinková1, L. Košťálová2, Z. Pribilincová2, S. Bertok3, R. Bertalan4, K. Efficient clearance of progerin through autophagy induction and Poločková5, H. Duba6, L. Kovács2, A. Hlavatá2, D. Ilenčíková2,6; 1Laboratory of clinical and molecular genetics, 2nd Department of Pediatrics, University SRSF-1 downregulation under MG132 treatment in Hutchinson- Children´s Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22nd Department of Gilford progeria syndrome Pediatrics, University Children´s Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, Bratislava, Slovakia, K. Harhouri1, C. Navarro1, D. Depetris1, M. Mattei1, X. Nissan2, P. Cau1,3, A. De Sandre- 33Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, University Children´s Giovannoli1,4, N. Lévy1,4; Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 42nd Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 1Aix Marseille Université, Inserm UMR_S 910 - GMGF, Marseille, France, 2CECS, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 5Department of Pediatrics, Hospital with I-STEM, AFM, Institut des cellules Souches pour le Traitement et l’Etude des maladies policlinic, Karviná, Czech Republic, 6Department of Human Genetics, General Women´s Monogéniques, Evry, France, 3APHM, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, Service de Biologie and Children´s Hospital, Linz, Austria. Cellulaire, Marseille, France, 4APHM, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, Département de Génétique Médicale, Marseille, France. Introduction Rasopathies represent a group of dysmorphic syndromes caused by muta- Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS; OMIM #176670) is an extre- tions in RAS/MAPK signaling pathway, such as Noonan syndrome, Noonan mely rare premature and accelerated aging disease which affects 1 in 4-8 syndrome with multiple lentigo, Costello, cardio-facio-cutaneous and neu- million children with symptoms resembling normal adult aging, including rofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome. These syndromes share clinical features growth impairment, thin skin, loss of subcutaneous fat, alopecia, osteoporo- including mainly short stature, specific cranio-facial features and heart de- sis and cardiovascular disease leading to shortened lifespan and death at a fects. Therefor the diagnosis of Rasopathies is a difficult task. mean age of 13.5 years. HGPS is caused by a de novo point mutation (c.1824 Aim C>T, p.G608G) within exon 11 of the LMNA gene encoding A-type lamins. Determination of genetic cause and description of genotype-phenotype cor- This mutation activates a cryptic donor splice site in exon 11 that leads to relation in patients with Rasopathy phenotype by Sanger and next genera- the deletion of 50 amino acids at its carboxy-terminal domain, resulting in tion sequencing. a truncated and permanently farnesylated prelamin A called progerin. Ac- Patients and methods cumulation of progerin is a hallmark of HGPS that affects the integrity of Mutation analysis of 14 genes associated with Rasopathies (PTPN11, SO S1
, the nuclear scaffold, leading to nuclear blebbing and functional defects in RAF1, BRAF, KRAS, HRAS, NRAS, MA P2
K1, MA P2
K2, SHO C2
, CBL, NF1, RIT1 cultured cells. We show that progerin is sequestered, together with other and SPRED1) was performed by Sanger and target sequencing using the Ha- proteins (lamins B1/B2, emerin), into abnormally shaped Promyelocytic- loPlexTM Target Enrichment System on MiSeq sequencing platform in 48 Nuclear Bodies (PML-NB), identified as novel biomarkers in Progeria. patients from Central Europe - Slovakia (18), Slovenia (20), Hungary (3), MG132, inhibiting proteasome activity, induces progerin nucleocytoplasmic Czech republic (2) and Austria (5). Patients were selected according to the translocation after a transition through the nucleolus, and progerin degra- scoring questionnaires oriented to the main clinical features of Rasopathies. dation through macroautophagy. MG132 also strongly reduces progerin Data were analyzed by ChromasPro and SureCall softwares. production through caspase-linked cleavage of SRSF-1 controlling prelamin Results A mRNA splicing. In vivo, through MG132 treatment, progerin expression We identified mutations in 60% of examined patients (29/48) including 3 decreases in skeletal muscle from LmnaG609G/G609G mice. Altogether, we new variants (c.87+2T>C in SO S1
, c.1175G>A in BRAF, c.490C>A in MA P2
K1 demonstrate progerin clearance based on MG132 dual action and shed the genes) with potentially pathogenic effect on patient´s phenotype. light on a promising class of molecules towards an encouraging therapy for Conclusion Progeria and related diseases. We contributed to enlargement of the mutation spectrum occuring in pa- PM11.108 tients with Rasopathies and described the possible mutation effect on the Clinical manifestations of germline PTEN pathogenic mutations: A phenotype. review of published cases with emphasis on phenotypic traits This work was supported by Ministry of Health of the Slovak Republic under K. Danielsson, N. Larsson; the project registration number Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 2012/21-UKBA-21. PM11.110 Background: Cowden syndrome is an autosomal dominantly inherited tu- Molecular findings in Spanish patient with RASopathies. Extending mour predisposition syndrome with a prevalence around 1/200 000 in the the analysis with prioritization methods European/USA population. It is associated with increased risk of developing P. Carrasco Salas1, J. M. Lezana Rosales1, S. Carmona Tamajón1, S. Franco Freire2, C. Benito López2, M. Martínez Atienza3, S. Pedrinaci3, C. Vázquez4, J. López Siles1; malignant tumors including breast, thyroid and endometrial cancer. Germ- 1MGC Genetaq, Málaga, Spain, 2Department of Genetics, Maternal-Fetal Hospital, line mutations in PTEN gene are considered an underlying cause of the di- Málaga, Spain, 3Department of Genetics, Virgen de las Nieves Hospital, Granada, Spain, sease. However, 37% of mutation carriers do not fulfill clinical diagnostic 4Department of Genetics, Maternal-Fetal Insular Hospital, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, criteria for any defined syndrome, and therefore a wider phenotype could Spain. be associated with pathologic mutations in PTEN. Introduction Purpose: This study aimed to describe the comprehensive clinical pheno- type associated with PTEN mutations, to examine potential genotype/phe- Material and :m ReAtShoopdasthies are caused bPyT gPeNrm11li,n SeO m S1
u, tRaAtiFo1n, sK iRnA gSe, nSHesO eCn2-, notype correlations, and to evaluate the relevance of currently used clinical cNoRdAinS,g B pRrAotFe, iMn AcoPm2Kp1o, nMenAtPs2 oKf2 t,h HeR RAaSs,- MLRAP P1
K CpBaLthway. diagnostic criteria. : First, 12 genes ( Method: A systematic review of published cases and observational articles , ) associated with the Ras- was undertaken and clinical characteristics of described cases were com- MAPK pathway were studied by next-generation sequencing (NGS) in 14 piled. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAN SD pa, nU isK h p| aW tieW ntsW w.E ithS H cliG ni. cO al R suG spicion of RASopathies. A segregation2 2 te9 stABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM11.112 The significance of RIT1 mutations in the etiology of Noonan was performanced in the patients‘ parents when they were available. Addi- syndrome: phenotype-genotype correlations in Polish patients tRioensuall tcsandidate genes were selected with an R custom script using PSIQUIQ M. Pelc1, E. Ciara1, M. Kugaudo1,2, D. Jurkiewicz1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, J. library (Shannon P, 2015). Trubicka1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; : In 3 patients, clinical diagnosis was molecularly confirmed in the 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, first screening. Two cases are waiting for segregation study. Poland, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Using the script, more than 1000 candidate genes were obtained, based on several molecular interaction databases, using as query the previous 12 ge- nes. Twenty-three genes with more than 5 interactions with query genes and/or more than 25 interaction methods reported, and availability in NGS Noonan syndrome (NS), a RASopathy which exhibits genetic and phenoty- capture kit used, were selected for the second screening. This additional pRiIcT 1heterogeneity, has been associated with germline mutations in 14 genes screening revealed some variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUCS) related to the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway, including recently discovered in 8 patients. gene encoding a small GTPase from the RAS superfamily. Table 1. Heterozygous changes identified in patients samples. We present 6 new unrelated NS patieDnet sn oovf oP olish origin with 5 different pa- Mutation Clinical JAK3 thogenic substitutions in conserved domains of RIT1: p.Ser35Thr, p.Ala57Gly, PatientPhenotype 1 Rs At F s 1creening* origin significance 2 En Rd B Bsc 2reening* p.Ala77Ser, p.Phe82Leu, p.Gly95Ala. occurrence has been confirmed : c.2164G>A in 4 case RsI, Tw1hereas p.Ala77Ser was identified in the patient’s father, who 1 NS : c.785A>G No data VUCS. Novel PIK3CG: aTlhsoe pclriensiecnatle fdi nwdiitnhg Ns So pf hoeunro stytupde.y I nla oruger lmy oalgerceuela wrlyit hd etfhinee ldi tgerroautpu roef, NaSs c.1157C>A PTPN11 PIK3CG: pthaeti epnattsients mexuhtiabtiiotends ctoynpsictiatul tNeS ~ f8e%at u(6r/e7s6, )h.owever, without intellec- c.1076G>A tual disability, additionally, only 2/7 had short stature. It is worth no- 2 NS : c.236A>G No data Pathogenic SHO C2
 : ting that 4/6 patients suffered from postnatal lymphedema and other MA P2
K2 novo c.2496T>G lymphatic disorders 3 NS SO S1
 : c.74A>G No data VUCS. Novel NILe2gRaAtive 4 CFC : c.181A>G de Pathogenic Negative Affected : c.76G>C . Cardiac anomalies occurred in 4/7 individuals. The 5 NS SO S1
: c.806T>G Pathogenic mother (Homozygous) patient with p.Phe82Leu mutation died early due to the severe hypertrophic 6 NS SO S1
 : c.1964C>T U fan tha eff rected Benign NC LRR ePK ga1L tive cardiomyopathy.In the affected father with p.Ala77Ser substitution terato- ma maturum testis has been identified. 7 NS : c.1964C>T No data Benign : c.634A>C 8 NS Negative - - : c.7636G>A Our results, RtoITg1ether with the recently published data concerning 4 other 9 NS Negative - - NCDeg2aAtPive Polish individuals, introduce theR IlaTr1gest group of NS patients of Ca RuIcTa1sian 10 NS Negative - - Negative CD2AP:: origin with mutations. They contribute to the further delineation of 11 NS Negative - - c.1632+3G>A molecular and clinical profile of -related NS and underline that , as ERBB2 the third most frequently affected gene in NS, should certainly be included c.1632+8G>T into the diagnostic panels screening for RASopathy disorders. PIK3CB:: 12 NS Negative - - The research was supported by projects: NCN UMO-2011/03/N/NZ2/00516, c.1157C>A CMHI  S140
/2014. cJA.2K135: 0A>G PM11.114 13 NS Negative - - Negative Expanding E P300
 mutational spectrum of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome N14S- NooNnSan syndroNmegea.tive - - c.452C>G and literature overview CFC- Cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome. G. Negri1, P. Colapietro1, D. Rusconi1, D. Milani2, M. T. Bonati3, M. Priolo4, L. Mazzanti5, L. * Transcripts according to HGMD. Larizza1,3, C. Gervasini1; Conclusion: Multi-gene analysis by NGS has improved the molecular diagnosis 1Genetica Medica - Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute - Università degli Studi di of RASopathies, but many cases still remain undiagnosed. Bioinformatics tools Milano, Milano, Italy, 2Unità di Pediatria ad alta intensità - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ can propose new candidate genes related to these disorders as shown, but further Granda, Milano, Italy, 3IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 4UOC Genetica studies are needed to confirm their causal effect. Medica - Azienda Ospedaliera Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli, Reggio Calabria, Italy, 5UO Pediatria - Dipartimento Scienze Medico Chirurgiche Policlinico - Ospedaliero Universitario S.Orsola Malpigh, Bologna, Italy. P S11
.111 Ring chromosome 22 in patients with multiple congenital anomalies J. Vukajlovic1, S. Cirkovic1, D. Radivojevic1, T. Liehr2, B. Dobric1, N. Ilic1, M. Miskovic1, T. Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS, #180849, #613684) is a rare congenital Lalic1, M. Djurisic1; neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by postnatal growth deficiency, 1Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of Human typical skeletal abnormalities, dysmorphic features and intellectual disabili- Genetics, Universitatsklinikum, Jena, Germany. ty. Mutations in two genes, CREBBP (16p13.3) and E P300
 (22q13.2), enco- ding two homologous transcriptional co-activators, have been identified in ~55% and ~8% of affected individuals, respectively. Introduction: Ring 22 chromosome is a rare chromosomal aberration, with To date, only 14 E P300
-mutated RSTS patients have been described, six in only ~100 cases reported and no consistent clinical picture. We present 3 our laboratory, and 12 additional mutations are reported in the LOVD data- cases with variable clinical phenotypes: RPM, microcephaly, hypotonia, ata- base, summing up to 26 different alterations. xia. E P300
 analysis of CREBBP-negative RSTS patients led to the identification Materials and Methods: Chromosomal analysis was done from cultured cells of five novel further inactivating de novo mutations: an exons 17-19 deleti- of PHA-stimulated lymphocytes from blood and cultured skin fibroblasts on and two stop mutations in exons 23 and 28 respectively (c.3829A>T/p. using GTG banding. Specific characterization of marker chromosome was K1276* and c.4585C>T/p.R1528*), a duplication in exon 29 (c.4640dupA/p. done using multicolor fluorescent in situ hybridization (M-FISH). N1547Kfs*3) and a IV S9
 splicing mutation (c.1878-12A>G). Results: Two patients had aberrant karyotypes: 46,XX,r(22)(p12q13) and RNA analysis on patients carrying the c.4585C>T/p.R1528* and 46,XY,r(22)(p12q13), respectively. Third patient had aberrant mosaic ka- c.4640dupA/p.N1547Kfs*3 mutations, which affect the KAT domain, re- ryotype: mos 46,XY,r(22)(p12q13)[44]/46,XY,dic r(22)(p12q13[6]). Cy- vealed the presence of both the WT and the aberrant transcript. togenetic analysis from this patient‘s skin fibroblasts showed presence of All E P300
-mutated patients show a convincing, although mild, RSTS pheno- only one clone: 46,XY,r(22)(p12q13)[52]. Clinical features in patients with type including typical broad thumb and big toes, craniofacial dysmorphis- ring22 can be associated with 22q13.3 syndrome (Phelan McDermid syn- ms, prenatal and postnatal growth delay with a moderate to mild intellec- drome) since the formation of ring22 is followed by terminal deletion of tual disability. Organ malformations were rare and, when present, always p and q arms. The last described patient had cells with dic r(22) causing isolated. presence of three copies of 22p12-22q13.2 region in minority (6/50) of pe- This study, expanding the RSTS E P300
 mutational spectrum to 31 alterations ripheral blood lymphocytes. This aberration still might account for the CES and providing a clinical description of five additional patients, will enhance (cat eye syndrome) features since it may have been present at a much higher RSTS-E P300
 mutated patients hallmarks identification and improve the cli- frequency early in development and then subsequently lost. nical practice allowing a better genotype-phenotype correlation doing. Conclusion: Our report emphasizes the importance of cytogenetic and mole- Supported by „RTS una vita speciale“ association cular-cytogenetic approach in order to better understand the spectrum of abnormalities in each case, and assess genotype-phenotype correlation. 230 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S11
.115 1Department of Clinical Pathology and Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, DOCK4 mutated in Seckel syndrome Gothenburg, Sweden, 2The Queen Silvia Children’s Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, R. Oegema, R. Schot, D. Heijsman, L. van Unen, F. W. Verheijen, G. M. S. Mancini; 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 4Department of Pathology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. Seckel syndrome is a genetic heterogenic disorder caused by mutations in Shwachman-Diamond-Bodian syndrome (SDS) is a pleiotropic disease, in several genes involved in the regulation of the cell cycle and DNA repair. Mu- which the main features are bone marrow dysfunction and pancreatic in- tations in each gene are extremely rare and only account for the diagnosis in sufficiency. Skeletal changes can occur in a variable degree and in rare ca- single or a small number of families. ses as severe congenital thoracic dystrophy. We report on a new-born baby Two sisters from a Turkish consanguineous family presented with primary boy with asphyxia, narrow thorax and severe hypotonia initially suggesting microcephaly (-8 SD), short stature of prenatal onset (-5 SD), behavioral is- a neuromuscular disease. The muscle biopsy showed myopathic changes sues, and intellectual disability. with prominent variability in muscle fibre size and abnormal expression Their facial features were suggestive of Seckel syndrome. Homozygosity of developmental isoforms of myosin. The myofibrils showed focal loss and mapping (using Affymetrix 6.0 SNP arrays) identified 5 regions; 1p34.2, disorganization of myofilaments and thickening of the Z-discs including 2q22.2-2q22.3, 3p24.1-p24.2, 7q31.1-q32.3 andD 1O8CqK241 .33q22.3. No known some abortive nemaline rods. The boy became permanently dependent on Seckel genes are located within these regions. With whole-genome sequen- assisted ventilation. Pancreatic insufficiency has subsequently been eviden- cing (Complete Genomics) the homozygous c.3470G>A variant ced explaining the malabsorption and failure to thrive. Except transitory was identified, leading to a putatively deleterious amino acid substitution thrombocytopenia and leukopenia, no other major hematologic abnorma- (p.R1157HD).OCK4, dedicator of cytokinesis 4, lities were noted. He had bilateral nephrocalcinosis with preserved renal The variant was absent from dbSNP and 414 Mediterranean control chro- function. Transitory liver dysfunction with increased transaminases and mosomes. encodes a Rac1 guanine ex- parenchymal changes on ultrasound were registered. The clinical diagnosis change factor (GEF), which is involved in the PDGF-dependent cell migration was molecularly confirmed by detection of compound heterozygous muta- through modeling of the actin cytoskeleton. DOCK4 is highly expressed in tions in the SBDS gene using whole-exome sequencing: a recurrent intronic brain and during embryonic development and it has been proposed to play mutation causing aberrant splicing (c.258+2T>C) and a novel missense va- in role in neurite differentiation and extension. We stimulated fibroblasts riant in a highly conserved codon (c.41A>G, p.Asn14Ser) considered to be from one of the affected individuals with PDGF-BB, and stained the fixated damaging for the protein structure by in silico prediction programs. The pa- cells with the F- actin marker rhodamine phallodoidin. This showed a poorly rental carrier status has been confirmed. This case illustrates the challenges organized actin network in patient fibroblasts compared to control cells. A in differential diagnosis of pronounced neonatal hypotonia with asphyxia PDGF-responsive migration assay on patient cells is pending. Confirmation and highlights the muscular involvement in SDS. To our knowledge, this is of our data in additional families will encourage further studies on the role the first report of evidenced myopathy in a patient with clinically and mole- of this gene in human growth and brain development. cularly confirmed SDS. PM11.116 PM11.118 ‚Serpentine-like syndrome‘ - a very rare multiple malformation Molecular analysis of a novel intragenic deletion in GP C3
 in three syndrome characterised by brachioesophagus and vertebral cousins with Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome anomalies R. Hollstein1, J. Schmidt2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach2, F. J. Kaiser1; A. Beleza-Meireles1, P. Steenhaut2, L. Peetermans3, P. Clapuyt4, P. Bernard2, C. 1Sektion für Funktionelle Genetik am Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Debauche5, Y. Sznajer1; Lübeck, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. 1Centre de Génétique Humaine, Cliniques universitaires St. Luc, Tour R. Franklin (niv. 0), Belgium, 2Obstetrics Department, Cliniques universitaires St. Luc, Avenue Hippocrate 10, Woluwe-Saint-Lambert, Belgium, 3Neonatalogy Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) is an X-linked recessive over- Cliniques universitaires St. Luc, Avenue Hippocrate 10, Woluwe-Saint-Lambert, Belgium, growth syndrome, characterized by pre/postnatal overgrowth, distinctive 4Radiology Department, Cliniques universitaires St. Luc, Avenue Hippocrate 10, Woluwe- craniofacial features, a broad spectrum of congenital malformations, intel- Saint-Lambert, Belgium, 5Neonatalogy Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Cliniques lGePcCtu3al disability (ID) of variable degree and an increased risk for embryonal universitaires St. Luc, Avenue Hippocrate 10, 1200 Woluwe-Saint-Lambert, Belgium. tumors. SGBS is caused by deletions, duplications and point mutations in , encoding a membrane associated cell surface heparan sulfateG pPrCo3- teoglycan named glypican 3. GP C3
 plays essential roles in regulation of cell “Serpentine-like syndrome” is a severe and rare multiple malformation growth signaling and cell division. Several large intragenic deletions of syndrome characterised by brachioesophagus with secondary intrathora- detected by array-CGH and PCR analysis of genomic DNA but so far not on cic stomac associated with cervical (sometimes more extensive) congenital mRNA level have been reported. Here we report on a family with three affec- vertebral anomalies (failure of fusion, segmentation and formation, or com- ted cousins who display typical clinical features of SGBS, such as overgrowth, binations of these). Other associated anomalies have been described such as aGcPcCe3ssory nipples, hypertelorism and ID. By initial microarray-CGH we iden- malposition and herniation of other abdominal organs. tified a deletion of approximately 30-50 kb that includes at least one exon of We report the case of a baby girl born prematurely (29wog) due to poly- . By subsequenGt PSaCn3ger sequencing of genomic DNA we could map the hydramnios. She presented IUGR, craniofacial dysmorphism, median cleft chromosomal breaking points to define a deletion of 43,617 bp including lip and short neck. She had a midline diaphragmatic hernia, a very short exons 6 and 7 of the gene. RT-PCR analysis on RNA derived from whole oesophagus. The stomach, spleen and part of the pancreas were located in blood could further confirm the deletion of both exons on transcript level. the thorax. She was also diagnosed with a large rachischisis from cervical This loss of two exons results in a frameshift and a premature stop. to thoracic spine, with major defect of the anterior arches and a cyst of the Based on our results we have established a breakpoint spanning PCR that spinal cord. The lobulation of the lungs was abnormal. Both the echocardio- could also identify the mutation in the mothers and grandmother of the pa- gram and the transfontanellar ultrasound were normal. Most of these mal- tients. Thus we provide a molecular test that allows accurate genetic coun- formations have been observed prenatally. SNP array was normal. She died selling and prenatal diagnosis for this family. at age 12 days. No relevant family history was regtihstered. To our knowledge, our patient represents the 7 report of a patient with P S11
.119 “Serpentine-like syndrome”. Brachioesophagus and congenital vertebral An unexpected diagnosis of Troyer syndrome in two brothers with a anomalies (in particular rachischisis) are the cardinal features of this mul- Silver-Russell syndrome-like phenotype tiple congenital malformations syndrome. All cases have been sporadic so A. Wischmeijer1,2, A. Tranchina1, E. Scarano3, F. Tamburrino3, A. Perri3, D. M. Cordelli4, R. Bergamaschi5, M. Seri1, C. Graziano1, R. Zuntini1, E. Bonora1, L. Mazzanti3; far and the cause was not found in any of them. It is likely that this condition 1Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, originates during early embryonic development. We believe that the speci- Italy, 2Clinical Genetics Unit, Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova - Istituto di Ricovero e Cura ficity of the presentation as well as the similarities between cases suggests a Carattere Scientifico, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 3S.S. di Malattie Rare e Sindromologia, a common, yet to identify, genetic cause, probably involving developmental Dipartimento della Donna, del Bambino e delle Malattie urologiche, Policlinico S.Orsola- „toolkit“ genes or related pathways. Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Pediatric Neurology Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Pediatric Emergency Unit, P S11
.117 Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. Novel myopathy in a newborn with severe thoracic dysplasia caused by mutations in the SBDS-gene. Further delineation of the phenotypic spectrum of Shwachman-Diamond syndrome Our laboratory received independent requests for UPD7 testing in two boys A. Topa1, M. Tulinius2,3, A. Oldfors4, C. Hedberg Oldfors4; with clinical suspicion of Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS), a normal ICR1 me- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANtDhy,l aUtiKon | pWattWernW o.fE cShHroGmo.OsoRmGe 11p15, normal karyotype; UPD7 wa2s 3no1tABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index confirmed. The patients turned out to be brothers, sons of first-degree cou- disturbed behaviour and a peculiar facial phenotype. Subsequent array-CGH sins from Morocco with irrelevant family history. analysis detected a 25 MB duplication encompassing the pericentromeric The sibs, 3 and 5 years-old, presented pre- and postnatal growth retarda- region 7p11.2-7q21.11. Based on the array-CGH results, the gene content tion, developmental delay with predominant speech impairment, hypoto- of the r(7) chromosome was determined. The 7q11.23 region included in nia and joint hyperlaxity, happy demeanor but no clear walking difficulties. the ring chromosome has been associated to the Williams-Beuren syndrome Physical evaluation showed relative macrocrania, prominent maxilla, pectus when deleted (OMIM #194050) and to the duplication 7q11.23 syndrome excavatum, flat feet. (OMIM #609757). This duplication causes a recognizable phenotype charac- Considering parental consanguinity and a difficult differential diagnosis, terized by language delay and mild craniofacial anomalies, showing variable whole exome sequencing was performed, which led to the identification of expressivity. In some cases, the genetic imbalance is inherited from one of a novel homozygous variant c.892dupA in the SPG20 gene in both affected the normal parents. Clinical assessment of our patient showed some minor sibs. This variant causes a premature stop codon in spartin, the protein en- facial dysmorphisms, such as a narrow flat front, almond-shaped palpebral coded by SPG20. Parents are heterozygous carriers of this variant, that is fissures, small mouth, thin lips and pointed chin, besides a central obesity. absent from large control databases (ESP, ExAc). Psychological tests disclosed an IQ in the low limit of normality, showing va- Mutations in SPG20 have been reported in Troyer syndrome, an autosomal riable performances in different areas. Aggressive behaviour and low social recessive disorder, mainly characterized by progressive spastic paraparesis, skills were also noted. Phenotype-genotype associations are discussed. pseudobulbar palsy, distal amyotrophy, developmental delay, and short sta- PM11.122 ture, with onset in early childhood. Genetic Susceptibility of Thalidomide Teratogenesis: study of variants A neurologic examination, performed after this finding, showed lower limb in developmental genes in humans muscular hypotrophy with mild distal hypertonus and intra-rotated feet L. R. Fraga1,2, T. W. Kowalski1, L. T. Rodrigues1, M. H. Hutz1, M. T. V. Sanseverino1,3, L. when running in both sibs. Schuler-Faccini1,3, F. S. L. Vianna1,3,4; The mutation therefore seems causative of the patients’ phenotype. 1Post-graduation program of Genetics and Molecular Biology – Federal University Even if it is a rare condition, Troyer syndrome should be considered in pa- of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2Current address: PhD student in School of Medical Sciences, Institute of Medical Sciences. University of Aberdeen. Scotland, tients with syndromic short stature (SRS-like) and developmental delay, for Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 3Teratogen Information Service, Medical Genetics Service, prognostic and counseling issues. Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4Post-graduation Program in PM11.120 Epidemiology – Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil. Potocki-Lupski syndrome due to a small supernumerary marker Introduction: chromosome derived from chromosome 17 O. S. Kurinnaia1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, M. A. Zelenova1,2,3, V. O. Sharonin1, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, Thalidomide remains infamous for being a teratogen, cau- I. Y. Iourov1,2,4; sing severe damage to embryos exposed during early pregnancy. Remarkab- 1Mental Health Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research and ly Thalidomide is currently used to successfully treat conditions like Lepro- Clinical Institute for Pediatrics at the Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology sy complications and Multiple Myeloma worldwide. Yet, surprisingly, how and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4The State Educational Institution of thalidomide caused teratogenesis is still not fully resolved. Many theories Professional Training under the Federal Agency of Health Care and Social Development, have been put forward, some of the widely accepted ones include induction Moscow, Russian Federation. of oxidative stress, angiogenesis inhibition and disruption of CeOrbebjelocnti vEe3: ubiquitin ligase complex which may alter molecular pathways involving de- velopmental genes resulting in thaliMdoemthidoed se:m bryopathy (TE). Potocki-Lupski syndrome (PLS) is usually caused by the chromosome 17 To identify if genetic variants of susceptibility to TE in developmental genes duplications at 17p11.2. However, there are rare cases of this syndrome ori- can be detected in subjects with TE. We compared the allelic and ginating from chromosome rearrangements producing partial trisomy 17p genotypic frFeqGuFe8n, FcGieFs1 o0f, sBinMgPle4 ,n SuHcHle otid eT pPo5l3y morphisms (SNPs) in several encompassing the critical region. Here, we present a 4-year-old girl with a important signalling molecules that have multiple roles in embryogenesis, developmental delay, language impairment, symptomatic epilepsy, beha- specifically, and genes in 28 TE subjects to 68 vioral problems, congenital corneal opacity of the right eye, and dysmorphic non-TE subjects from the Brazilian popuRleastiuolnts w: ithout congenital malfor- features mimic PLS facial appearance. Cytogenetic analysis has revealed a mations. A ll DNA samples were genotyped by Real-Time PCR and all the ne- supernumerary marker chromosome. Molecular cytogenetic analysis by cessary ethical consenCtso nwcelrues oiobntasi:n ed. For the genes looked at in SNP array molecular karyotyping and FISH has indicated this marker chro- this studywe did not identify differences in genetic frequencies between the mosome to be derived from chromosome 17. This small supernumerary TE and control group. We did not, at this time, identify genetic marker chromosome (sSMC) was detected in about 60% of cells. SNP array susceptibility to TE for the evaluated variants. However, we have only used and FISH showed approximately the same percentages of abnormal cells. a small sample size and a limited number of gene targets, to validate this Molecular karyotyping has shown that sSMC was composed of a genomic re- aFpupnrdoiancgh:. We are looking at other potential targets using the same metho- gion corresponding to 17p11.2q11.1 (8.5 Mb) and affected 164 genes. sSMC dology to help in understanding of molecular mechanism of teratogenesis. was larger than commonly reported duplications (3.7 Mb). In the available CNPq, CAPES and FIPE-HCPA. literature, there have been only 3 reports describing supernumerary “mar- P S11
.123 ker” chromosomes 17 in PLS. Interestingly, the present case exhibited a de- Macrothrombocytopenia and developmental delay with a de novo rivative chromosome affecting larger genomic region as to those previously CD C42
 mutation: Yet another locus for thrombocytopenia and reported. The latter seems to be key explanation of clinical manifestati- developmental delay ons additional to PLS phenotype. Finally, this case exemplifies that sSMCs K. Kosaki1, R. Kosaki2, T. Takenouchi1; addressed through SNP array and FISH represent an attractive perspective 1Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 2Division for genotype-phenotype correlations. Supported by a grant from the Russi- of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. an Science Foundation (#14-15-00411). P S11
.121 Supernumerary ring chromosome 7 in mosaic. Molecular cytogenetic The combinatory phenotype of thrombocytopenia and developmental de- analysis and clinical findings. lay has been described for two genetic conditions: a chromosome 11q de- E. Margarit1, M. Obón2, L. Rodríguez1, A. Soler1, Y. Viedma1, A. Sánchez1; letion that is referred to as Jacobsen syndrome, and a 21q22 microdeletion 11Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics.and IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, syndrome. Herein, we report a young girl who presented with persistent 2Universitary Hospital Dr Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain. macrothrombocytopenia and a developmental delay. A physical examinati- on showed distinctive facial features with microcephaly. She communicated with simple words. She was able to identify colors and to name objects. She Supernumerary ring chromosomes cause genomic imbalance and can be as- had an intention tremor and fell while attempting a tandem gait. Whole exo- sociated to an abnormal phenotype depending on the gene content. It is im- me sequencing identified a de novo mutation in CD C42
 (NM_001039802), portant to identify and characterize the extra chromosome composition in i.e., c.191A>G, p.Tyr64Cys as the sole candidate in an autosomal dominant order to perform phenotype-genotype correlations. Only thirteen patients de novo mutation model or an autosomal recessive model. The mutation was with a supernumerary pericentromeric ring (7) chromosome have been confirmed using Sanger sequencing. CD C42
 is a critical regulator of the cy- reported to date. Among them, language delay and poor expressive speech toskeleton. While the observation may be coincidental, the strong degree of performance are frequently reported. We report a patient with a de novo similarity between the phenotype of the proposita and that of mice lacking supernumerary r(7) chromosome present in 56% of lymphocytes, found by Cdc42 suggests a probable causal relationship. The conditional knock-out of c2o3nv2entional cytogenetic analysis in a 19 EyeSaHrsG-o l2d 0gi1rl5 r e|f eGrrLeAd SfoGr lOowW IQ, ,S COCdTc L42
A iNn mDi,c Ue rKes |u lWts iWn cWen.tEraSl HneGrv.oOuRs sGystem defects and macrothrombo-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM11.126 Management of Children with Trisomy 13: Clinical Details of 22 cytopenia. This pattern of hematologic indices was exactly the same as that Patients Receiving Intensive Treatment. which was observed in the proposita. We suggest that this CD C42
 mutation E. Nishi1,2, T. Hiroma3, M. Arakawa1, T. Nakamura3, Y. Fukushima2, T. Kosho1,2; may represent yet another mechanism leading to the combinatory pheno- 1Division of Medical Genetics,Nagano children‘s hospital, Azunimo city, Japan, type of persistent macrothrombocytopenia and developmental delay. 2Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 3Division of Neonatology, Nagano children‘s hospital, Azunimo city, Japan. PM11.124 TMEM-107 is anchored to ring-like subdomains of the transition zone (TZ) membrane and organizes the TZ recruitment of ciliopathy Trisomy 13 (T13) is characterized by multiple congenital anomalies, severe transmembrane proteins developmental delay, and a short life span with the 1-year survival rate as A. Bruel1,2, N. Lambacher3, J. Van Dam4, G. Slaats5, K. Szymanska6, J. Kennedy3, K. Gaff3, C. Johnson6, R. Giles5, T. Attie-Bitach7,8,9, V. Cormier-Daire7,8,9, S. Saunier8,10, L. Burglen11,12, L. 5-10 % and the median survival time as 7 days through population-based Faivre2,1, J. Rivière1,2, M. Huynen4, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, O. Blacque3; studies. Management of T13 is controversial, supposedly due to the lack 1Équipe EA42271 GAD, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 2FHU-TRANSLAD, of precise clinical information of this syndrome especially on efficacy of Université de Bourgogne/CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 3School of Biomolecular and treatment. To delineate the natural history of T13 managed under intensive Biomedical Science, UCD Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, treatment, we reviewed detailed clinical data of 22 patients with full T13 4Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud University Medical admitted to Nagano Children’s Hospital from 1994 to 2014. Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Major clinical findings included congenital heart defects (91%), cleft lip or University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Section of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, Wellcome Trust Brenner Building, cleft palate (68%), polydactyly (59%), and cryptorchidism (50% of male). St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 7INSERM U781, Institut IMAGINE, 19 patients received resuscitation by intubation and required Mechanical Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 8Université Paris Descartes, Institut ventilation. Of these, six were extubated and 11 needed tracheostomy. A to- IMAGINE, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France, 9Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker- tal of 29 surgical interventions except for cardiac surgery were performed Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 10Plateforme de génomique, Fondation IMAGINE, on 15 patients. Enteral feeding was accomplished in 19, six of whom were Hôpital Necker-Enfant Malades, Paris, France, 11Service de génétique Hôpital Armand fed orally. Eight patients could be discharged home. The survival rate at age Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 12Centre de Référence des malformations et maladies 1 week, 1 month, and 1 year was 100%, 95%, and 41%, respectively. Median congénitales du cervelet, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France. survival time was 271 days (range, 22−3987). Common final modes of death were congenital heart defects and heart failure (50 %). These data were si- milar to those obtained in patients with trisomy 18 in our hospital [Kos- The ciliary transition zone (TZ) is thought to control ciliary formation, ho et al., 2006].This study has demonstrated improved prognosis through composition and signaling by facilitating a protein diffusion barrier at the intensive treatment, which would be helpful for clinicians to offer the best ciliary base, and TZ defects are associated with ciliopathies such as Meckel- information on treatment options to families of patients with T13. Gruber syndrome (MKS), Nephronophthisis (NPHP) and Joubert syndrome (JBTS). Here, using a co-expression/evolution profiling approach to uncover P S11
.127 candidate TZ genes, TMEM107 was identified as a new TZ protein muta- Discordant prenatal and postnatal cytogenetic findings in a case of de ted in patients with oral-facial-digital syndrome type VI (OFD VI) and JBTS. novo complete trisomy 5p Mechanistic studies in C. elegans roundworms reveal TMEM-107 functions E. Krimmel1, D. Wahl2, A. Ovens-Raeder3, U. Heinrich1, I. Rost1; 1Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics (MVZ), Martinsried, Germany, redundantly with NPHP-4 to regulate cilium integrity, TZ docking and the 2Practice for genetic counselling and psychotherapy, Augsburg, Germany, 3Genetic assembly of TZ membrane-microtubule Y-link connectors. Consistent with counselling and diagnostics, München, Germany. evolutionary and mammalian biochemical analyses, TMEM-107 occupies an intermediate layer of the nematode TZ-localised MKS functional module and organises the TZ recruitment of a distinct transmembrane submodu- Isolated trisomy of the complete short arm of chromosomdee n5o ivso a very rare le including TMEM-17, TMEM-231 and JBTS-14/TMEM237. Furthermore, constitutional chromosomal finding. We report a case of a meanwhile 6 transmembrane MKS module proteins including TMEM-107 are immobile month old dysmorphic girl with a prenatally not detected trisomy of within the TZ membrane and display ring-like super resolution localisation the complete short arm of chromthosome 5. patterns reminiscent of the ciliary necklace. Thus, TMEM107 is a ciliopathy Prenatal ultrasonography at 12 week of gestation revealed a dorsonuchal constituent of an anchored ring-like domain of the TZ membrane and orga- edema of 7.00 mm. Subsequently, chorionic villus sampling (CVS) was per- nises a discrete transmembrane component of the C. elegans MKS module. formed for conventional chromosomal analysis. After direct preparation P S11
.125 the CV trophoblast cells showed a numerically normal female karyotype Trisomy of the short arm of chromosome 10: description of three new (46,XX), whereas after long-term culture all analysed CV mesenchymal core cases cells showed a numerically abnormal female karyotype with tetraploidy D. A. Ochiana, V. Plaiasu, G. Motei, F. Brezan, I. Anca; (92,XXXX). th Mother and Child Care Institute, Bucharest, Romania. Fetal ultrasonography at 17 week of gestation revealed persistent nuchal edema, bilateral clubfeet and a generally petite developed fetus. Parents re- jected a recommended amniocentesis. Molecular analysis for Noonan-Syn- Trisomy 10p is a rare, complex syndrome of mental retardation and multip- drome and high-resolution array-CGH performed with DNA of the cultured le congenital malformations caused by the partial or total duplication of the tetraploide cells showed negative results. short arm of chromosome 10. This abnormality may be a de novo occurrence Five weeks after birth the child was presented to a geneticist because of or may be inherited from a carrier parent. Most cases appear because of an several dysmorphic features and a severe failure to thrive. Chromosomal unbalanced segregation of famililal chromosomal translocations that result analysis of peripheral blood showed an aberrant female karyotype with an in trisomy 10p associated with other additional segmental imbalaces. additional marker chromosome segregating in all cells. The marker could We describe three cases of non-mosaic trisomy 10p resulting from familial be identified as an isolated complete short arm of chromosome 5 confir- translocations: two sisters with a complex cytogenetic anomaly consisting med by molecular-cytogenetic analysis: 47,XX,+del(5)(q11.1).ish del(5) in 10p trisomy and a rare subtelomeric 2p25.1 deletion and one other (wcp5+). The report will discuss the discordance of the results, describe unrelated girl with 10p trisomy, without any apparent additional geno- the established dysmorphism and emphasize the importance for additional mic imbalance (46,XX,der(2)t(2;10)(p25.1;p11.1)mat and, respectively, cytogenetic testing of a second fetal tissue, if abnormal prenatal ultrasound 46,XX,der(14)t(10;14)(p11.1;p11.1)mat). The inheritance and identity of findings persist and cytogenetic analysis of one fetal tissue show negative the translocations were ascertained by extensive familial cytogenetic and or unclear results. FISH studies. PM11.128 The few tens of patients with trisomy of the short arm of chromosome 10 re- Molecular diagnosis of Czech tuberous sclerosis complex patients in ported to date have shown variable clinical manifestations. The clinical pre- the period 2009-2013 sentation for the girl with der(14) (10 days old) is very similar to that found H. Filipova, R. Vrtel; for pure trisomy 10p reported in the literature, with facial dysmorphism, University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. congenital abnormalities, hypotonia and severe developmental delay. For the two sisters with der(2) (ages 1y 4mo and 8y 1mo), the phenotypic features slightly overlap those previously described for trisomy 10p, with AD inherited tuberose sclerosis complex, caused by TS C1
 or TS C2
 gene mu- additional clinical characteristics, probably due to the accompanying mo- tation, is characterised by hamartomatous growths in many organs (brain, nosomy. heart, kidney etc.). Molecular diagnostics for Czech TSC patients is perfor- Acknowledgments: This work was supported by Objective 3.3 of Romanian med at Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Olomouc since Ministry of Health Program VI anEd SbHy PGN -2II0- P1
T5-P C| CGAL-2A01 S3
G-4O-1W33, gSrCanOtTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 233 1995. Previously used methods for unknown mutations detection (DGGEABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and SSCP) have been replaced from 2009 by MLPA and Sanger sequencing Materials and Methods: A total of 27 cases diagnosed at our hospital bet- of all TSC coding sequence, with the aim to increase the efficiency of causal ween years 2010-2014 were analyzed retrospectively. The variables analy- mutations detection. zed were sex, age at diagnosis, presenting manifestation, type of heart de- In the period from 2009 to 2014 the following file of patients has been in- fect, other features and positive family history. vestigated by our laboratory for the TSC genes analysis: 124 new cases of Results: From total of 24 children 15 (63 %) were female, 9 (37 %) were TSC (7 prenatal samples) and 37 patients indicated before the year 2009. male, 3 were antenatal cases. The youngest patients were 1 month old (8), The file also included family members (127 postnatal examinations and 14 16 were younger than 1 year, the oldest was 11 years old. The prenatal cases prenatal samples) and confirmatory samples (45 examinations). were diagnosed between 25th and 32nd weeks of gestation. Heart defects For the period a complete analysis of TSC genes was carried out in 98 index were the most common presenting manifestation (23/27). Hypocalcemia, cases. 87 causal mutations were uncovered, 29 of them not previously pu- immune deficiency, velopharyngeal incompetence and dysmorphic features blished in TS C1
/TS C2
-LOVD database. 64 cases were related to the TS C2
 were the other features in the rest (4/27). The most common cardiac defect gene mutation, 23 patients have TS C1
 gene mutation, for 5 persons (3 pre- was co-existence of VSD and ASD (6), the others were Tetralogy of Fallot natal samples from fetuses with rhabdomyoma) no mutation was found. In 6 (4), truncus arteriosus (4), interrupted aortic arch (3) and VSD (3). Families individuals sequential change of unknown significance was found, to clarify were tested in 10 cases; 4 of them were found affected. its possible causality it is necessary to investigate the parents‘ DNA, or other Conclusions: In the light of these results, we planned to develop a guideline members of the family. for the diagnosis of velocardiofacial syndrome in high risk pregnancies and Since 2014, we are implementing massive parallel sequencing (MPS, MiSeq) newborns in our clinic. of both TSC genes in order to speed up the passage of the samples through P S11
.131 the laboratory. Preliminary MPS results will be discussed. A homozygous PAX3 mutation leading to severe presentation of P S11
.129 Waardenburg syndrome with prenatal diagnosis A paternal isodisomy of chromosome 12 causes two different S. Issa1, E. Mousty2, F. Grosjean2, J. Col3, P. Khau Van Kien4, Y. Petrov4, D. Reboul4, J. disorders in a developmentally delayed girl with mild dysmorphic Maurice Develay2, N. Bondurand1, J. Chiesa4, V. Pingault1,5; 1Inserm U955, Hopital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 2Gynécologie Obstétrique, CHRU features and sideroblastic anaemia Caremeau, Nimes, France, 3Gynécologie Obstétrique, Centre hospitalier, Avignon, France, M. Alders1, P. Lakeman1, M. Peters2, T. W. Kuijpers2; 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique et Génétique Médicale, CHRU Caremeau, Nimes, France, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Departement de Génétique, Hopital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France. 2Department of Paediatric Haematology - Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. History: Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is one of the most common forms of syndro- 5 year old girl (no sibs) of non-consanguineous parents with psy- mic deafness, characterized by the clinical association with pigmentation chomotor developmental delay (IQ ~80), sideroblastic anaemia, microce- abnormalities of the eye, skin and hair. Four subtypes are described (W S1
-4), pChlianliyc a(<l -e 2x,a5m SDin)a atniodn short stature (4 cm < -3 SD), hypotonia, exercise into- type 1 and 2 being the most frequent and 3 the rarest. W S1
 is caused by he- lerance, myopia, immunological problems an recurrent infections. terozygous mutations in PAX3, a transcription factor playing a key role in showed mild facial dysmorfisms with an upslant of neural crest cells and muscle development. More than one hundred muta- palpebral fissures, hypertelorism (mum too), hypoplastic alae nasi, a smooth tions have been published. Two homozygous mutations in PAX3, leading to philtrum, small chin, and cup-shaped and low implanted ears. Furthermore, hindlimb defects (W S3
), were also described. tBhieorceh wemasi caa lt aapnedri nMg oolfe tchuel afrin ginevrse,s ctliignaotdioanctsyly of the fifth digits, vitiligo Here we document 2 consecutive severe cases of WS with fetal presentation. and eczema. Ultrasound found increased nuchal translucency, lack of active movements, : a slightly elevated lactate club hands and feet, and neural abnormalities. Both pregnancies were me- was shown in blood with no amnio acid abnormalities and a (probably se- dically interrupted due to the severity of the phenotype.We identified in condary) growth hormone deficiency. There were no abnormalities in karyo- both fetuses a homozygous missense mutation within PAX3 homeodomain, typing (46,XX); microarray CGH analysis, Mitomycin C (Fanconi anaemia), shedding light on the molecular basis of this very rare form of WS. The con- mtDNA (including Pearson), RP S19
 and RP S14
 (Blackfan Diamond), SHOX, sanguineous parents are heterozygous for the mutation and present with a FGFR3, NBN (Nijmegen Immunodeficiency syndrome) and several side- classical form of W S1
. roblastic anaemia genes (SL C25
A38; GLR5, STEA P3
, ABCB7, ALA S2
. NGS In vitro experiments were carried out to confirm the deleterious effect of (WES) identified homozygosity for: 1) a pathogenic nonsense mutation in this mutation. We found that PAX3 activation ability on the MITF promoter, PU S1
 which is associated mitochondrial myopathy with lactic acidosis and alone or together with SOX10, was crippled by the mutation. While the cellu- ringed sideroblasts (MLASA); and a pathogenic splice site mutation in 2) lar localization of the protein was not affected, the mutation clearly interfe- PFKM, which is associated with Glycogen Storage disease VII (Tarui disea- res with the trans-acting activity of PAX3 and thus inhibits it from activating se). Her clinical phenotype is predominantly explained by MLASA, but both downstream targets in the neural crest pathway. dCiosnocrdluesriso fnit with her clinical problems. The father was a heterozygous car- PM11.132 rier, but the mother was not. Exome sequencing of patients with Weaver-like features links another : This girls’ phenotype was explained by an extraordinary ge- cancer gene to overgrowth syndromes notype. She had (at least) two rare recessive disorders based on a proven A. S. A. Cohen1,2, B. Tuysuz3, Y. Shen4, S. J. M. Jones4,2,5, W. T. Gisbon1,2; paternal isodisomy of chromosome 12 resulting in homozygous pathogenic 1Child & Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Department of mutations in PU S1
 and PFKM. Pediatric Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, PM11.130 4Canada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Velocardiofacial Syndrome: Review of the Five Years Experience Vancouver, BC, Canada, 5Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon E. Yilmaz Gulec1, A. Gezdirici1, Z. Ocak1, E. Koparir1, H. Bornaun2, K. Oztarhan2, A. Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada. Guzeltas3, F. Cipe4, M. Cetinkaya5, H. Aslan6; 1Istanbul Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Department of EZH2 Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Our lab was the first to publish that constitutional mutations in the epige- Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Mehmet Akif netic regulator cause Weaver Syndrome (WS). WS is chEarZaHc2terized by Ersoy Chest & Cardiovascular Surgery Training & Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and overgrowth, increased height, large head, intellectual disability and suscep- Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Istanbul, Turkey, tibility to various cancers. We found pathogenic mutations in among 7 5Istanbul Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Department of out of 45 individuals with Weaver-like features, of which two had developed Neonatalogy, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Istanbul Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research malignancies prior to referral. Our efforts focus on determining characteri- Hospital, Department of Perinatalogy, Istanbul, Turkey. stics that wEilZl Hhe2lp predict the likelihood of WS patients developing cancer, through phenotype/genotype correlations and functional studies. Given that is a histone-modifying enzyme known to be mutated in Introduction: Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, also known as ve- various somatic cancers, we hypothesized that constitutional mutations in locardiofacial syndrome / DiGeorge syndrome is one of the most common other epigenetic regulators could explain the overgrowth features seen in microdeletion syndromes . Its incidence is 1/4000 in live births. Common our undiagnosed patients. To investdigea nteo vtohis, we carried out whole exome manifestations are conotruncal heart defects, palatal abnormalities, hypo- sequencing for a subset of patients in our cohort. calcemia, immune deficiency, velopharyngeal incompetence and intellectual In one patient, we identified a novel mutation in a key epigenetic re- / 2b 3eh 4avioral problems. We aim to docume En St Hth Ge m 2o 0s 1t 5co m | Gm Lon A f Sea Gtu Ore Ws o , f S COguTlaLtAor.N BDas,e dU oKn |th We sWimWila.rEitSieHs oGf t.hOe RpaGtient’s phenotype to WS and other our patients diagnosed during the antenatal period and childhood.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S11
.135 A partial deletion of the Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) region lines of evidence including animal models, we characterized this mutation in a child with classic Williams facial features: further delineation of as probably pathogenic. This is the first report of overgrowth associated genotype-phenotype correlations in the WBS region with a constitutional mutation in this gene, which is mutated somatically A. C. Foster1, F. S. Togneri2, M. Drozniewska2, L. Reali2, N. S. Cooper1; in various cancers. Further investigations are needed to make a definitive 1Birmingham Women‘s Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, link between mutations in this epigenetic regulator, Weaver-like syndromes, 2West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom. and cancer development. We intend to present the identity of this gene and results of further studies at this meeting. This work was supported by the CIHR Operating Grants PCN102990, This patient was referred to clinical genetics following investigations for tri- PCN110794, MO P119595
. ASAC holds a Doctoral Grant from the Fundação somy 21 and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome due to dysmorphic features, para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (Portugal/EU). mild motor delay and relatively large size. On examination she was noted P S11
.133 to have facial features typical of Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) and a Heterozygosity of ELN can cause tortuous cerebral artery in Williams systolic murmur. Cardiac investigations identified mild left ventricular hy- syndome pertrophy, mild mitral valve prolapse with regurgitation, and hypertension Y. Muramatsu1,2, S. Mizuno1, H. Kakizawa3, K. Shimizu4, H. Ohashi4, S. Hayashi5, J. requiring treatment with amlodipine. Microarray analysis detected an aty- Inazawa5, K. Itomi3; pical deletion of 1.6Mb at 7q11.23 partially overlapping the WBS region. Im- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, balance of this region has not previously been reported in the literature. Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, WBS is a microdeletion syndrome caused by a recurrent deletion of 1.5-1.8 Nagoya, Japan, 3Division of Neurology, Aichi Children‘s Health and Medical Center, Mb at 7q11.23. The syndrome is characterised by a specific phenotype that Obu, Japan, 4Division of Medical Genetics, Saitama Children‘s Medical Center, Saitama, includes cardiac, facial, cognitive, endocrine, growth, and connective tissue Japan, 5Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute and School of features. The microdeletion typically encompasses 26 to 28 genes. While de- Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. letion of ELN is established as responsible for the cardiovascular phenotype, the exact phenotypic impact of the other genes in the region is not yet clear. Overlapping deletions provide an important insight into genotype-pheno- Introduction: Williams syndrome (WS) is a contiguous gene syndrome com- type correlations. It has been suggested that BAZ1B is a candidate for cra- monly caused by a 1.5-Mb deletion involving ELN located at 7q11.23. Ela- niofacial development and thus the facial features of WBS. However, our stin arteriopathy plays a key role in WS. Although cardiovascular diseases patient has typical facial features and preservation of BAZ1B. Our patient’s such as supravalvar aortic stenosis and peripheral pulmonic stenosis are the atypical feature of height velocity along the upper centiles is also of great most significant features, there were some reports of cerebral vessel steno- interest. Here we present a review of atypical deletions reported in the li- ses, which cause cerebral infarction or moyamoya disease. Neurovascular terature, including our new case, and summarise the current knowledge of abnormalities have still not fully been studied in patients with WS. genotype-phenotype correlations in WBS. Materials and Methods: In this study, we investigated magnetic resonance imaging and angiography findings of the brain and intracranial vessels in PM11.136 WS. Four patients were included in this study. Three were typical WS (age Genotype-phenotype correlation in three patients with Wolf- range, 1-2 years) diagnosed by fluorescence in situ hybridisation, and the Hirschhorn syndrome fourth was a 7-year-old girl with an interstitial 7.92Mb deletion of 7q11.21- H. Gurkan1, U. Vatansever2, E. I. Atlı1, D. Eker1, S. Ulusal1, N. A. Çiftdemir2, H. Tozkır1; 1Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Edirne, Turkey, q11.23 containing the whole ELN gene and a part of the LIMK1 gene. She 2Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Edirne, Turkey. had a history of peripheral pulmonary stenosis, rectal prolapse, and skeletal features similar to those seen in WS. Results: Bilateral tortuosity of middle cerebral artery and vertebrobasilar Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) (OMIM 194190) is a multiple congenital artery were observed in all four cases. Neither constriction of vessels nor anomalies/mental retardation (MCA/MR) syndrome caused by partial 4p infarction was detected. deletion that was first described independently by Wolf et al. and by Hirsch- Conclusions: Tortuosity of the intracranial artery is one of the clinical mani- horn et al. in 1965. festations in WS. ELN may play an important role in pathogenesis. Clinical signs and symptpms include typical facial appearance, resembling PM11.134 the ‘‘Greek warrior helmet’’ profile, mental retardation, severe growth delay, Williams-Beuren syndrome: phenotypic, biologic and molecular hypotonia, congenital heart malformations, midline defects, such as cleft pa- characteristics late and hypospadias, ocular colobomas, renal abnormalities and seizures. S. Popa1,2, A. Grozavu1, R. Popescu1,2, M. Panzaru1,2, L. Butnariu1,2, E. Braha1,2, C. Rusu1,2; Different phenotypes and clinical findings are caused by the number of ge- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy ”Grigore T. Popa”, Iasi, Romania, 2“St. Mary” nes deleted on the 4p16.3 locus. Children’s Hospital, Iasi, Romania. Here we represent the clinical findings of three patients who have deletion on 4p16.3 chromosomal locus. Size of the deletions were different from each other. Introduction: Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is known as a multisy- The first patient is a 3,5- year-old female who has afebrile convulsion, hea- stem disorder caused by the deletion of several genes on chromosome 7 ring loss and speech delay. Submicroscobic heterozygous deletion including (7q11.23). We have used specific facial anomalies, intellectual disability, PIGG, GAK, FGFR L1
, SPON2 genes on 4p16.3 was determined by MLPA me- cardiac abnormalities, and hypercalcemia as diagnostic selection criteria, thod performed with  P373
-A1 MLPA probemix. and used multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA - MRC The second patient is a 2-day-old female patient. She has a dysmorphic face Holland) analysis to confirm the diagnosis. appearence, preauricular pit, PDA? and sacral dimple. She has a 46,XX,del(4) Materials and Methods: We have analyzed 24 patients confirmed with WBS, (p15.?3) karyotype. A 19 Mb heterozygous deletion between 4p16.3-4p15.3 and identified 5 cases related to a familial disorder and 19 isolated cases. We regions was determined by arrayCGH [CytoScan750K_Array, Affymetrix] have analyzed the clinical and biological characteristics of the above-cited method. Deleted region includes 88 genes described in OMIM. individuals and correlated them with the deletions identified using MLPA Third patient is a 9-year-old male who has microcephaly, dysmorphic face  P064
 kit. Deletion size was further characterized using MLPA follow-up kit appearence, iris coloboma, exophtalmus, ASD+PDA+ pulmonary steno- P-029-A1. sis, gastroesophageal reflux, scoliosis and seizures. He has a 46,XY, der(4) Results: The data show that 21 of the patients had a hemizygous deletion of t(4;18)(p16.3;p11.2) karyotype. ELN, STX1A, FZD9, CYLN2, and LIMK1 genes, whereas three individuals had Differential expressivity and incomplete penetrance in WHS cause difficul- an atypical deletion (a smaller one that does not extend telometically futher ties in clinical diagnosis and problems in understanding the genotype/phe- than LIMK1 gene) with an incomplete phenotype (mild dysmorphic face, su- notype correlations. pravalvular aortic stenosis and learning difficulties). The dysmorphic face was present in all individuals, but the frequency of different features varied. P S11
.137 71% of subjects associated congenital heart defects, whereas hypercalcemia Cytogenetic approach of girls with short stature: unrelated 6 cases was found only in 19% of the patients with WBS. All subjects had mild to with structural X chromosome abnormalities moderate intellectual disability. V. PLAIASU, D. Ochiana, G. Motei, F. Brezan, I. Anca; IOMC Prof.dr.Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania. Conclusions: For countries with limited financial resources, the use of a combination of MLPA kits allows both confirmation and estimation of the deletion size in WBS patients. A comprehensive phenotype-genotype corre- There are various genetic causes of short stature. It has been known that lation is provided, with detailed illustration of particular cases. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANsDho, rUt sKta |t uWreW is aWss.oEcSiaHteGd w.OitRh Gseveral disorders including wide varia 2ti 3on 5sABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of chromosomal abnormalities. A detailed clinical evaluation is essential to adenosquamous carcinoma of the lung. suspect and diagnose the underlying cause, especially in patients with over- Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin- lapping phenotypes. embedded tumour tissue. Libraries were prepared for sequencing using a This work presents the cytogenetics results found in Romanian fema- TruSight Cancer Panel and included the exons of 94 cancer genes and 284 le patients with short stature as a main clinical feature for referral to Ge- SNPs associated with cancer. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina Mi- netics Department. G-banding and metaphase FISH techniques were Seq platform. The BWA pipeline was used for alignment and variant calling. performed and showed various X chromosome abnormalities: Xp and Results: In each of tAhPeC patients we identified at least one clear-cut dTriPv5e3r Xq deletions [46,X,del(X)(p11.2), 46,X,del(X)(q22)], isochromosome X mutation leading to a loss ofB fRuCnAc2tion of a haploinsufficAiTeMnt gene. The ge- [mos 45,X/46,X,i(X)(q10)], 46,X,idic(X)(p22.1)], ring chromosomes [mos nes NaFff1ected were (p.Ser2497Ter; p.Gly857Ter; c.730-1G>T), 45,X/46,X,r(X)]. (p.Arg196Ter; p.Val197Met), (c.9089_9090insA), (p.Tyr313Ter) Phenotypic expression of Turner syndrome patients is largely dependent and (p.Arg304Ter). Each patient alsFoA cNarCrAiedFA oNthCeCr sFoAmNCaGticF aAnNdC gIerFmANli-- on the patient‘s karyotype and is most commonly associated with a 45,X CnMe potential driver mutations such as heterozygous nonsense mutations in karyotype, with a wide spectrum of clinical features. In some patients with the haplosufficient FANC family genes ( , , , , Turner syndrome the karyotype shows mosaicism, including cell lines with ), as well as many novel missense mutations in other genes predicted as monosomy X along with X structural anomalies, with possible imbalance of pathogenic by the RadialSVM algorithm. gene content of the X chromosome. A ring X chromosome with loss of XIST Conclusion: We observed great heterogeneity in all patients, which high- gene function and certain X-autosomes translocations are the only sex chro- lights the need for a personalised approach in designing a therapeutic stra- mosome structural abnormalities likely to cause mental retardation. Haplo- tegy for lung cancer patients in order to maximise their chances for suc- insufficiency of SHOX gene, located on the short arm of the X chromosome, cessful treatment. is responsible for height deficit in Turner syndrome patients. PM12.002 Genetic evaluation of X chromosome rearrangements is important for an Next-generation sequencing as a tool for assessing minimal residual accurate diagnosis and to provide information regarding natural history, disease in AML patients with CEBPA mutations prognosis, available treatment, recurrence risk. L. Zejskova1, R. Plachy1, L. Sedlackova1, O. Mazal1, A. Zavrelova2, P. Zak2, V. Petecukova3, Acknowledgments: This work was supported by objective 3.3 of Romanian J. Novak3, T. Kozak3, S. Pekova1; Ministry of Health Program VI and by PN-II-PT-PCCA-2013-4-133 grant 1synlab genetics s.r.o., Laboratory for Molecular Diagnostics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Clinical Hematology, Faculty Hospital Hradec Kralove, Hradec Kralove, PM11.138 Czech Republic, 3Department of Clinical Hematology, Faculty Hospital Kralovske Mutations in KCNH1 and AT P6
V1B2 cause Zimmermann-Laband Vinohrady, Prague, Czech Republic. syndrome F. Kortüm1, V. Caputo2, C. K. Bauer1, L. Stella3, A. Ciolfi4, M. Alawi1, G. Bocchinfuso5, E. Flex4, S. Paolacci2, M. L. Dentici6, P. Grammatico7, G. C. Korenke8, V. Leuzzi2, D. Mowat9, L. CEBPA D. V. Nair10, T. T. M. Nguyen11, P. Thierry12, S. M. White13, B. Dallapiccola6, A. Pizzuti2, P. M. Introduction: Mutations in the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha Campeau14, M. Tartaglia4,6, K. Kutsche1; ( ) gene occur approximately in 5 – 10 % of acute myeloid leukemia 1University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 2Sapienza (AML) patients and can be used as molecular markers for monitoring of University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 3Università “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 4Istituto minimal residual disease (MRD). However, detection of MRD using quan- Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 5Università “Tor Vergata“, Rome, Italy, 6Ospedale titative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) is complicated due to GC-rich regions and Pediatrico Bambino Gesù- IRCSS, Rome, Italy, 7Università La Sapienza, Ospedale San thus validation of leukemia-specific and sensitive MRD assay can be techni- Camillo-Forlanini, Rome, Italy, 8Klinikum Oldenburg gGmbH, Oldenburg, Germany, cally difficult. The goal of our work was the application of next-generation 9Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 10Saveetha University, Chennai, India, 11University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 12CHI Haute-Saône, Vesoul, France, amplicon-based deep sequencing (NGS) as a quantitative detection method 13Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 14Sainte-Justine Hospital, University of for MRDCE mBPoAnitoring. Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. Materials and methods: Since 2010, we have perCfEoBrmPAed mutational analysis of the gene coding region in 411 AML patients at initial diagnosis using Sanger sequencing. In patients with the mutation as the only Zimmermann-Laband syndrome (ZLS) is a developmental disorder charac- detected mutation, we designed leukemia-specific assay using RT-qPCR. Ho- terized by facial dysmorphism with early onset gingival enlargement, intel- wever, in 5 patients the assay did not provide sufficient sensitive and speci- lectual disability, hypo/aplasia of nails and terminal phalanges of hands and fic detection of residual leukemic cells. In these cases MRD was monitored feet, and hypertrichosis. We report that heterozygous missense mutations by NGS technology. in KCNH1 account for a significant proportion of ZLS. KCNH1 encodes Eag1/ Results: From January 2013 we examined 38 samples from 5-4 AML p-5atients. Kv10.1, a member of the ether-à-go-go family of voltage-gated K+ chan- The assay detection sensitivity achieved the threshold of 10 to 10 (1 leu- nels. Patch-clamp recordings in cells expressing homomeric KCNH1 mutant kemic cell in 10 000 to 1 leukemic ceCllE iBnP 1A00 000 cells). Dynamics of residu- channels revealed a shift in the threshold for K+ current activation to more al leukemic cells correlated with clinical outcome of the patients. In patients negative potentials for all but one mutant. For the latter, co-expression expe- with relapse, the occurrence of the CEB mPAutation was also confirmed by riments demonstrated a dominant action over the wild-type channel, with conventional Sanger sequencing. reduced K+ conductance of the heterotetrameric channels at depolarizing Conclusion: Quantitative assessment of mutations using NGS offers a potentials but a pronounced conductance at negative potentials. These data promising way for the detection of MRD level necessary for individualized support a gain-of-function effect of all KCNH1 mutants. We also report that monitoring of disease status and treatment efficacy. a single missense change in AT P6
V1B2 underlie a small fraction of ZLS. AT- P S12
.003  P6
V1B2 encodes the B2 subunit of the vacuolar H+-ATPase, a multimeric en- Polymorphisms of DNA repair genes in the susceptibility of acute zyme that mediates acidification in organelles by pumping protons against myeloid leukemia (AML) an electrochemical gradient. Structural analysis indicated a possible pertur- A. Daraki1,2, D. Koumbi1, P. Masoura2, S. Samara2, C. Sambani1, K. Manola1, P. Kollia2, V. bing effect of the introduced residue on complex assembly. Our findings pro- Aleporou-Marinou2; vide evidence that disturbances in voltage-dependent K+ currents cause the 1Laboratory of Health Physics, Radiobiology & Cytogenetics, NCSR “Demokritos”, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Genetics & Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, National and clinically recognizable ZLS phenotype, and document genetic heterogeneity Kapodistrian University, Athens, Greece. for this disorder. P S12
.001 Detection of extensive driver mutation heterogeneity in 5 Bulgarian Alterations in the polymorphisms of DNA repair genes have been associated patients with adenosquamous carcinoma of the lung with the pathogenesis of leukemia. DNA double-strand break repair pa- L. T. Balabanski1, N. Chilingirova2, S. Ivanov1, R. Vazharova1, D. Toncheva1, G. Kurteva2; thway represents the main pathway in maintaining genome stability which 1Genomics Laboratory, Malinov Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Medical Oncology Clinic, is distinguished into two pathways: homologous recombination (HR) and Specialized Hospital for Active Treatment in Oncology, Sofia, Bulgaria. non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ). The Rad51 proteins are essential com- ponents of the HR, whereas Lig4 proteins represent central components of the NHEJ. In this study, we investigated possible implications of the G135C Background: Lung cancer remains amongst the leading causes of death and  C26
T germline polymorphisms of RAD51 and LIG4 genes, respectively, worldwide. Adenosquamous carcinoma of the lung is a relatively rare sub- in AML development and its specific chromosomal abnormalities. Geno- type of non-small cell lung cancer accounting for approximately 1-4% of all typing was performed in 83 patients and 91 controls by PCR-RFLPs. The cases. The genetic mechanisms underlying the onset and progression of this polymorphic site G135C of RAD51 gene showed the same allelic and genoty- type of cancer are still not clear. The aim of this study was to gain an insight 236 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOpiTc LfrAeqNueDn,c yU bKet |w WeenW pWati.eEnStsH anGd. OcoRntGrols. The genotypic distribution of into the mutational profile of tumour tissue from 5 Bulgarian patients withABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  C26
T polymorphism of LIG4 gene revealed a statistically higher frequency Research was supported by grants 6.703.2014/K and RFMEFI59414X0002. of the variant genotypes in patients compared to controls (C/T: 50.6% vs PM12.006 30.8%, T/T: 10.8% vs 6.6%, respectively, p=0.006). Allele frequency dis- Polyposis coli due to low APC somatic mosaicism tribution analysis for LIG4 gene, showed that patients exhibited an almost Y. Goldberg1, B. H. Shirts2, A. Jacobson2, C. C. Pritchard2, T. Walsh3, H. Jacob4, A. A. 2-fold increased risk of carrying at least one mutant allele (T) compared to Benson4; controls (p=0.004). No statistically significant associations were found for 1Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, both polymorphisms after stratification of patients according to karyotypic Israel, 2Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of findings. However, an increased frequency of variant genotypes of  C26
T Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Gastroenterology Division, Hadassah-Hebrew polymorphism of LIG4 gene was observed in patients with -7/del(7q), -5/ University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. del(5q) and +8, compared to controls. Our results showed that the AML risk was not associated with RAD51 gene polymorphism; however, our data pro- vide evidence for an important role of the  C26
T polymorphic site of the LIG4 PURPOSE: To present a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) gene in AML development. caused by adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) somatic mosaicism; Descrip- PM12.004 tion: we report of a twenty-one year old female presented with rectal blee- Principal clinical features of acute myeloid leukemia with mutations ding and abdominal pain. Colonoscopy and esophagogastroduodenoscopy DNMT3A R882 revealed extensive polyposis of the recto-sigmoid junction, distal sigmoid, E. Petrova, I. Martynkevich, L. Polushkina, L. Martynenko, M. Ivanova, N. Cybakova, E. proximal right colon and cecum. The rectum was essentially spared aside Kleina, E. Shabanova, A. Chechetkin, K. Abdulkadyrov; from two small pedunculated polyps. The stomach and duodenum, inclu- Russian Research Institute of Haemotology and Transfusiolofy, St.-Petersburg, Russian ding the papilla, were normal. In preparation for recto-sigmoid sparing Federation. surgery, more than sixty polyps were removed. The patient had no extra- colonic signs of FAP. Her maternal grandmother was diagnosed with colon cancer at age seventy-six, but there was no other family history of polyps or The aim of the research was to analyse frequency of DNMT3A mutations colon cancer. Methodology: NTeMxt-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis was in AML patients, their association with clinico-hematologic parameters and performed using the ColoSeq panel* on DNA extracted from both periphe- prognostic significance. The investigation group included 143 AML patients. ral blood lymphocytes and colonic polyps. RESULTS: Molecular analysis de- Mutations DNMT3A R882 were identified in 23 (16,1%) patients: R882H - tected the p. E1408
X deleterious mutation in the APC gene in 12 of 276 (4%) 16, R882С - 6, R882S - 1. reads of the DNA in the peripheral blood and in 30% of the DNA from colonic Patients with DNMT3A R882 had higher WBC (p=0,001) and platelets polyps. CONCLUSIONS: In this patient, 4% APC mosaicism of the peripheral (p=0,020) count at diagnosis and more frequently belonged to FAB groups blood lead to florid polyposis. Somatic mosaicism has been reported to cau- M5 (p=0,003) and M4 (p=0,012), as compared with DNMT3Awt. Of 23 pa- se cancer syndromes in a few cases, but has been underestimated. This case tients who had AML with DNMT3A mutations, 17 (24,3%) had tumors with should reinforce the need for NGS analysis in all patients with a personal normal cytogenetic profiles (of a total of 70 cytogenetically normal samples) history of polyposis, no family history of colon polyps/cancer, and no identi- (p=0,009). Patients with isolated DNMT3A mutations were seen in 4 cases, fied germline mutation by traditional less sensitive approaches. whereas in the rest of patients they were detected simultaneously with mu- tations in genes FLT3, NPM1, NRAS and CKIT. DNTM3A mutations were si- P S12
.007 gnificantly more prevalent in NPM1mut (p=0,005) and FLT3-ITD (p=0,005) Analysis of BCR-ABL mutations in chronic myeloid leukemia patients positive cases than wild type. DNMT3A mutations associated with negative treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors influence on patients overall survival (OS) and risk of relapse, compared G. Cardos1, S. Dinu1, P. Apostol1, M. Stoian1, C. Ionescu1, P. Gurban1, F. Iordache1, S. Spandole1, R. Manolache2, D. Duta3, A. Rodewald1,4; with DNMT3Awt (Me of OS and RFS: 5,2 and 13,0; 4,8 and 10,0 months; р = 1Personal Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Hematology Clinic, Coltea Hospital, Bucharest, 0,031 and р = 0,045, respectively). Romania, 3Filantropia Municipal Hospital, Craiova, Romania, 4Human Biology Institute, Summary. AML with DNMT3A mutations represent the group, homogeneous University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. on a number of clinical and laboratory parameters. DNMT3A mutations are highly recurrent in patients with de novo AML with an intermediate-risk cytogenetic profile. The presence of DNMT3A mutations can be considered Mutations in the BCR-ABL tirozin-kinase (TK) domain represent the most as an independent adverse prognostic factor for survival, suggesting that common mechanism of resistance to personalized therapy with TK inhibi- testing of DNMT3A mutations can help further improve risk stratification tors (TKI) in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). in AML patients. Mutational status of the BCR-ABL gene corresponding to the TK domain was P S12
.005 analyzed by capillary sequencing in 45 CML patients with suboptimal re- Bioinformatics analysis of mature mi-RNA motifs distribution in sponse/failure to TKI, in order to tailor their therapy. The response of the tumor suppressor genes surroundings patients to TKI therapy was monitored at molecular and cytogenetic level. E. V. Butenko, D. E. Romanov, E. A. Pshenichniy, T. P. Shkurat; Mutations in the BCR-ABL gene were identified in 18 (40%) patients: a sin- Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. gle mutation in 15 patients and 2 mutations in 3 patients. Mutations identi- fied corresponded to several regions of the BCR-ABL oncoprotein, such as: the P-loop (M244V, G250E, Q252H), the ATP-binding region ( L298
V, V299L, Every human tumor type has its own unique mi-RNA expression profile. Mi- T315I, F317L), the SH2-contact region (M351T) and the substrate-binding RNA can be located in intergenic spaces, in antisense strain, in introns and region (F359V). The T315I mutation, conferring resistance to almost all exons. Such genome organization can determine the mechanism of coordi- known TKI, was detected both as single mutation (in 7 patients) and in com- nation between RNA and protein expression, but also represents the value bination with M351T (1 patient). of mi-RNA motifs in human evolution. Based on the findings that genome The 2 mutations detected in the BCR-ABL TK domain in case of 2 patients functioning is connected with its structure we have conducted the bioinfor- represented different clones; during dasatinib therapy, the resistant clones matics analysis of mature mi-RNA motifs distribution in tumor suppressor were selected (M351T and T315 respective), while the clones sensitive to genes surroundings. this drug have disappeared. We analyzed the intergene spaces located in surroundings of the tumor sup- Different chromosomal abnormalities associated with clonal evolution were pressor genes (APC; BRCA1; BRCA2; CDKN2A; DCC; MEN1; NF1; NF2; PTEN; identified in 3 patients, which may be the major cause of secondary resi- RB1; T P53
; VHL; WT1). Sequences were obtained from NCBI data base and stance to TKI. miRBase release 21 using E-utilities API. Motif search was carried out with Conclusions: MEME Suite program package. The results were filtered to yield only those - Mutational status of the BCR-ABL TK domain is valuable information for matches with 85% identical nucleotides. the best therapeutic decision and management of patients with CML; The entire set of non-coding DNA sequences contained 755 motifs of 19-23 - Additional TKI resistance mechanisms can be detected by a combined nucleotides, homologous to 261 mature mi-RNA sequences. About 60% of molecular and cytogenetic monitoring of the CML patients. all motifs were homologous to miR-5585, miR-1273g, miR-619, miR-5196, PM12.008 miR-5095, miR-709 and miR-1285. These motifs can be considered as non- Changes in the gene expression and copy number aberrations in non- specific and widely spread in human genome. We have found that tumor invasive and muscle-invasive bladder tumors suppressor genes have specific patterns of mi-RNA homologous motifs dis- O. S. Antonova1, S. Hadjidekova1, Z. Hammoudeh1, R. Staneva Tsvetkova1, B. Rukova1, S. tribution. Prevalent motif type and the density of motif distribution varied from gene to gene. Results can beE dSisHcuGss e2d0 a1s a5 b |a GckLgrAouSnGd OtoW th,e SseCaOrchT oLfA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 237 new targets for tumor diagnostics and therapy.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Karachanak-Yankova1, D. Nesheva1, V. Sabriev2, E. Popov2, G. Stamenov3, R. Cherneva4, C. Léonard de Vinci, Chambray les Tours, France, 10SELARL Cylab, La Rochelle, France. Slavov2, D. Damyanov5, D. Toncheva1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of urology, University Hospital Aleksandrovska, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3MBAL Nadezhda, Sofia, Background Bulgaria, 4Department of intenal medicine, University Hospital Aleksandrovska, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are major genes involved in hereditary breast and ovari- an cancer (HBOC). Facing an increasing number of routine genetic tests and emergency indications such as eligibility to targeted therapies (anti-PARP) and surgery decision, we optimized our genetic testing strategy to reduce Background: processing time. Based on high-throughput sequencing, our approach allo- The aim of this study was evaluation and comparison of the copy number wed the bi-monthly screening of 96 patients in routine diagnosis (RD), and aberration and the expression of the genes, related to cancer drug resistance the additional testing of 16 patients every three weeks as part of a fast track in non-invasive and muscle invasive bladder carcinomas. (FT) was performed. Materials & Methods: Methods Bladder transitorial cell cancer samples from pTa, pT1, pT2, pT2a and pT2b 96 DNA samples (RD) or 16 DNA samples (FT) were amplified using BRCA stages were tested for gene expression levels and copy number aberrations. MASTRDx kit (Multiplicom®), based on five multiplex PCR covering coding A gene expression analysis of the 84 genes from Cancer drug resistance and regions and exon-intron junctions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, followed by metabolism panel (Qiagene) of 30 tumours and CytoChip Oligo aCGH, 44K sequencing on MiSeq (Illumina®). Bioinformatic analysis was performed format (Bluegnome) of 12 tumours were performed. using SeqNext Software (JSI®). Large rearrangement were researched using Results: MLPA (MRC Holland®). The DNA copy number data shows gains, amplifications and loses in the Results bladder cancer genome, compared to the control. Tumours from pT2, pT2a 1154 patients were analysed in 2014 (1070 RD and 84 EI): 10.3% of them and pT2b stages have higher numbers of chromosomal imbalances then had germline deleterious mutations (CNV included), and 6.9% carried va- non-invasive tumours. riants of unknown significance. The Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS)- The gene expression analysis of the bladder tumours revealed an up-regu- based strategy amorced the shortening of analysis delay, which get closer lation for CY P1
A1, CY P3
A5, AR, CLPTM1L, CCN E1
, MVP, TO P2
B, AHR and to our target delay of 16 weeks maximum. The fast track process, including PPARG genes compared to the normal tissue. A statistically significant diffe- medical validation, last less than 8 weeks. rence (p<0,0001) in the expression level in muscle invasive versus non-in- Conclusion vasive bladder tumours of the EGFR, ERBB2, ERBB4, ABC C1
, ABC C3
, ARNT, This NGS approach enabled to increase the throughput of genetic tests for CY P1
A1, CY P3
A5, EPHX1, MVP and PPARG genes is observed. These genes BRCA1 and BRCA2, and to develop an efficient fast track in response to the- are involved in the multi-drug resistance and the metabolism of: steroid rapeutic emergency indications. The use of two MiSeq sequencer enables a hormones, cyclosporine, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and anticancer technical capacity of 2500 patients a year. Furthermore, this technological drugs Vincristine, Thiopurine, and Taxol. This data confirms the significance resource allows us to consider HBOC genes panel sequencing. of these genes as targets for further clinical trials. Acknowledgements: Contract № ДМУ 03/48 of the Ministry of Education P S12
.011 and Science, Bulgaria, Contract with BAS. Routine germline BRCA testing in serous ovarian cancer: The West of Scotland experience P S12
.009 P. Spiliopoulou1, S. Gibson2, R. Davidson2, R. Glasspool1, I. McNeish3; Study of tumour recurence in superficial transitional cell carcinoma 1Beatson West of Scotland Cancer Centre, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics, by microarrays Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Cancer Sciences, J. Mares1, M. Klabanova2, V. Soukup3, J. Duškova4, A. Horinek4, M. Babjuk1; University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. 12nd Faculty of Medicine Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Diana Lucina, Prague, Czech Republic, 31st Faculty of Medicine Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 41st Faculty of Medicine Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. Background: Germline mutations in BRCA1/2 (gBRCA) are strongly linked to non-mucinous ovarian cancer (OC), in particular high grade serous OC (HGSOC). Since Jul 13, all patients with non-mucinous OC in the West of Treatment of bladder superficial tumours is dependent on the risk of re- Scotland (WoS) have been offered germline BRCA1/2 testing regardless of currence and it is therefore clinically important to identify bladder cancers family history. All patients received counselling prior to testing. Methods: with a high risk of intravesical recurrence after transurethral bladder tu- Sequencing results were collated with clinical data. Progression-free (PFS) mour resection. For the improvement of recurrence prognosis we applied and overall (OS) survivals in gBRCA mutation carriers and non-carriers were gene expression microarray analysis to two groups of bladder tumours (su- compared using Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test. Results: 154 patients were perficial bladder tumours with no or late recurrence during the period of referred to genetics and 120 accepted testing. gBRCA mutations were iden- two years versus early recurrence ones). Data from microarrays containing tified in 22/120 (18.3%) - 6 BRCA1, 16 BRCA2. An additional 4/120 (3.3%) 29,019 targets (Applied Biosystems) were subjected to a panel of statistical had variants of unknown significance (VUS). In HGSOC, the mutation rate analyses to identify bladder cancer recurrence-associated gene expression was 21/92 (22.8%) (6 BRCA1, 15 BRCA2). 50% mutations occurred in wo- changes. After validation 33 genes manifested significant differences bet- men with Manchester score (MS) ≤ 15: these would have been missed if fa- ween both groups. The significant expression was observed in the group of mily history alone determined decision to test. OS for gBRCA2 carriers with patients without recurrence by 30 genes of which the highest differences stage III/IV HGSOC was significantly better than gBRCA wild-type (HR: 2.25 were detected by NINJ1, GNE, ANXA1, TNFSF15, WDR34, ARHGEF4, PRICK- 95%CI 1.05-4.79, p = 0.02, gBRCA wild-type median 63.2m, BRCA2 carriers L E1
, PSAT1, RNAS E1
, TM4SF1, TSPAN1, PLOD2 and WDR72. These genes median undefined). Median PFS of gBRCA2 carriers was also significantly code for signal transduction, vascular remodeling and vascular endotheli- better than gBRCA wild-type (27.9m vs 15.1m, HR 1.8, 95%CI 1.08-3.26 p = al growth inhibition mainly. Specially, PRICKL E1
 and TNFSF15 genes were 0.02). For gBRCA1carriers both PFS and OS did not differ significantly from described to be linked with WNT/β-catenin signaling and angiogenesis re- non-carriers. Conclusions: Routine germline BRCA1/2 mutation testing is gulation and MTOR pathway. Loci of genes with significant changes of gene acceptable and feasible in women with OC. c.20% women with HGSOC carry expression were on characteristic chromosomes for bladder cancer: 9q, a gBRCA mutation. In WoS, we observe higher prevalence of BRCA2 mutati- 17q, 2q and 16p. On the basis of these findings we documented a number ons (16.3%) than previously reported (6-8%). In our cohort, gBRCA2 muta- of expression changes of genes among which some seem to form clinical- tion confers better PFS and OS than wild-type BRCA1/BRCA2 status. ly useful recurrence markers of superficial bladder tumours. Research was supported by MSM 0021620808 and Diana Lucina. PM12.012 BRCA1/2 Mutation Status Is an Independent Factor of Improved PM12.010 Survival for Advanced Stage Ovarian Cancer Routine and emergency BRCA1 and BRCA2 genetic testing using R. Janavičius1,2, V. Rudaits1, D. Janulynaitė1, T. Žvirblis1, L. Griškevičius1; MASTRDx (Multiplicom®) kit, and MiSeq (Illumina®) sequencer: 1Vilnius university Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2State Research Description of two NGS-Workflows. Institute Innovative Medicine Center, Vilnius, Lithuania. V. Guibert1, C. Delnatte1,2, O. Ingster3, M. Morin Meschin3, I. Mortemousque4, A. Lortholary5, S. Audebert Bellanger6, P. Parent6, P. Gesta7, H. Journel8, D. Galliano9, H. Lallaoui10, S. Bézieau1, C. Garrec1; 1CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, The aim of this study was to evaluate BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation impact on Nantes, France, 2CLCC René Gauducheau, Nantes, France, 3CLCC Paul Papin, Angers, prognosis of advanced-stage (III-IV) ovarian cancer patients after standard France, 4CHRU, Tours, France, 5Centre Catherine de Sienne, Nantes, France, 6CHRU, treatment. Brest, France, 7CHG, Niort, France, 8CH Bretagne Atlantique, Vannes, France, 9Pôle Santé Methods: A total of 466 patients with advanced-stage (primary) epithelial 238 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOovTaLriAanN cDan,c UerK (E |O WC) WweWre. EidSenHtiGfie.Od fRroGm a clinical database during yearABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index BRCA1 BRCA2 1998-2013 and enrolled in a prospective, single-center study. All cases with Introduction: and a BreR CthAe1 two mBRaCjoAr2 genes associated with available germline DNA (n=297) were screened for BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene inherited breast and ovarian cancer. Double heterozygosity (DH) is an ex- mutations using combination of methods (HRM, Sanger/Next Generation tremely rare event in which both and are mutated simulta- Sequencing, MLPA). Progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival neously in a patient. To date, most cases of DH reported are in Ashkenazi (OS) was assessed between BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and BRCA1/2 wild- populations, but only a few cases hBavReC Ab1een reported to BhRavCeA 2more than type patients. To eliminate survivorship bias, analysis was limited for cases one non-Ashkenazi BRCA mutation. Here, we have described two families with BRCA testing performed <36 month from the diagnosis. Various clinical with two different mutations, one in and another in . One case risk factors for PFS and OS were assessed by univariate and multivariate Cox includes an Ashkenazi mutation and a non-Ashkenazi mutation while the regression analysis with stepwise model selection process. other case includBeRs CtwA1o non-BARsChAk2enazi mutations. Results: Older age (hazard ratio [HR], 1.032; 95% confidence interval [CI], Method: MLPA and bidirectional Sanger sequencing analysis of the entire 1.010-1.055; P=0.0047), nonoptimal cytoreduction (HR, 3.170; 95% CI, coding region of and were carried out. 1.986-5.060; P=0.0001), and BRCA1/2 wild type (HR, 1.625 [1.003-2.632]; Result: P=0.0486) were significantly associated with shorter PFS in multivariate Family 1. Family with early onset oBfR bCrAe1ast cancer, our patient was dia- Cox regression analysis. Nonoptimal cytoreduction (HR, 2.684; 95% CI, gnosed at the age of 33 and her mother at the age oBfR 3 C6
A. 2In the index case, the 1.264-5.701; P=0.0102) and BRCA1/2 wild type (HR = 1,612 (95% CI 1,16 - c.5266dupC frameshift mutation in (common Ashkenazi mutation) 2,23; P=0.0002) were statistically significant risk factors for shorter OS. The and the c.9097_9098insT frameshift mutation in were detected. overall 5-year survival for the hereditary case patients was better than that Family 2. The proband was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 36 of the nonhereditary patients, however after that time no survival advan- and has a family historyB oRfC Abr1east cancer from the maternal side. Sequen- tage was apparent. cBiRnCgA a2nalysis showed that the patient was heterozygous for the c.3750delG Conclusions: Advanced ovarian cancer patients harboring BRCA1/2 mutati- frameshift mutation in and the c.4447delA frameshift mutation in on treated with debulking surgery and platinum-based adjuvant chemothe- . rapy have a longer PFS and OS not longer than 5-years. Conclusions: These findings highlight that a second mutation could potenti- P S12
.013 ally be missed if a screen is not completed once a mutation is detected. Laying the groundwork for a global solution to the variome: the BRCA P S12
.015 Challenge BRCA1/2 risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy audit J. Burn1, A. Antoniou2, L. Brody3, F. Couch4, J. den Dunnen5, S. Domchek6, D. Easton2, C. J. Compton1, S. J. Rose1, C. Jacobs1, A. Kulkarni1, C. Hammond2, S. Wells1, L. Izatt1; W. Foulkes7, J. Garber8, D. Goldgar9, R. Nussbaum10, K. Offit11, S. Plon12, N. Rahman13, H. 1Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Sheffield Rehm14, M. Robson11, W. Rubinstein15, A. Spurdle16, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet17, S. Tavtigian18, S. Children‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom. Chanock19, Global Alliance for Genomics and Health; 1University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3National Human Genome Research Background: BRCA1/2 carriers have a lifetime risk of ovarian cancer of up Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 5Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 6University of Pennsylvania, to 30-50% and no evidence-based ovarian cancer screening is available. Philadelphia, PA, United States, 7McGill University, Quebec, QC, Canada, 8Dana-Farber Therefore, most women opt for a risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorec- Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United States, 9Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, tomy (RRBSO). Since 2007 the BRCA family service at Guy’s Hospital has UT, United States, 10University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 11Memorial advised gynaecological surgeons to follow a protocol for RRBSO in BRCA1/2 Sloan Kettering Cancer, New York, NY, United States, 12Baylor College of Medicine, carriers as standard practice. This evidence-based protocol, implemented Houston, TX, United States, 13Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom, after an audit in 2006, includes removal of fallopian tubes, serial sectioning, 14Harvard medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 15National Institute of Health, peritoneal washings, and HRT recommendations. Bethesda, MD, United States, 16QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Australia, 17Curie Institute, Paris, France, 18Hunstman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT, Methods: An audit of women who had RRBSO between February 2013 to United States, 19National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD, United States. May 2014 (37 women) was undertaken to measure compliance with this protocol and review the evidence for the protocol. Data was collected from the BRCA family service database and clinical notes were reviewed. Infor- Most people at risk of hereditary cancer remain unrecognized. Cost and mation about post-surgical use of HRT was collected from the patient. complexity of interpreting sequenced data are significant barriers. As tech- Results: 84% (31 women) were between 40 and 59 years at the time of sur- nical advances reduce the cost of sequencing, and new interventions offer gery. Removal of fallopian tubes was evident in 97% (36 women), sectioning real hope of cancer cure and prevention, the problem of variant interpreta- was undertaken in 76% (28 women) and peritoneal washings was docu- tion has become more visible. mented in 51% (19 women). This showed an improvement in compliance The BRCA Challenge calls on clinicians, clinical laboratories and researchers with the protocol compared to the 2006 audit (36%, 16% and 8% respec- across the world to share their knowledge of variation in the BRCA 1 and 2 tively). No pattern was identified between compliance and hospital where sequences. Existing databases; BIC, UMD, LOVD, ClinVar, HGMD are being surgery was performed. linked to ensure a single point of access. The goal is to provide the com- Conclusion: Compliance with recommendations has vastly improved since munity with a reliable record of those variants that can be interpreted as the implementation of the RRBSO protocol. Inconsistencies between and pathogenic for a high penetrance phenotype versus benign. An international within hospitals highlights the need for further discussion with surgeons interpretation community will include the existing ENIGMA project, which in our catchment area. Before disseminating the results widely, literature establishes clinical significance of variants in these genes. Meanwhile, an review and revision of protocol is planned. API suitable for the extraction of all relevant sequence variation is being PM12.016 developed, including co-occurrence data, from genomic datasets to better An Audit of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genetic testing offered to unaffected define non-pathogenic variants across population diversity. individuals as part of the cancer genetics service at Guys Hospital Ultimately the database will facilitate exploration of the clinical significance H. Eshika, A. Kulkarni, C. Compton, J. Campbell, C. Rideout; of variants across pathogenicity, building on and contributing to the work Guys Hospital, London, United Kingdom. of CIMBA (the Consortium of Investigators of Modifiers of BRCA1/2), fo- cused on refining the estimates for penetrance of a subset of variants, as well as ClinGen (Clinical Genome Resource) which provides curated geno- Introduction mic knowledge to improve clinical care. Barriers to be overcome include In keeping with recommendations made by NICE guidelines (2013), the can- concerns around the quality of phenotypic data, the reliability of sequences, cer genetic services at Guys started offering genetic testing to unaffected confidentiality, the standardisation of data collection, and the attribution of individuals who have a combined BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carrier pro- credit to generate, collect the data and curate their collection. bability of 10% or more. Eligibility was determined by confirming ovarian cancers and cancers in first degree relative. In addition families had to have PM12.014 a Manchester score of 17 or over to be eligible. The aim of this audit was to Two new cases of double heterozygosity for BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene review the data on unaffected individuals who underwent BRCA1 and BR- mutations detected during routine diagnostic screening at the SW CA2 testing. Thames Regional Genetics Laboratory Method A. Perez-Caballero, L. Kiely, E. Fidanis, L. Collins, H. Gosrani, R. Norris, S. Cottrell, A. Haworth, J. Short, R. Taylor; We obtained all diagnostic BRCA1 and BRCA2 results between the period of SW Thames Regional Genetics Laboratory, London, United Kingdom. 30/08/2013 and 01/09/2014. These were separated into affected and un- affected individuals. The unaffected individuals were further separated into ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANmDu,t UatiKon |, WVUWS oWr n.oE mSHutaGti.oOn RanGd their Manchester score was calculat2e3d.9ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results (0.68%) and BARD1 (0.54%). From a total of 359 individuals, a total of 29 unaffected individuals were TNBC status alone can be a significant predictive factor for germline mutati- identified. Of these 29, BRCA mutations were identified in 2 (6.9%), VUS ons in predisposition genes, irrespective of family history and early onset of were identified in 7 (24.2%) and 20 (68.9%) were negative for either BRCA1 disease. Even with the application of improved DNA sequencing techniques, or BRCA2. BRCA1 loss-of-function mutations are still the major players in TNBC. Mu- Conclusions tations in additional genes, which are BRCA1 partners in the homologous We concluded that there was a 6.9% pick up rate for mutations which is recombination pathway, also seem to be overrepresented in TNBC patients. lower than the 10% threshold. However, the small sample size may have These observations might be beneficial in terms of developing targeted the- contributed to this. The individuals in whom mutations were identified had rapeutics, such as poly-ADP-ribose polymerase inhibitors. a very high Manchester score (29 and 37 respectively). Interestingly, a very P S12
.019 high number (24.2%) of VUSs were also identified. In light of the findings Identification of a first large deletion of the BRCA1 gene in a Croatian we may need to review our threshold for offering genetic testing to unaf- patient fected individuals based on mutation probability, cost implications and high V. Musani1, I. Susac2, P. Ozretic1, D. Eljuga3, S. Levanat1; variant rate. 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, 2Eljuga Polyclinic, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, 3Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Center, 10000 Zagreb, P S12
.017 Croatia. Analytical validation of a CE marked companion diagnostic tumor test to detect BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in ovarian cancer for clinical use S. Wehnelt1, K. Timms2, K. Copeland3, C. Hayward3, B. Roa4, D. Mancini-DiNardo4, K. Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women after non-melanoma Bowles4, N. Singh4, L. Esterling4, J. Mitchell2, B. Wardell2, B. Morris2, M. Perry2, M. Francis2, skin cancer, and it is the leading cause of cancer related deaths in Croatia. L. Fitzgerald2, J. Lanchbury2, S. Bhatnagar2; Ovarian cancer isB iRnC tAh1e fifth2 place, both in incidence and mortality. About 1Myriad GmbH, Munich, Germany, 2Myriad Genetics, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United 5-10% of all breast and/or ovarian cancer cases are hereditary, and hetero- States, 3Myriad Genetics GmbH, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., zygous germline and mutations are responsible for the majority of Salt Lake City, UT, United States. hereditary breast and/or BoRvCarAi1an cancers. In the mosBtR cCaAse2s, the mutations BRCA1 BRCA2 are small nucleotide alterations leading to premature stop of translation. Large rearrangements of gene and less often, gene have been Background: Somatic and germline mutations in the and ge- described in recent years, but haven‘t been found in Croatia so far. nes may predict outcomes to ovarian cancer therapies such as platinum and Here we describe a case of a Croatian breast cancer patient with no apparent PARP inhiBbRitCoArs1./ T2o identify patients that may benefit from these therapies, family history of cancer, who developed a triple negative breaBstR cCaAn1cer at a companion diagnostic test has been developed to analyze tumor speci- the age of 29, with return of the disease at the age of 33. No mutation was mens for mutations. The aim of this study is to validate the test’s found by HRM or sequencing, but the 5-7 exon deletion of the gene analytical performance. was determined with a Quantitative Multiplex PCR method and confirmed Methods: Genomic DNA isolated from 42 anonymized ovarian tumor samp- with MLPA analysis. les underwent full sequence and large rearrangement analysis using next PM12.020 generation sequencing (NGS). The criteria for calls required 99% of bases Whole cDNA analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in Spanish breast/ to have ≥ 100 reads. The reproducibility of this test was evaluated by se- ovarian cancer families quencing 10 samples in triplicate across 6 batches. All samples underwent G. Montalban1, S. Bonache1, A. Tenés1, E. Carrasco2, N. Gadea3, J. Balmaña3,2, O. Díez4,1, S. analysis by an independent laboratory to verify results. Gutiérrez-Enríquez1; Results: The analytical sensitivity was estimated to be >99.07% (lower 1Oncogenetics Group, Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, 2High bound of 0.95 C.I.), with an analytical specificity >99%. The average read Risk and Cancer Prevention Group, Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology VHIO, Barcelona, depth was approximately 425X per base, with a minimum inclusion cri- Spain, 3Medical Oncology Department, Vall d’Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, terion of 50X per base. All samples that were previously identified by alter- 4Molecular Genetics Unit, Vall d’Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. native methods as positive for deletions/duplications were correctly identi- fied using NGS dosage analysis. This study also showed that the results were 100% concordant with independent laboBraRtCoAr1y /a2nalysis - both finding 319 Introduction: Germline pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are sequence variants - and had 100% intra- and inter-run reproducibility. associated with inherited high-risk of breast (BC) and ovarian cancer (OC). Conclusions: Ovarian tumor testing for mutations including se- The whole coding sequence and the flanking exon-intron junctions are rou- quence and large rearrangement variants using NGS has been validated with tinely screened in genomic DNA. However, in only about 25% of the cases a high sensitivity and specificity for companion diagnostic use. It may be used clear deleterious variant is identified. The disease susceptibility may also for identifying patients with somatic or germline mutations to help guide be associated with alterations in gene expression due to variants located in therapy decisions. splicing and/or transcription regulatory non coding regions, not included in the conventional analysis. To test this hypothesis, we analyze the whole PM12.018 BRCA1/2 cDNA in high-risk Spanish families testing negative for BRCA1/2. A significant proportion of Greek TNBC patients carry rare loss-of- Materials and Methods: Total RNA of 200 probands and 10 control indivi- function mutations in 15 breast cancer predisposing genes A. Vratimos1, I. Konstanta1, F. J. Couch2, S. N. Hart2, I. Konstantopoulou1, G. Fountzilas3, D. duals was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes. PCR overlapping am- Yannoukakos1, F. Fostira1; plicons including the entire cDNA of both genes were generated. Full-length 1NSCR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 3Aristotle transcripts were qualitatively assessed by QIAXCEL and bidirectional Sanger University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. sequencing, allowing the detection of aberrant transcripts and alterations in natural occurring isoforms. Single polymorphisms in coding regions were also identified to confirm biallelic expression. Triple‐negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive breast cancer subtype Results: To date, one out of 60 patients analyzed presents an aberrant tran- which is generally characterized by poor overall survival, mainly attributed script consisting in a partial inclusion of intron 21 in BRCA1. This splicing to inadequate therapeutic targets. Germline BRCA1 mutations have been alteration is yet to be confirmed by capillary electrophoresis of fluorescent strongly associated with TNBC, the prevalence of which can be as high as amplicons. A potential allelic imbalance of BRCA1 expression has been also 29% in populations with strong founder effect. Mutations in other breast detected in another individual. cancer predisposing genes can be associated with TNBC, but the contributi- Conclusions: Although the frequency of splicing and expression alterations on of these genes is still unclear. in high-risk families appears to be low, the analysis of RNA can provide a TNBC patients (n=733; mean age 45.19 years) were recruited solely on their more comprehensive BRCA1/2 diagnostic. TNBC status, between years 1999-2014. Initially, the Greek founder BRCA1 (Financial support: AECC grant, FIS PI12/02585; FIS PI13/01711). mutations were tested; individuals who were wild type at these loci were P S12
.021 then tested by next generation sequencing using a 27-breast cancer gene NGS screening for BRCA1/2 in Portuguese high-risk breast/ovarian panel. cancer families: initial results, advantages and challenges Loss-of-function mutations were identified in 25.3% (186/733) of the indi- P. Machado1, S. Fragoso1, S. Santos1, A. Opinião2, S. Bento2, A. Luis2, A. Clara2, P. viduals tested. BRCA1 mutations were observed in 20.2% (148/733). The Rodrigues2, C. Simões2, J. Parreira2, F. Vaz2; mean age of breast cancer diagnosis was 39.6 years. Another 38 deleterious 1Molecular Biology Department, Portuguese Institute of Oncology of Lisbon, Lisbon, mutations were detected in 14 additional genes. Interestingly, 3.1% of the- s2e4 m0utations cluster in only three genesE, nSaHmGely 2 B0R1 C5
A2 | (G1. L9
%AS), GRAODW51,C S COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Portugal, 2Breast Cancer Risk Evaluation Clinic, Portuguese Institute of Oncology of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. Introduction: BRCA1 BRCA2 Methods: A comprehensive list of female BRCA mutation carriers was obtai- ned from the RM Genetics Unit database. The electronic patient record was and are the genes most frequently involved in interrogated to ascertain decision-making regarding breast surgery. hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC). These genes are very large and Results: 858 carriers were identified: 458 with BRCA1 mutations and 400 the genetic screening based on BSRaCnAge1r/ 2sequencing is laboriPoautsi eanntds taimnde with BRCA2 mutations. Of the 458 BRCA1 carriers, 82 had therapeutic mas- mcoentshuomdisn:g. Last year our Lab acquires a Next GBeRnCeAr1a/ti2o n Sequencing (NGS) tectomy for BC (14 unilateral, 23 bilateral, 45 unilateral with contralateral instrument and we change the screening to NGS. BRCA2 RRM). Of the remainder 124(33%) chose bilateral RRM and 252(67%) had Review of all patients screened for by NGS. AllB pRaCtAie1n/t2s no breast surgery. Of the 400 BRCA2 carriers, 90 had therapeutic mastecto- underwent pre and post-test McoAuSnTsRe-lBliRnCg,A w ere prMe-uslctriepelincoemd )for the my for BC (25 unilateral, 21 bilateral, 44 unilateral with contralateral RRM). Portuguese founder mutatiRone s[uMltasc:hado et al, 2007], analysed for Of the remainder 76(25%) chose bilateral RRM and 234(75%) had no bre- point mutations by NGS with assay ( B aRnCdA f1o/r2 large ast surgery. rearrangements by MLPA. The first stage of NGS implementation Conclusions: Uptake of bilateral RRM in BRCA carriers was slightly higher included the re-analysis of 11 patients previously positive for a mu- for BRCA1 vs BRCA2 mutation carriers (33% vs 25%), but this was not sta- tation and 100% concordance was obtaineBdR CfoAr1 all BmRuCtAat2i,o 1nBsR aCnAd1 v+aBrRiaCnAt2s., tistically significantly different. Rates of contralateral RRM with therapeutic B2BetRwCeAe lna rSgeep tember 2014 and1 CJaHnEuKa2r ya n2d0 145 , 290 patients were screened mastectomy for BRCA mutation carriers with unilateral BC were similar for and 25 positive patients were deteCctoendc (lu8sion: , 9 both genes (~50%). Further work is underway to investigate if RRM uptake rearrangements, founder mutation), which cor- has been constant or is increasing. responds to a 8.6% detection rate. NGS is a valuable methodo- This work was funded by the RM/ICR NIHR BRC. logy with high throughput and quality, allowing a rapid diagnostic result for PM12.024 more appropriate clinical/prophylactic attitudes. In 5 months, 290 high-risk Emerging phenotype of BRCA2 mutations in South African patients families were screened and 25 presented deleterious mutations. As expec- with breast cancer and Fanconi anaemia ted, several neutral or unknown variants were also detected, posing a si- T. Wainstein1, C. Feben2, R. Kerr1, A. Krause2; gnificant challenge for counselling. Depending on pedigree reanalysis and 1Division of Human Genetics, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, multidisciplinary decision, BRCA1/2 negative families will be screened for a South Africa, 2Division of Human Genetics, NHLS/University of the Witwatersrand, selected panel of other relevant genes. Johannesburg, South Africa. PM12.022 BRCA2 Prostate-Specific Antigen velocity as a predictive biomarker in a Introduction: Heterozygous mutations in predispose tBoR HCeAr2e dFitAaNry- prospective prostate cancer screening study of men with genetic CBDre1ast and Ovarian Cancer syndrome (HBOCS). Further, a rare subtype of predisposition Fanconi anaemia (FA) is caused by biallelic mutations in the F(ANCG C. G. Selkirk*1, C. Mikropoulos*2, S. Saya2, E. Bancroft3,2, T. Dadaev2, C. Brendler1, E. Page2, D. A. Leongamornlert2, N. Taylor3, E. J. Saunders2, C. Cieza-Borrela2, .. The IMPACT ) gene. TwoB pRaCraAl2lel studies in South African black patients investigating study collaborators2,3, S. Moss4, Z. Kote-Jarai2, B. T. Helfand**1, R. A. Eeles**2,3; the genetic basis of inherited breast cancer and FA not caused by 1NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, United States, 2The Institute of have identified as bBeRinCgA a1 potenBtRiaClAly2 important gene. Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 3Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Subjects and Methods: 84 young black South African women with breast London, United Kingdom, 4Queen Mary‘s University of London, London, United Kingdom. cancer were screened for and mutations using either Sanger Objectives:BRCA2 or NGS sequencing. In a separate study 5 patiBenRtCsA w2ith FA wBeRrCeA s1c reened for mutations using a NGBSR pCaAn2e l of known DNA breakage associated genes. mutation carriers are more likely to develop prostate Results: In the women with breast cancer, 9 and 4 mutations cancer (PrCa) and aggressive disease. We assessed whether men in the IM- were identBifRieCdA.2 Two mutations observed more than once suggest the PACT study (Identification of Men with a genetic predisposition to ProstAte possibility of founder mutations. There is no family history in 5 of the wo- CMaentcheord: Tsa: rgeted screening in men at higher genetic risk and controls) exhi- mBReCnA w2ith mBuRtaCtAio2n. Two had triple negative tumours. An FA patient bit altered PSA kinetics prior to diagnosis. with multiple birth defects and Wilms tumour had 2 pathogenic truncating We calculated PSA Velocity (PSAV) using validated mBRetChAo1d/s2: mutations. sequeBnRcCeA 2variants (unconfirmed pathogenicity) arithmetic mean(a), linear regression(b) and first and last readings(c) equa- were identified in 2/5 other black patients with clinical diagnoses of FA. tions. Pearson chi-square test was used to compare PSAV between Conclusions: The phenotype of mutations in South African black pa- carriers versus negative controls in those that underwent prostate biopsy tients may be different to that previously described, and needs to be fully (RPeBs)u. lBtsin: ary Logistic Regression was used to compare PSAV between carri- characterised. The paBuRciCtyA 2o f family history in young mutation carriers with ers who were and were not diagnosed with cancer. BR- breast cancer may suggest strong protective environmental effects. Possible CA1 PSAV was available for 191 men who underwent a PB; 57 PrCas overlapping founder mutations may contribute to both young onset were diagnosed. There was no difference in thBe RmCeAd2ian PSAV between breast cancer and severe FA. carriers and non-carriers who were diagnosed with cancer (0.24 vs. P S12
.025 0.37 ng/ml/yr, respectively). In comparisBoRnC, A2 carriers with cancer Exome sequencing to explore temporal and spatial mutational showed a significantly higher PSAV when compared to non-carriers (1.36 evolutionary changes in invasive breast cancer specimens vs. 0.50 ng/ml/yr, respectively, p=<0.05). carriers wiBthR CaA  P2
SAV over S. Mian1, E. Nuglozeh1, M. Fazaludeen1, A. Elmouna1, I. Ashankyty1, M. Aleskandarany2, 0.75ng/ml/yr were 5 times more likely to be diagnosed with PrCa compared M. Diez-Rodriguez2, C. Nolan2, E. Rakha2, I. Ellis2; to non-carriers [95%CI=1.5-14; P value=0.003]. In addition, carriers 1University of Ha‘il, Ha‘il, Saudi Arabia, 2University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United with cancer were 12 times more likely to have high-grade disease (Gleason Kingdom. sCcoonrcel ≥u7si)o pnhse:n otype compared to non-carriers with ca nBcReCrA [295%CI: 1.1-98; p=0.039]. This is the first study to document that carriers have Genetic heterogeneity of breast cancer represents a significant challenge different PSA kinetics compared to non-carriers. This increased PSAV most with respect to disease course and patient clinical management. Understan- likely reflects prior associations with disease susceptibility, aggressive di- ding molecular evolution of tumours both temporally and spatially would sease and PrCa specific mortality. contribute further insight into molecular derangements driving disease pro- P S12
.023 gression. Exploratory analyses have been conducted on exome sequencing Uptake of risk-reducing mastectomy in BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene data of genomic DNA extracts from six invasive breast carcinoma samples re- mutation carriers at The Royal Marsden presenting matched primary tumour and the corresponding axillary lymph K. Kohut1, J. Wiggins1, A. George1,2, Z. Kemp1, N. Rahman1,2, H. Hanson1,2; node metastases. Data was mined regarding concordance and discordance 1Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Division of between primary tumour samples and their respective metastatic variants. Genetics & Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom. Initial findings suggest that 37 candidate indels are common to all three axillary lymph node samplings and yet absent from the three samplings of the primary tumour. Several genes have been identified as having frameshift Background: Women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation may choose surveil- mutations caused by indels that may lead to potential abrogation of protein lance with MRI and mammography or risk-reducing mastectomy (RRM) to function. Of the genes with indel mutations in their coding sequences inclu- manage their breast cancer (BC) risk. The reported uptake of RRM in the UK de molecular players that have been previously linked to anti-angiogenesis. has historically been low, with many women opting for surveillance. Howe- These initial findings provide the framework for detailed molecular analy- ver, demand for RRM anecdotally is said to be increasing. Here we report ses of the molecular evolution of primary breast cancer and their associated ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 241 uptake of RRM at the Royal Marsden (RM) Hospital. metastases.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM12.026 of Turku, Turku, Finland, 5Department of Pathology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki Panel next-generation sequencing reveals a high prevalence of University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Oncology, University of Helsinki deleterious ATM mutations in BRCA1/2-negative breast and ovarian and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. cancer families A. Heimbach1,2, J. Hauke1,2, S. Kröber1,2, J. Altmüller3,4,5, C. Becker3,4,5, H. Thiele3,4,5, P. Nürnberg3,4,5, B. Blümcke1,2, R. Schmutzler1,2, E. Hahnen1,2; BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, CHEK2 1Center for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Center for Integrated Oncology (CIO), Inherited predisposition to breast cancer is known to be caused by loss-of- Medical Faculty, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for Molecular function mutations in , and other genes in- Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Cologne Center volved with DNA repair. However, most families severely affected by breast for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, cancer do not harbor mutations in any of these genes. University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress In Finland, founder mutations have been observed in each of these genes, Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. suggesting that the Finnish population may provide a unique resource for identification of additional breast/ovarian cancer alleles. We studied 24 breast cancer patients from 11 Finnish breast cancer families with exome sequencing and further genotyped selected DNA repair variants in 3166 Approximately 24% of familial breast cancer (BC) and/or ovarian cancer familial and/or unselected breast cancer patients as well as 569 ovarian (BORCC)A c1as2es analyzed within the framework of the German ConBsRoCrAti1u/m2 for cancer patients and 2090 population FcAoNnCtrMols. Of all genotyped variants, Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (GC-HBOC) are due to pathogenic a nonsense mutation (c.5101C>T, rs147021911, p.Gln P1
 701Ter) in Fanco- / mutations. However, the mutation frequencies of non- BRCA1/g2e- ni Anemia complementation gene M ( ) was significantly associated nes associated with familial BC and/or BC/OC are largely unknown. Here, we with breast cancer risk (OR = 1.86, 95% CI = 1.26-2.75, = 0.001 P8
 ). Further present the NGS analysis (TruRisk™ gene panel) of a cohort of 574 - assessment based on tuFmAoNrC pMathology identified a particularly strong effect negative index cases which comprises 256 unselected ApTaMti,e BnAtsR wD1it,h B tRrIipPl1e, in triple-negative breast cancer (OR = 3.56, 95% CI = 1.81-6.98, = 0.0002). nCDegHa1ti, vCeH bErKea2s, tF cAaNnCceMr, (MTNLBH C1
), aMnSdH 321, 8M cSaHs6e,s MfrRom E1
 h1iAg,h N-rBisNk, BPCA LaBn2d, BPCM/O S2
C, These findings identify as a novel breast cancer predisposition gene, fPaTmEiNli,e Rs.A BDy5 0fo, RcuAsDin5g1 Co, nR A2D15 B1CD/, OSMC AaRssCoAc4ia, SteTdK 1g1e,n TePs 5(3 XRC C2
 with a moderate risk of especially tripl e negative breast cancer for mutation carriers. , ), we identi- The study has been supported by theHelsinki University Central Hospital fied 40 different pathogenic variants in 38 unrelated mutation carriers deri- Research Fund, the Academy of Finland, the SigridJuselius Foundation, Nor- ved from 318 high risk BC and BC/OC families (12%). In contrAaTsMt, only 9 mu- dic Cancer Union, and the Finnish Cancer Society. FJC was supported by the (tant=i1o0n, c3a.1rr%ie)rs (3.5%) were discovered among AthTeM unselected TNBC cases. Breast Cancer Research Foundation, and CA116201 NIH SPORE award in Interestingly, we identified a high frequency of pathogenic mutations breast cancer to the Mayo Clinic. CHEK2,PA LinB 2thRe AfaDm50ilial cases wherFeAaNsC nMo S mMuAtRaCtiAo4ns were found in the TNBC cohort. Additionally, we found a high frequency of mutations P S12
.029 in , and confirm and as novel BC/ Associations Between HER2/neu ,TO P2
A ,Chromosome 17 OC predisposing genes. Due to the unexpectedly high mutation frequencies Copy Numbers and TWIST , RARβ2 and ESR1 Gene Promotor in familial cases, our study highlights the importance of these genes to be Hypermethylations of Patients with Breast Cancer included in BC/OC routine diagnostics. O. EROGLU1,2, A. F. NURSA L3
,2, O. CILINGIR2, B. DURAK ARA S2
, M. OZDEMIR2, S. ARTAN2; 1Bilecik Seyh Edebali University, Science and Art Faculty, Molecular Biology and P S12
.027 Genetics Department, Bilecik, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty The Estrogen Receptor -α Gene rs1801132 variation and Breast of Medical Genetics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 3Giresun University, Medical Faculty of Medical Cancer risk in Iran Genetics, Giresun, Turkey. S. Abbasi1, S. Kalbasi2; Introduction: 1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Faculty of Veterinary, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. Breast cancer is an important public health problem world- wide. The HER2 /neu protooncogene is amplified and overexpressed in approximately 25-30% of invasive breast carcinomas. DNA topoisomera- Iranian breast cancer patients are relatively younger than their Western se 2-alpha enzyme controls and alters the topologic states of DNA during counterparts. Evidence suggests that alterations in estrogen signaling pa- transcription. TWIST expression in breast tumors correlate with increased thways, including ESR1( estrogen receptor-α ), occur during breast cancer disease recurrence and poor disease-free survival. Steroid receptor genes development in Caucasians. Epidemiologic studies have revealed that age- fMametihlyo mdembers such as the RARβ2 and ESR1 genes are methylated and si- incidence patterns of breast cancer in Asians differ from those in Caucasi- lenced in a fraction of breast cancer. ans. Genomic data for ESR1in either population is therefore of value in the : In this study we analysed retrospective HER2/neu, TO P2
A gene clinical setting for Iranian breast cancer. and Chromosome17 copy number alterations by fluorescence in situ hybri- A case-control study was conducted to establish a database of ESR1poly- dization (FISH) in primary tumor core biopsies from 100 high-risk prima- morphisms in Iranian women population in order to compare Western and ry breast cancer patients (tumors ≥2 cm and/or lenfatic metastase and/or Asian with Iranian (Asian-Caucasians) distributions and to evaluate ESR1- distant metastases and/or under 40 years) . The methylation levels of the polymorphism as an indicator of clinical outcome. DNA was extracted from RTWesIuSlTt,s R:ARβ2 and ESR1 gene promoters were assessed Methylation Sensi- Iranian women with breast cancer referred to Imam Khomeini Hospital tive High Resolution Melting Analysis (MS-HRM). Complex clinical breast cancer group (150 patients) and in healthy indivi- In our study, HER2/neu amplifications were identified in 25% and duals (147 healthy control individuals). PCR single-strand conformation TO P2
A amplifications in 24% and deletions in 6% of patients. HER2/neu polymorphism technology was performed. and TO P2
A amplifications are found to be associated with IDC tumor type A site of silent single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1801132 was found, and high grade also HER2/neu amplifications is associated with PR(-), TO- The frequency of allele 1 in codon 325 (CCC→CCG) was significantly higher  P2
A amplifications is associated with ER(+). TO P2
A deletions is associated in breast cancer patients (39.6%) than in control individuals (28.9%; P = with ER(-) and PR(-). Polysomy17 was present in 23% and monosomy 12% 0.007). The allele CCG had also significant association with the occurrence oCfo npcaltuiesniotsn. sT:WIST, RARβ2 and ESR1 methylation frequencies were 24%, of lymph node metastasis. 90% and 69% respectively. Data suggest that ESR1polymorphisms in exon 4 codon 325 is correlated . Our study is important as being the first study that analyzes with various aspects of breast cancer in Iran. ESR1 genotype, as determined association between HER2/neu, TO P2
A gene copy numbers and TWIST, during presurgical evaluation, might represent a genetic marker for predic- RARβ2 and ESR1 gene promotor methylation status in Turkish population. ting breast cancer lymph node metastasis. PM12.030 PM12.028 Exome analysis of families with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer Nonsense mutation in FANCM confers risk for triple-negative breast (HBOC) to identify new candidate genes related with breast cancer cancer development J. I. Kiiski1, L. M. Pelttari1, S. Khan1, S. N. Hart2, S. Vilske1, A. Kallioniemi3, J. Schleutker3,4, S. Glentis1, A. S. Dimas1, A. C. Dimopoulos1, K. Rouskas1, I. S. Vlachos2,3, F. Fostira4, I. A. Leminen1, R. Bützow1,5, C. Blomqvist6, F. J. Couch2, K. Aittomäki7, H. Nevanlinna1; Konstantopoulou4, D. Yannoukakos4, J. Ragoussis1; 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki 1Functional Genomics Laboratory, BSRC Alexander Fleming, Athens, Greece, 2Medical University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 2Division of Experimental Pathology, Department School of Athens, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Diana-Lab, BSRC Alexander of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, Fleming, Athens, Greece, 4Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, 3BioMediTech, University of Tampere and Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland, Greece. 4Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine, University 242 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 6Dept. of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 7Lundbeckfonden Center of Excellence NanoCAN, Odense, Denmark. Introduction: Breast cancer (BC) is the most common type of cancer in wo- men worldwide. Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) accounts for ~10% of BC cases, a fraction which stems from the genetic effects of rare Evolution of the breast cancer genome from pre-invasive stages to asyn- alleles. At least 20 genes have been linked to BC susceptibility and a high chronous metastasis is complex and mostly unexplored, but highly deman- fraction of genetic effects remains to be explained. The aim of this project ded as it may provide novel markers for and mechanistic insights in cancer is to identify genetic variants linked to HBOC through exome sequencing in progression. The increasing use of personalized therapy of breast cancer Greek patients that were found to be negative for mutations in known can- necessitates knowledge of the degree of genomic concordance between dif- didate genes. ferent steps of malignant progression as primary tumors often are used as Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing was performed on a total of 50 surrogates of systemic disease. Based on exome sequencing we performed HBOC patients and informative relatives. Exome capture was through the copy number profiling and point mutation detection on successive steps of Ion TargetSeq Exome Capture kit and sequencing was performed on the Ion breast cancer progression from one breast cancer patient, including two dif- Proton platform. An analytical pipeline was compiled adapting the GATK ferent regions of Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS), primary tumor and an software package to IP data. asynchronous metastasis. We identify a remarkable landscape of somatic Results: We detected an average ~55,000 variants per exome. We filtered mutations, retained throughout breast cancer progression and with new our data using criteria based on relatedness of individuals sequenced, BC mutational events emerging at each step. Our data, contrary to the proposed segregation in families, minor allele frequency of variants and in silico model of early dissemination of metastatic cells and parallel progression of functional evaluation. This resulted into collection of shortlisted variants primary tumors and metastases, provide evidence of linear progression of amounting to ~100 per family. breast cancer with relatively late dissemination from the primary tumor. Conclusion: Preliminary results have highlighted candidate variants in The genomic discordance between the different stages of tumor evolution in PRDM2, EM E1
, XRR C1
 and GAB4. Genetic variants have been validated this patient emphasizes the importance of molecular profiling of metastatic through Sanger sequencing. Further functional validation is necessary to tissue directing molecularly targeted therapy at recurrence. confirm the pathogenicity of the candidate variants. This project is funded P S12
.033 by SYNERGASIA 2011 (NSRF 2007-2013, code: SYN11_10_19, NBCA). Screening of HELQ in breast and ovarian cancer families P S12
.031 L. M. Pelttari1, L. Kinnunen1, C. Blomqvist2, K. Aittomäki3, H. Nevanlinna1; Estrogen withdrawal, breast cell transformation, and breast cancer 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University risk in women with the KRAS-variant Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Oncology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki T. P. McVeigh1, S. Jung2, D. Salzman3, M. J. Kerin1, S. Nallur3, M. Dookwah3, A. A. Nemec3, University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, University of J. Sadofsky3, T. Paranjape3, O. Kelly3, E. Chan3, N. Miller1, K. J. Sweeney1, D. Zelterman3, J. Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Sweasy3, R. Pilarski4, D. Telesca2, J. B. Weidhaas2; 1National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland, 2University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 3Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States, Several risk-alleles have been identified for breast and ovarian cancer pre- 4Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, James Cancer Hospital, Columbus, OH, disposition and most of them encode proteins that function in DNA repair. In United States. the Finnish population, recurrent founder mutations have been observed in most of the susceptibility genes whereas in out-bred populations each gene may harbor rare unique mutations. A prospective candidate for breast and Background: ovarian cancer susceptibility is the HELQ helicase that has a role in the reso- The polymorphism rs61764370 is a functional variant in the let7a-binding lution of DNA interstrand cross-links. HELQ interacts with the RAD51 para- site of KRAS that is associated with increased cancer risk, particularly breast log complex BCDX2. Two components of the complex, RAD51C and RADH5 E1
LDQ, and ovarian. This risk may be modified by menopausal status and HRT use. increase the risk of ovarian cancer, while the other two, RAD51B and XRC C2
 Aim: have been associated HwEitLhQ breast cancer risk. To investigate the role of To evaluate the effect of estrogen exposure and withdrawal on development in cancer predisposition and to identify putative recurrent founder mutati- of breast cancer in patients with the KRAS-variant (vKRAS). ons, we screened the gene for germline variation in 182 Finnish fami- Methods: lial breast or ovarian cancer patients. To study the role of common variation Isogenic mammary (MCF10A) cell lines with and without vKRAS were in the gene, we performed haplotype analyses for 1517 breast and 308 ova- cultured and observed for oncogenic transformation in charcoal-stripped rian cancer cases and 1234 population controls. No deleterious mutations media following oestrogen withdrawal and restoration. Cells with and wi- were identified amonHgE LthQe patients and the haplotype distribution did not thout vKRAS were examined for epithelial-mesenchymal transition(EMT) differ between breast or ovarian cancer cases and population controls. Our by western blot, immunoflourescence, and relative quantification of EMT- results indicate that is not a major breast and ovarian cancer suscep- associated miRNAs. The effect of the vKRAS on disease phenotype was in- tibility gene in the Finnish population. However, we cannot rule out rare vestigated in a cohort of patients with breast cancer, comparing variant and risk-variants in the Finnish or other populations. wild-type genotype carriers. A case-control analysis was also performed This study was supported by the Helsinki University Hospital Research using a control group of unaffected vKRAS carriers. Data was collected with Fund, the Academy of Finland, the Sigrid Juselius Foundation, and the Fin- respect to pathological characteristics, reproductive risk factors and anthro- nish Cancer Society. pomorphic measurements. PM12.034 Results: Clinical Characteristics of Breast Cancer in Women with a PALB2 Isogenic cell lines with vKRAS showed evidence of EMT, with relative over- Mutation expression of vimentin and fibronectin. Acute estrogen withdrawal by addi- C. Cybulski1, W. Kluzniak1, T. Huzarski1, D. Wokolorczyk1, A. Kashap1, A. Jakubowska1, tion of tamoxifen to charcoal-stripped media led to 7.9-fold increase in on- M. Szwiec2, T. Debniak1, B. Gorski1, V. Sopik3, M. Akbari3, P. Sun3, J. Gronwald1, S. Narod3, J. cogenic transformation, with reduction in colony formation after restitution Lubinski1; of oestrogen. Affected vKRAS carriers were significantly more likely to have 1Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Regional Oncology Center, Opole, oophorectomy pre-diagnosis than wild-type patients(p=0.033). Affected Poland, 3Womens College Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada. vKRAS carriers with breast cancer had lower BMI(p<0.01) than vKRAS un- affected controls. HRT-discontinuation in vKRAS carriers was significantly associated with post-menopausal triple negative breast cancer. PURPOSE: To estimate the lifetime risk of breast cancer in Polish women Conclusions: Estrogen withdrawal and a low estrogen state appear to in- who carry a founder mutation in the PALB2 gene and to establish the clinical crease breast cancer and predict aggressive tumor biology in women with characteristics of breast cancers in patients with a PALB2 mutation. variant KRAS. PATIENTS AND METHODS: 12,529 breast cancer patients from Poland and PM12.032 4,702 controls were genotyped for two deleterious mutations in PALB2 Clonal expansion and linear genome evolution through breast cancer (c.509_510delGA and c.172_175delTTGT). Among breast cancer patients, progression from pre-invasive stages to asynchronous metastasis the ten-year survival of carriers of a PALB2 mutation was calculated and A. B. Krøigård1,2, M. J. Larsen1,2, A. Lænkholm3, A. S. Knoop4, J. D. Jensen5, M. Bak6, J. compared with that of non-carriers. Mollenhauer7, T. A. Kruse1, M. Thomassen1; RESULTS: A truncating PALB2 mutation was found in 116 breast cancer pa- 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 2Human tients (0.93%) and in 10 controls (0.21%; OR = 4.39; 95% CI = 2.3 to 8.4; p Genetics, Institute of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, < 0.0001). The ten-year survival of women with breast cancer and a PALB2 Denmark, 3Department of Pathology, Slagelse Hospital, Slagelse, Denmark, 4Dept. of mutation was 49%, compared to 76% for women without a mutation (HR Oncology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Dept. of Oncology, Odense University for death = 2.14; 95% CI = 1.55 to 2.95; p < 0.0001). Among the 2,065 pati- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAN eD nt, s U wK ho | dW iedW , 3W 8 w.E oS mH enG (. 1O .8R %G ) carried a PALB2 mutation. 243ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S12
.037 Tumor microRNA expression profiling identifies circulating CONCLUSION: Women with a PALB2 mutation face increased risks of bre- microRNAs for earlier breast cancer detection ast cancer and of death from breast cancer. Given the high incidence and N. Matamala1, M. Vargas2, R. González-Cámpora2, R. Miñambres3, D. Diego Álvarez3, case-fatality associated with mutations in this gene, preventive mastectomy J. Arias4, P. Menéndez4, E. Andrés-León1, G. Gómez-López5, K. Yanowsky1, J. Calvete- should be discussed with unaffected women who are found to carry a PALB2 Candenas2, L. Inglada-Pérez1, B. Martínez-Delgado6, J. Benítez1; mutation. 1CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Virgen de la Macarena, Sevilla, Spain, 3Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna (Valencia), Spain, 4Hospital Monte Naranco, Oviedo, Spain, 5CNIO, Acknowledgements: The study was funded by the Polish National Science MAdrid, Spain, 6ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. Centre on the basis of the decision number DEC-2011/03/N/NZ2/01510. P S12
.035 Genetic predisposition to bilateral breast cancer: bioinformatics Background: The identification of novel biomarkers for early detection of challenges in whole exome sequencing data analysis breast cancer would be a great advance. Due to their role in tumorigenesis A. Larionov1, J. Redman1, P. Concannon2, D. Thomas3, D. Duggan4, J. Bernstein5, WECARE and stability in body fluids, microRNAs (miRNAs) are emerging as a promi- Investigators, D. Conti3, M. Tischkowitz1; sing diagnostic tool. The aim of this study was to identify miRNAs deregu- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Genetics Institute and Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, lated in breast tumors and evaluate the potential of circulating miRNAs in University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States, 3Division of Biostatistics, Department breast cancer detection. of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United Methods: MiRNA expression profiling of 1919 human miRNAs was conduc- States, 4Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGEN), Phoenix, AZ, United States, ted in paraffined tissue from 122 breast tumors and 11 normal breast tis- 5Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer sues. Differential expression analysis was performed generating a microar- Center, New York, NY, United States. ray classifier. The most relevant miRNAs were analyzed in plasma from 26 healthy individuals and 83 breast cancer patients (36 pretreated and 47 postreated), and validated in 116 healthy individuals and 114 pretreated Contralateral breast cancer (CBC) is strongly associated with a heritable pre- patients. disposition. The Women‘s Environmental Cancer and Radiation Epidemiolo- Results: We identified a large number of miRNAs deregulated in breast can- gy (WECARE) Study investigates susceptibility genes for CBC in women who cer and generated a 25-miRNA microarray classifier that discriminates bre- received radiation treatment for the primary tumour. Whole exome sequen- ast tumors with high sensitivity and specificity. Ten miRNAs were selected cing (WES) wBaRs CpAe1rf, oBrRmCeAd2 in DNPAA sLaBm2ples extracted from the blood of 256 for further investigation in plasma and 4 of them (miR-505-5p, miR-125b- women with unilateral BC and 256 closely matched women with CBC who 5p, miR-21-5p and miR-96-5p) were found to be significantly overexpressed did not have and mutations based on previous scree- in pretreated breast cancer patients when compared with healthy individu- ning. Matching was prioritised by radiation exposure, age at onset, latent pe- als in two different series of plasma. MiR-505-5p and miR-96-5p were the riod between diagnoses and family history of breast cancer. Libraries were most valuable biomarkers (AUC=0.72). Moreover, the levels of miR-3656, prepared using Illumina Nextera Rapid Capture Exome kits. Sequencing was miR-505-5p and miR-21-5p decreased in a group of treated patients. performed on Illumina HighSeq2500 machines to ~50x depth. Initial fin- Conclusions: MiRNAs can discriminate breast tumors in peripheral blood. dings will be presented and challenges in data analysis discussed. The focus The identification of deregulated miRNAs in plasma of breast cancer pa- will be on quality control during data acquisition and current bioinformatics tients supports the use of circulating miRNAs as a novel method for early and statistical approaches that can be employed to detect genetic alterations breast cancer detection. associated with CBC. The quality control analysis found that longer reads PM12.038 may reduce efficiency of sequencing when used with Nextera library pre- Not HOXB13 p.G84E, but p.R217C appears to be associated with paration kits because of the overlap in reads. Regarding the main analysis increased breast cancer risk in the Dutch population pipeline we will discuss (i) concordance assessment with previously obtai- J. Liu1, W. J. C. Prager-van der Smissen1, M. K. Schmidt2, M. Collée3, S. Cornelissen2, R. ned GWAS data (ii) performance and limitations of available tools for detec- Lamping3, A. Nieuwlaat3, J. A. Foekens1, M. J. Hooning1, S. Verhoef4, A. W. M. Van den ting structural variations and (iii) tools and resources required for adopting Ouweland3, F. B. L. Hogervorst4, J. W. M. Martens1,5, A. Hollestelle1; GRCh38 assembly in WES data analysis. Finally, we will compare statistical 1Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, models that can be employed to detect single-genes as well as multi-gene Netherlands, 2Division of Molecular Pathology, Netherlands Cancer Insitute, Amsterdam, patterns associated with unilateral BC versus CBC in the WECARE study. Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Division of Diagnostic Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, PM12.036 Netherlands, 5Cancer Genomics Netherlands, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Clinical utility of a breast cancer gene panel to improve clinical management of familial breast/ovarian cancer families K. Reay1, N. Forrester2, S. Clokie1, K. R. Ong3, J. Bell1, D. G. Evans4, Y. Wallis1; HOXB13 HOXB13 plays an importantH rOoXleB i1n3 breast tumorigenesis as high expression 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3West Midlands Clinical Genetics Service, of predicts poor outcome and adverseH rOeXsBp1o3nse to endocrine thera- Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, py. At the genetic level, the p.G84E mutation confers a four to five- United Kingdom. fold increased prostate cancer risk and thus p.G84E might also be associated with increased breast cancer risk. PHreOvXioBu1s3 studies investigating this association, howeveBrR, CreAp1o&r2ted conflicting results. Therefore, we now Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 breast cancer susceptibility have comprehensively interrogated the entire coding sequence for genes account for up to 20% of inherited breast cancer cases. This leaves mutations in 12 50 non- familial breast cancer cases and 800 con- a sizable fraction of familial cases where the heritability link remains uni- trols. In total, seven missense mutations were identified of which five were dentified meaning affected families may not receive appropriate clinical seen only once.The p.G84E mutation, however, was identified in 4 (0.33%) management including predictive testing for at-risk family members. In re- of 1215 cases and 6 (0.79%) of 759 controls. Another recurrent mutation, cent years a number of other breast cancer susceptibility genes have been p.R217C, was found in 6 (0.50%) of 1206 cases and 1 (0.13%) of 765 con- identified. Although they may be individually less prevalent, together they trols. Because both mutations were predictBeRdC tAo1 b&e2 damaging, we further promise to account for a significant proportion of familial cases. An exten- evaluated their association with breast cancer risk by expanding our case- ded breast cancer gene next generation sequencing strategy has therefore control study to include a total of 4520 non- familial breast cancer been developed to determine the role these genes play within the clinical cases and 3127 conPtrols. Custom HgeOnXoBt1y3ping revealed that p.G84E was pre- diagnostic setting. A large cohort of families previously found not to have sent in 22 (0.50%) of 4415 cases and 22 (0.71%) of 3089 controls (OR=0.70, a pathogenic BRCA1/2 gene mutation were screened for mutations in an 95% CI=0.39-1.26, =0.23). TheP P p.R217C mutation, however, was additional 10 genes (ATM, BRI P1
, CDH1, CHEK2, PALB2, PTEN, RAD51C, HidOeXnBti1fi3ed in 16 (0.36%) of 4444 cases and 3 (0.10%) of 3077 controls RAD51C, STK11, and T P53
) enriched using the Illumina TruSight Cancer Pa- (OR=3.70, 95H%OX CBI1=31.08-12.72, =0.033, adj=0.066). Our results show that nel. Sequencing data was processed using an in-house bioinformatics pipe- p.R217C rather than p.G84E appears to be associated with breast line optimised for sensitive indel detection. To date this new strategy has cancer risk. p.R217C is thus a putative novel moderate-risk breast been used to screen 121 patients. Twelve patients (10%) were identified cancer susceptibility allele. as having a class 4/5 pathogenic mutation in ATM, CHEK2, PALB2, RAD51D P S12
.039 and T P53
 according to criteria recommended by the ACGS Evaluation of Pa- Identification Of Rare And Novel Alleles In Ffpe Tumor Samples Using thogenicity Best Practice Guidelines, including confirmation by RNA analy- Laser Capture Microdissection (Lcm) And Ampliseq™ Sequencing sis. Given the limited penetrance of some of these genes segregation studies Technologies are offered to further support pathogenicity within individual families. This S. Jackson1, P. Choppa2, K. Kuar2, K. Schmidt1, K. Varma1; s 2tu 4d 4y is already indicating that this approEacShH wGill i2m0p1ro5v e| tGheL mAaSnGagOemWen, tS COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG of breast cancer families.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Thermo Fisher Scientific, West Sacramento, CA, United States. Materials and Methods: We designed a cancer panel using an augmented target enrichment strategy optimized for even coverage across the entire Tumors are becoming recognized as genetically heterogeneous masses of span of gene content to detect small variants, CNAs, and gene fusions. The cells with different clonal histories. Identifying the mutations present in the- panel includes over 1,500 cancer genes and micro-RNAs. Very high depth se heterogeneous masses can lead to important insights into the future be- (>500x) sequencing detects low representation alleles. We tested the panel havior of the tumor and possible intervention mechanisms. However, the ra- and pipeline using over 30 different cancer samples including cancer cell rity of pathogenic mutations in small subsets of cells can make identification lines, engineered cells containing specific cancer mutations, and primary of such alleles difficult. In this study, we demonstrate a complete workflow tumors in FFPE. that facilitates the identification of rare and novel alleles from FFPE tumor Results: We demonstrate that this cancer gene panel and analysis strategy is sections. We collected small regions with different cellular morphologies able to detect mutations of each major type with high sensitivity and positi- from lung tumor samples using laser capture microdissection, extracted ve predictEivMe Lv4a-lAuLeK. We saBwC Rg-rAeBaLte1r than 99% sensitivity for small variants both DNA and RNA from these regions, and characterized mutations pre- down to 5% allele frequency. We also detected known gene fusion events sent and transcript abundances by using Ampliseq™ targeted sequencing. including and accuratelyE iGnF aRll 20 cancer samEpGleFsR with We show that LCM facilitates the detection of alleles that are not detectab- kPnToEwNn fusions.p M16o reover, the assay was able to identify CNAs consistent le in macrodissected tissue scrapes. We also show that different regions of with the known state, including detection of amplification, vIII, a tumor have very different patterns of alleles detectable and have a great loss, and loss in known cases. deal of genetic diversity. Finally, we show that RNA expression patterns are Conclusions: The high depth, augmented cancer gene panel assay is able to also clearly different in the different regions. Interestingly, dissected regions comprehensively identify cancer mutations with high accuracy. with similar gross tissue morphologies display differences in alleles present PM12.042 and RNA expression patterns. These results suggest the best way to analyze Exome sequencing and molecular heterogeneity in a cohort of mutations present in a tumor is to microdissect different subregions of the Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma tumor, and using Ampliseq™ panels to identify the alleles present in those S. Mian1, E. Nuglozeh1, A. Elmouna1, M. Fazaluldeen1, I. Ashankyty1, N. Moti2, T. Malcolm2, subregions. C. Fairbairn2, S. Turner2; 1University of Ha‘il, Ha‘il, Saudi Arabia, 2University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United PM12.040 Kingdom. Case-control genetic association study of urothelial bladder carcinoma among Pakistani population S. H. Ali1,2, K. S. Bangash3, A. Rauf4, M. Younis5, K. Anwar3, M. A. Khawaja6, S. Akhter6, M. Azam2, L. A. Kiemeney7, R. Qamar2; Exome sequencing has been conducted on a panel of frozen paediatric Ana- 1Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan, 2COMSATS Institute of Information plastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL) tissue samples. Exome sequencing was Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, 3Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission General conducted using an Illumina MiSeq. Variants (indels/SNPs) were identified Hospital, Islamabad, Pakistan, 4Nishtar Medical College & Hospital, Multan, Pakistan, using the GATK (Genome Analysis Tool Kit) pipeline using the hg19 refe- 5King Edward Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan, 6Department of Urology, Shifa rence genome. A molecular characterisation has been undertaken to assess International Hospital, Islamabad, Pakistan, 7Department for Health Evidence and inter-patient molecular tumour homogeneity/heterogeneity and data is Department of Urology, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. presented on these initial findings. One patient had tissue samples derived from a primary, and two relapse cases. SNPs and indels were detected that were concordant between all three samplings. Analysis of temporal changes A case-control genetic association study on Pakistani urothelial bladder between the primary tumour and second recurrence also identified SNPs carcinoma (UBC) patients (N = 200) and controls (N = 200) was conduc- and indels that were restricted only to the secondary recurrence. In-silico ted. VNTR polymorphism of eNOS; Alu repeat variation of ACE; null poly- tools were utilised to examine potential effects upon protein function in- morphisms of GSTT1 and GSTM1 and selected common variants of GST P1
, cluding frameshift mutations caused by indel. Several genes were identified MTHFR, PSCA, TNFα, p21, p53, CY P1
B1, XPD, XRC C1
, CAV1, PON1, IGFB P3
, including RBM33, SEMA5B and ZNF155 that had high impact changes to VEGFA, LEP, LEPR, PPARγ genes as well as 8q24.21 locus (rs9642880 and their genetic sequence with potential downstream consequences to protein rs6983267) were analyzed for an overall risk assessment and with respect structure and function. These studies provide the framework for a detailed to smoking status, tumor grade and stage. molecular analyses of exonic dynamics and molecular evolution of ALCL tu- Variants of GSTM1, LEPR, ACE, PSCA, rs9642880 and rs6983267 were found mours. to be associated with higher risk while IGFB P3
 variant and haplotypes of P S12
.043 CAV1 and MTHFR with reduced risk of UBC in the overall comparison. Personalized cancer mutation panel by next generation sequencing CY P1
B1, p21, ACE and rs9642880 conferred a high risk to smokers while for cancer prediction LEPR and PSCA variants to non-smokers. In contrast, IGFB P3
 variant and H. Chia-Cheng1,2,3, S. Yi-Ning1,2,4, L. Tzu-Hung5; CAV1 haplotypes conferred protection to non-smokers. 1Phoebus Genetics Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, 2Sofiva Genomics, Co., Ctd., Taipei, Taiwan, GSTM1, LEPR and rs9642880 were found to be associated with enhanced 3Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, National Taiwan University risk of low grade and non-invasive UBC; while GSTT1, CAV1, PSCA and College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of PPARγ with an elevated risk of high grade and invasive UBC. IGFB P3
 variant Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Dianthus Maternal Fetal Medicine protected against low and high grade tumors and non-invasive disease. Dif- Clinic, Taipei, Taiwan. ferent haplotypes of MTHFR were found to confer a high risk of non-invasive tumor while providing protection against invasive. In brief, genetic associations to UBC susceptibility, few being novel, were Objective: observed in the present study, which to the best of author’s knowledge, is Next-generation sequencing (NGS) allows for high-throughput sequencing the first attempt to reveal genetic epidemiology of UBC exclusively among analysis of numerous regions of the human genome. We explored the use Pakistani population. of targeted mutation detection by NGS for simultaneous genetic testing for Grant reference: Pakistan Academy of Sciences multiple caner genes. P S12
.041 Methods: We used a personalized cancer mutation panel to target more than Case studies demonstrating that use of a large, augmented panel 2,800 mutations in the 50 key cancer genes. NGS was performed to jointly to sequence cancer genes to high depth enables clinically-relevant sequence captured DNA individually for 2 healthy cases. variant identification Results: Using targeted mutations sequencing, we achieved an average se- M. J. Clark, R. McClory, S. Boyle, E. Helman, J. Beck, G. Chandratillake, S. Garcia, D. quence depth of ~1000× per base. We analyzed DNA from 2 unrelated in- Church, R. Chen, J. West; dividuals and identified a heterozygous c.1151T>A (p.V384D) mutation of Personalis, Menlo Park, CA, United States. the MLH1 gene in case 1, which is highly associated with pancreatic cancer; a heterozygous mutation c.2472C>T (p.V824V) of the PDGFRA gene was de- tected in case 2, which is highly associated with endometrium cancer. Introduction: Genetic lesions in cancer can determine prognosis and have Conclusion: The personalized cancer targeted mutation detection NGS pa- diagnostic value. Next-generation sequencing facilitates the detection of a nel allows simultaneous testing for multiple genes with high accuracy. Using wide array of somatic mutations, copy number alterations (CNAs), and gene this approach can fast identification of mutations in key cancer genes and fusions in a single assay. With increased sequencing depth, mutations pre- can provide important individual information of tumor development and sent in only a fraction of the neoplastic tissue can be identified. Detection of cancer prediction. these mutations after sequencing DNA and RNA involves a complex set of variant detection algorithms tailoErSedH sGpe c2if0ic1al5ly |f oGr LcaAncSeGr aOnWaly,s iSs.COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 245ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM12.044 From national guideline recommendations to familial cancer risk assessment decision support in primary care: UK experience family members. Identifying a new family mutation in tissue-derived DNA W. Chorley, B. Dutton, C. Brindley, L. Robles, N. Qureshi; from deceased is technically challenging for various reasons, and because University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom. of that, this diagnostic approach has not been offered on a regular basis by diagnostic departments or companies. Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from 9x15 µm FFPE tissueC DseHc1- Introduction: The English national guidelines on managing women with a tions per sample, and DNA integrity was estimated. DNA samples were sub- family history of breast cancer provides criteria for specialist care referral jected to HaloPlex Target Enrichment using a custom design including and for patients that can be followed-up in primary care. Also there is a ca- (Agilent Technologies). After enrichment, HaloPlex libraries were diluted, tegory, with unclear family histories, where the guidelines recommend that pooled, denatured and 10 pM libraCrDyH p1ool was subjected to paired-end patients are not referred directly but discussed with specialists. We have (2x150 bp), single index (8 bp) DNA sequencing on a MiSeq (Illumina). explored the nature of family histories that fall into this category and how to Results: We identified a pathogenic mutation in three different fami- integrate this information into primary care decision support software. The lies with one or more deceased family members with suspected HDGC. In all guidelines also recommend genetic testing, hence referral, when probability three cases, the mutation was identified in DNA extracted from FFPE tissue of BRCA1/BRCA2 is greater than 10%. from a deceased. Materials and Methods: In our exploratory trial all women aged 30 to 60 in Conclusions: The possibility of identifying pathogenic mutations in deceased four General Practices, in Central England, were invited to complete a family family members is a new and important tool in the process of determining history questionnaire. The family histories were assessed against national or evaluating the risk of certain cancers of family members who receive ge- guidelines and Manchester Scoring System. netic counseling. Results: Currently, 13.1% (126) of 963 women completing the question- P S12
.047 naire were recommended by guidelines to discuss with familial cancer spe- A multiplexed amplicon sequencing technology for FFPE and cialist. Of these 126 participants, 9.5% (12) of pedigrees had greater than circulating cell-free DNA 10% probability of BRCA1/BRA C2
, based on Manchester Scoring System. L. Kurihara, C. Couture, J. Laliberte, S. Sandhu, J. Irish, T. Harkins, V. Makarov; Further, the specialist identified that the guideline’s referral criteria had not Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. fully taken account of familial risk of related cancers and age of onset in relatives. Conclusion: To operationalise national guidelines and implement decision Detection of somatic mutations is challenging since percent tumor content support software in primary care, uncertain family histories need to be re- in clinical samples is variable and is compounded by tumor heterogeneity. duced. This could be achieved by combining national guidelines with con- Additionally, circulating cfDNA and FFPE samples are limited in quantity, sensus opinion of specialists and key attributes of evidence-based referral and FFPE samples can be damaged. To address these challenges, we deve- tools, such as Manchester Scoring Systems. loped a single tube, multiplexed amplicon sequencing method that employs Funded by NIHR-SPCR IR7-13138 hundreds of primer pairs for amplification of target loci, producing ready- P S12
.045 to-run libraries for Illumina sequencing. The two-step method- multiplexed Intratumoral Genetic Heterogeneity in Clear Cell Renal Cell PCR followed by a 10 minute adapter ligation- results in amplicons that are Carcinoma 120-160 bp in length, enabling amplification and variant calling from cfD- K. Kok1, P. Ferronika1, G. Kats-Ugurlu1, J. Bergsma1, J. Li1, M. M. Terpstra1, D. Danarto2, A. NA-sized DNA fragments or damaged FFPE DNA. An oncology panel was de- Moeljono2, T. Utoro2, R. H. Sijmons1; veloped to target known, clinically relevant mutations in 56 genes. The pa- 1UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Gadjah Mada University, Yogyakarta, Indonesia. nel design encompasses single exons (e.g. BRAF) and comprehensive coding exon coverage of entire genes (e.g. T P53
), depending on the allele distribu- tion across each gene. To validate this panel, a cohort of control and clinical samples with pre-validated genotypes was tested using 10ng of input DNA. Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC) is well known for the heterogeneity Variant calling was performed using GATK and LoFreq. Robust detection of of its clinical, histologic, and genetic profiles. We optimized the preparation 5% mutant frequency was observed, and the limit of detection was as low as of DNA samples from paraffin material to identify the genetic profile of dif- 1% mutant frequency. The percent on-target bases and coverage uniformity ferent tumour areas of one case of ccRCC. DNA was isolated from paraffin were both >95%, where uniformity is defined as the percent bases covered sections of four tumour areas and normal kidney cortex. The morphologi- at >20% of the mean coverage. These results indicate that this multiplexed cal variety among different areas of the tumour has been documented. We amplicon panel is an excellent tool to assess multiple oncogenes in limiting performed pre-analytical RT-PCR to measure the quality of amplifiable DNA clinical samples, enabling high throughput, cost effective NGS analysis. input. Aliquotes of 100 ng of DNA were subjected to whole exome sequen- PM12.048 cing (Agilent SureSelect All exon V2®, Illumina HISEQ 2500®) and targeted A circulating cell free DNA targeted sequencing workflow - from exome sequencing (NugenOvation® Target Enrichment System) as an alter- isolation through validation native approach to obtain reliable sequence data from FFPE material. Based D. Dhingra, X. Fang, M. Carter, D. Brinza, C. Scafe, F. Hyland, K. Bramlett; on published data a minimum Quantitative Functional Index (QFI) of 6-7% Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States. from RT-PCR is needed to achieve 90% confirmed variants on sequencing data. The QFI of our FFPE DNA samples showed values of 8.9-12.6%, indica- ting that the quality of our DNA samples was acceptable for further analysis. Circulating cell free DNA has been shown to have the potential as a non- The quality control report of sequencing data showed a 20x coverage of 68- invasive substrate for the detection of cancer and its progression as well 86%. Preliminary analyses of the sequence data identified 151 somatic mu- as the determination of therapeutic resistance. As circulating tumor DNA is tations, including 3 indels. In these preliminary data we see a unique genetic often present at low frequencies within circulating cell free DNA, targeted profile shared by areas which have similar tumour histological grade. The sequencing is an optimal tool for mutation detection. Here, we demonstrate observed mutational heterogeneity present among different areas of ccRCC a complete workflow from isolation through validation of circulating tumor may be important in cancer development. DNA. PM12.046 We have optimized an easily automatable protocol using magnetic beads to Identification of pathogenic CDH1 mutations in three families in isolate circulating cell free DNA. It is also scalable for any input volume and DNA extracted from FFPE tissue from deceased family members with can elute in volumes down to 15 µL resulting in no loss of low frequency suspected hereditary diffuse gastric cancer alleles. We demonstrate comparable performance between this bead based T. D. Jensen, A. H. Petersen, A. Bojesen; isolation and column based isolation. Department of Clinical Genetics, Sygehus Lillebaelt, Vejle, Denmark. We then completed molecular characterization of the isolated circulating cell free DNA using the multiplexing capabilities of AmpliSeq™ and the Ion CDH1 Torrent™ platform for targeted sequencing of 50 genes of interest. We de- Introduction: Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a cancer suscep- monstrate good reproducibility of amplicon representation as well as allelic tibility syndrome caused by pathogenic mutations in . HDGC is inheri- frequencies. We have determined the limit of detection of hotspots circula- ted in an autosomal dominant manner and mainly characterized by a high ting cell free DNA on the Ion Torrent™ platform to be below 1%. We further cumulative risk of developing diffuse gastric cancer (approximately 80% for demonstrate proof of principle of this workflow on circulating cell free DNA both sexes) and lobular breast cancer (approximately 50% for women). As and matched FFPE samples complete with TaqMan® validation. with other hereditary cancer syndromes, the task of identifying the disease- Our results validate the accuracy and ease of our workflow. This protocol, c2a4us6ing mutation in a family has often beeEnS dHifGfic u2lt0 w1i5th o| uGt LafAfeSctGedO liWvin,g S COfroTmL AisNolaDti,o Un tKhr |o WughW taWrg.eEteSdH seGq.uOenRciGng and validation, will not only re-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S12
.051 Loss Of The Y Chromosome In Myelodysplastic Syndromes sult in a simple sample preparation for circulating cell free DNA but also D. Costa, M. Nomdedeu, X. Calvo, C. Muñoz, A. Carrió, A. Arias, C. Gómez, E. Campo, B. facilitate rapid mutation detection to advance cancer research. Nomdedeu; Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. P S12
.049 Comprehensive genomic characterization of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma T. Heß1,2, D. Bertrand3, C. Chan4, J. Becker1,2, A. Hofmann1,2, I. Gockel5, I. Hornstein6, M. M. Introduction: The clinical association between loss of the Y chromosome Nöthen1,2, A. M. Hillmer4, J. Schumacher1; and MDS has been debated, because both phenomena are related to aging. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of The objective of this study was to asses if the the mean age is related to the Genomics, Life&Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Computational loss of the Y chromosome. and Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 4Cancer Material and Methods. From 1986 to July of 2014, 875 patients were dia- Therapeutics and Stratified Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, gnosed of Myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS) in the Hospital Clinic of Barce- Singapore, 5Department of Visceral; Transplantation; Vascular and Thoracic Surgery, lona and 275 (55%) were male. ANOVA was used for age comparison bet- University Hospital of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 6Department of General; Visceral and Transplant Surgery, University Hospital of Mainz, Mainz, Germany. ween groups. Results. Twenty-six (6%) patients showed a loss of the Y chromosome, in most of them as a sole abnormality. According to the WHO classification Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is a cancer arising from the epithe- about half of these 28 patients were affected of refractory cytopenia with lium of the biliary tracts located within the liver. ICC represents the second multilineage dysplasia (RCMD) (n=16). The mean age in patients with loss most common primary liver malignancy with significant rise in incidence of the Y chromosome was 77 years old (95%CI: 74 to 80), significantly hig- over the past three decades. The molecular mechanisms underlying ICC her than that observed in patients with either a normal karyotype (71 y.o.; tumorigenesis are not well understood, although recently the first whole- 95%CI: 70 to 73) or with an abnormal karyotype without loss of the Y chro- exome sequencing (WES) studies have been performed on tumor samples mosome (61 y.o.; 95%CI: 65 to 70). derived from patients with Asian descent. Conclusion. Based on our results, the loss of the Y chromosome is observed In order to identify common genomic alterations driving ICC development, more frequently in a group of elder MDS patients. we conducted the largest WES study on patients of Central European origin. PM12.052 We collected tumor and matching control tissue samples from 38 ICC-pati- Potential new player in prostate cancer susceptibility and survival in ents and performed WES as well as microarray genotype and gene expressi- Finland on analyses. The data were used to obtain genomic profiles comprising so- C. Sipeky, E. Kaikkonen, J. Schleutker, The PRACTICAL/ ELLIPSE consortium; matic mutations, copy number aberrations and gene expression patterns. Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. In line with previous studies, somatic mutations affecting tumor suppressor genes implicated in chromatin remodeling including ARID1A (14%), BA P1
 (14%) and PBRM1 (11%) could be identified. In addition, the oncogenes CI P2
A (Cancerous Inhibitor of P P2
A) gene has been demonstrated as poten- IDH1 and IDH2 (14%) showed frequent mutations and may also play an tial cancer susceptibility gene. Aim of this study is to explore the population important role in the development of ICC. Other frequent alterations affec- diversity of CI P2
A rs2278911 common variant in Finnish, to elucidate its ted genes implicated in the p53 and MAPK signaling pathways. Integrative role in prostate cancer (PCa) susceptibility, survival, potential in develop- analysis of the data sets further revealed ICC driver gene candidates. Their ment of aggressive disease, association with specific, clinically different role in the development of ICC will be examined by functional studies and by subtypes of PCa. screening larger tumor collectives in the near future. We genotyped 2738 men with PCa, 2427 healthy controls within the Fin- In conclusion, the results of the current study confirm and expand the geno- nish Genetic Predisposition to Prostate Cancer Study (iCOGS) using Illumina mic landscape of ICC. This, finally, will help to find new therapeutic approa- iSelect custom SNP genotyping platform. ches for the treatment of this orphan cancer. This is the first comprehensive case-control study assessing the prevalence of the CI P2
A R229Q variant, which revealed that the ancestral C allele is PM12.050 the major allele, the variant T is the minor allele in Finnish population. The Molecular characterization of commonly used chondrosarcoma cell overall minor allele frequency in entire sample set 13.8%. Notably, CI P2
A lines rs2278911 minor allele showed slightly, but not significantly protective J. AURY-LANDA S1
,2, M. BARREAU1,2, N. GIRARD1,2, E. LHUISSIER1,2, K. BOUMEDIEN E1
,2, C. BAUG E1
,2; effect in PCa cases (13.2%) relative to controls (14.3%) (OR, 0.912; 95% 1UNICAEN, EA4652 MILPAT, Caen, France, 2Normandie Univ, Caen, France. CI, 0.815-1.020; p=0.106). This is underlined by the fact that the minor al- lele significantly confers to belong to the least serious combined PCa sta- ge group (OR, 1.212; 95% CI, 1.010-1.454; p=0.039). Association between Chondrosarcomas (CHS) are malignant tumours of bone that produce hya- CI P2
A rs2278911 variant and the development of castration resistant PCa, line cartilage matrix. Primary CHS is the second most frequently primary clinically detected, progressed cases, PCa cancer specific death was not re- malignant tumour of bone after osteosarcoma, and represents about 25% vealed in Finnish samples. Survival between PCa diagnosis and progression, of bone sarcomas. Prognosis is strongly correlated with histological grading. progression and overall or PCa-specific death were not affected by CI P2
A Grade I CHS typically does not metastasize, in contrast with grade II and III R229Q variant. CHS. The ten-year survival is 83% for patients with grade I, 64% for grade In genetically homogenous Finnish CI P2
A rs2278911 minor allele alone II and 29% for grade III. CHS is highly resistant to both chemotherapy and suggests slight protection against PCa, which need to be ascertained in radiation, making surgical resection the only curative treatment. pooled European samples. Due to the limited amount of primary tumour specimens, inclusion of in vi- * tro models for CHS investigation is of high importance. In addition, as com- Members from the Prostate Cancer Association Group to Investigate Cancer prehensive genomic analyses of CHS become available, there is a growing Associated Alterations in the Genome (PRACTICAL) consortium are provi- need for corresponding cell models to performed functional analysis of new ded in the Supplement/foot notes. Information of the consortium can be identified variants. To date, commonly used CHS cell lines has been only par- found at http://practical.ccge.medschl.cam.ac.uk/. tially screened by target-genes approaches. P S12
.053 Our study is the first which aims to extensively characterize commonly used Sensitive Mutation Detection By Sequencing Circulating Cell-Free DNA human CHS cell lines by exome sequencing to identify somatic variants and N. Fang, R. Akinci-Tolun, K. Heitz, A. Wolf; biological pathways potentially involved in the tumorigenesis. We generate QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany. an average of 4.9 Gb of sequence per cell line with a mean depth of 67-fold and with 90% of the targeted bases which have a QPhred score > 30. On average, 56 000 variants were identified per exome, including 1700 new Circulating DNA, the cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in serum or plasma, has beco- variants. me a powerful tool used for Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) as well as In conclusion, this study will be useful to highlight genetic alterations asso- cancer liquid biopsy. It has been shown that the quantity, integrity, as well ciated with malignant transformation and potential molecular therapeutic as the mutation contents of the cfDNA in cancer patients could differ from targets. that in healthy controls and therefore serve as biomarkers for cancer dia- gnosis, prognosis, and stratification. High-throughput sequence analysis of the cfDNA with the rapidly developing next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies provides a highly sensitive method in detecting and characte- ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANrDiz,in Ug Kso m| WatiWc mWut.aEtiSoHnsG in. OthRe cGancer patients. However, the concentr2at4io7nABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Luca4, G. Petruz4, S. Kraljevic Pavelic2, G. Damante1,4; 1Medical Genetics Institute, University Hospital S. Maria della Misericordia, Udine, of the cfDNA in the serum is normally very low, which posts challenges in Italy, 2Department of Biotechnology, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 3University sequencing library construction. Here we describe an optimized workflow Hospital Centre Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 4Department of Medical and Biological Sciences, University of Udine, Udine, Italy. that combines high-efficiency NGS library construction, unbiased library amplification, and target enrichment to sensitively and reliably detect mu- tations in cfDNA samples. Circadian rhythms are influenced by the expression of clock genes, which PM12.054 are controlled by a feedback NmPeAcSh2a (nMisOmP 4th)at allows a rhythmic variation Detecting hypomethylation in circulating, cell-free DNA to monitor during 24 hours. Various evidences indicate that clock genes are important cancer burden in neoplastic traNnPsAfo S2
rmation. is a clock gene that can act as a T. Harkins, C. Schumacher, R. Spurbeck, J. Laliberte, C. Couture, S. Chupreta, L. Kurihara, tumor suppressor. We are searching for the presence of polymorphisms in V. Makarov; Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. theN 5P’A rSe2gion of . By using Sanger sequencing and capillary electropho- resis, we found a polymorphic GGC repeat in the untranslated (first) exon of . Allele and genotype frequencies of the GGC repeat were measu- Circulating, cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is a powerful, non-invasive sample source red in 72 subjects affected by melanoma and 77 controls. In both groups that contains tumor associated DNA. Characterizing the genome-wide me- four alleles were present, with 7, 9, 12 and 13 GGC repeats. Alleles 7 and thylation state of cfDNA is a powerful and economical biomarker that can 9 were the most frequent (either having a frequency > 40% in controls or be used for providing an effective means to monitor disease and treatment melanoma subjects). In both groups allele and genotype frequencies were efficacy. The challenges in performing deep sequencing of cfDNA include: a in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. In terms of allelic frequencies no statistical requirement for fast turnaround times due to sample degradation issues, li- difference was found between melanoma and control subjects. In contrast, mited sample material, short DNA fragments <170 bp, and limit of detection significant differences were found in genotype frequencies. In particular, issues caused by both normal and tumor DNA being present. This study de- the genotype 7/9 was more frequent in controls (57.1%) than in melanoma scribes a novel library preparation suitable for the Illumina platforms that subjects (34.7%) (p: 0.0084); the genotype 9/9 was more frequent in me- requires only 10 million sequencing reads making it cost-effective, sensitive, lanoma subjects (26.3%) than inN cPoAnSt2rols (9.0%) (p: 0.0087). No statistical and specific to assess the methylation status of cfDNA. difference was found for other genotypes. Therefore, the homozygous geno- To characterize the methylation status of cfDNA, NGS libraries were genera- type of the 9 GGC repeat of the gene could be a susceptibility factor ted utilizing a chemistry that sequentially ligates the adapters to each end for melanoma. of the DNA molecules. As the library is generated after bisulfite treatment, P S12
.057 a high recovery of DNA library molecules is observed, thus enabling high CANCER RISKS IN FAMILY MEMBERS OF CMMR-D PATIENTS complexity library preparation from 5 ng of cfDNA. M. Nielsen1, M. Suerink1, S. ten Broeke1, A. Trainer2, A. Wagner3, M. Jongmans4, K. Preliminary analysis of the hypomethylation status of the cfDNA from 8 can- Heinimann5, T. van Os6, K. Guthrie7, L. Senter8, M. Tibiletti9, M. Genuardi10, G. Evans11, K. Jasperson12, K. Wimmer13, I. Winship14, S. Holzapfel15, S. Andrew16, T. Ripperger17, I. repair cer subjects ranged from 0.4% to 44% when compared to a set of healthy consortium (IMRC)18, H. F. A. Vasen19, T. European Consortium Care For Cmmr-D20; controls. The cfDNA sample with 0.4% hypomethylation originated from the 1Centre of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Peter Maccallum Cancer plasma of a subject with a high-grade serous adenocarconima in the fallo- Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 3ErasmusMC Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands, pian tube, and it believed that this tumor type sheds very little DNA into 4Clinical Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Universitätsspital Basel,, Basel, Switzerland, the blood compartment. The most hypomethylated cfDNA came from the 6AMC Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United plasma of subject with metastatic adenocarcinoma of the colon which had States, 8The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, United States, metastasized to the liver. 9Ospedale Varese, VARESE, Italy, 10Università Cattolica Del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 11.St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 12Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake P S12
.055 City, UT, United States, 13Medical University Of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 14The Royal Circulating miRNA expression profiling in chronic lymphocytic Melbourne Hospital,, Melbourne, Australia, 15University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, leukemia (CLL) patients - preliminary results 16Katz Group Centre, Edmonton, AL, Canada, 17Hannover Medical School, Hannover, A. A. Filip, A. Grenda, S. Popek, D. Koczkodaj, M. Michalak-Wojnowska, M. Budzyński, S. Germany, 18Melbourne university, Melbourne, Australia, 19Gastroenterology LUMC, Zmorzyński; Leiden, Netherlands, 20LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands. Department of Cancer Genetics, Medical University of Lublin, Poland, Lublin, Poland. Introduction: Biallelic germline mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) MicroRNAs regulate gene expression on post-transcriptional level. miRNA genes cause a recessive form of childhood cancer that has been referred to expression is altered in cancer, and its profiling helps to diagnose the di- as Constitutional Mismatch Repair Deficiency (CMMR-D) syndrome. Family sease, to stratify patients into risk groups, and to predict the response to members of CMMR-D patients are at risk of being a heterozygous MMR mu- treatment. Circulating miRNA molecules were identified in different body tation carrier and thus for having Lynch syndrome (LS). The cancer risks for fluids, and in many cancer types their expression reflected expression in these family members have not yet been analyzed. It is expected that their tumor cells. cancer risk will be different than cancer risks reported before for LS families In our study we used qT-PCR to assay peripheral blood serum of 22 CLL that were ascertained because of cancer in the family. CMMR-D families have patients for the expression of 84 miRNAs which were associated with diffe- not been ascertained because of cancer in the family, but because the index rentiation and maturation of B and T lymphocytes. patient has a distinct phenotype. We have found that the general expression of examined miRNAs in CLL pati- Methodology: Data collection of CMMR-D families started in 2014 and is still ents was lower when compared to the expression levels in serum of healthy in process. In the first half of 2016 a competing risks analysis will be perfor- volunteers. Only miR-32a-5p, miR31-5p, miR-155-5p, miR-150-5p, miR-15a- med to calculate cancer risks for family members up to the 6th degree. For 3p and miR-29a-3p were expressed on higher level. Considering prognostic family members of whom the carrier status is unknown, the probability of factors, the most important differences in miRNA expression were observed carriership will be computed based on the distance to obligate carriers and among patients depending on B2M level, CD38 expression status, and ab- phenotypes in the family. errations of chromosomes 12 and 13. When the functional miRNA groups Results: Thus far we have collected data on 46 PM S2
, 15 MSH6, 4 MSH2 and were considered, the important factors for all examined groups included 6 MLH1 families of CMMR-D-patients including 1764 family members. This age, CD38 expression, NOTCH1 status and the status of chromosomes 11 numbers includes 340 proven and obligate heterozygote mutation carriers, and 12. Interestingly, neither ZA P70
 expression, nor T P53
 gene status were 104 proven non-carriers and 1220 non tested family members. Data analy- differentiating factors. sis will be done at a preliminary basis. Alterations in circulating miRNA expression in CLL patients affected miRNAs Conclusion: Analysis of cancer risks in CMMR-D families are relevant for ap- associated both with B and T lymphocyte differentiation, which proves the propriate screening advice for family members and MMR mutation carriers role of the latter cells in leukemogenesis. Further study utilizing larger test detected through population based screening. group of patients may warrant the identification of a panel of several circu- PM12.058 lating mRNAs which would be used at diagnosis for prognostic and predic- Systematic meta-analyses and field synopsis of genetic association tive purposes. studies in colorectal adenomas PM12.056 J. Little1, Z. Montazeri1, E. Theodoratou2, C. Nyiraneza1, M. Timofeeva2, H. Campbell2; A polymorphic GGC repeat in the NPA S2
 gene and its association with 1University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United melanoma Kingdom. A. Franzoni1, E. Markova-Car2, S. Devic- Pavlic2, D. Jurisic3, C. Puppin4, C. Mio4, M. De 248 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) constitutes a major global public 756 diagnostic ALL samples and 50 controls. The signals from the array health challenge. Most CRCs develop from preneoplastic asymptomatic le- were first normalized using functional normalization and then segmented sions known as colorectal adenoma (CRA). We have previously summarized using the circular binary algorithm. Methylation data was analyzed using the associations between common genetic variants and CRC in a field syn- the R packages Minfi and CopyNumber450k. CNVs were detected using an opsis of genetic association and GWAS, but the genetic basis of CRA is less in-house modified version of the CopyNumber450k package adapted to can- well documented. We now present the first synthesis of all published gene- cer samples, in particular within the high hyperdiploid subtype (>50 chro- tMice athssoodcsia:tion data for CRAs and the results of meta-analyses to summarise mosomes). risk estimates. The unbalanced cytogenetic aberrations characteristic of the recurrent ALL Using Medline and the HuGENet phenopedia™, we identified and subtypes were observed. In many cases, our results showed higher sensi- synthesized all published genetic association data for CRAs. We conducted tivity than traditional karyotyping, in particular in the detection of dupli- meta-analyses of the identified studies and data from two GWAS to sum- cated and deleted chromosomes. Data from CNAs will be compared across marise risk estimates. We applied the Venice criteria and Bayesian False all patients to identify potential novel aberrations associated with clinical RDeisscuolvtesr:y Probability (BFDP) to assess the levels of the credibility of asso- outcome of ALL. Paired samples from the same individual will be compared ciations. at different disease stages: diagnosis, relapse, and remission. Significant dif- 9750 titles and abstracts were initially screened, and 1750 publi- ferences will be selected for further functional investigations. cations were identified for full text screening of which 130 articles mMeTtH tFhRe The results suggest that the DNA methylation arrays can be used to detect inclusion NcrAiTte1riNa.Q DOa1ta were extracted fo TrP 15831 SNPs in 74 genes. The variant somatic structural alterations and CNAs with high accuracy in ALL and other Cato n8cql2u4s.i2o1n :( rs6983267) was considered as “highly credible” and leukemias. ( C677
T), , (Pro187Ser), and (Arg72Pro) as “less credible”. P S12
.061 The identification of genetic variants with influence on CRA Cost-effectiveness of UGT1A1 genotyping before colorectal cancer risk may provide new insights into the fundamental biological mechanis- treatment with irinotecan: A decision analytic model from the ms involved in early CRC development and help to inform future research. perspective of the German statutory health insurance Further, CRA risk-associated SNP variants may also show utility in contri- B. Butzke1, F. Oduncu2, F. Severin1, A. Pfeufer1, V. Heinemann2, C. Gießen2, B. Stollenwerk1, buting to future risk scores for accurate population risk stratification which W. Rogowski1; could be of potential value in improving CRC screening modalities. 1Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany, 2LMU, Munich, Germany. P S12
.059 Overexpression of HDA C3
 in colorectal cancer M. Nemati1, E. Sakhinia2, S. Hashemzadeh3, S. Rezapour2; Irinotecan is an anti-cancer agent that is used for the treatment of metastatic 1Department of biology, Tabriz university, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department colorectal cancer. Although it prolongs survival, it can cause severe toxicity, of medical genetics, Tabriz university of medical sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic especially diarrhea and neutropenia, in patients who carry the UGT1A1*28 of, 3Liver and gastrointestinal disease research center, Tabriz university of medical allele. This study evaluates the cost-effectiveness of UGT1A1 genotyping sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of. prior to irinotecan-based chemotherapy in order to prevent adverse side effects from the perspective of the German statutory health insurance. A decision-analytic Markov model with a life time horizon was developed. Introduction: Histone deacetylase 3 (HDA C3
) is involved in many important No testing was compared to (1) dose reduction of irinotecan-based chemo- biological processes including transcriptional regulation, cell cycle progres- therapy and (2) administration of a prophylactic G-CSF growth factor for sion and developmental events. Aberrant expression of HDA C3
 is observed patients with a UGT1A1*28 variant. Probability, utility and cost parameters in several human cancers, indicating a critical role in carcinogenesis and a used in this study were extracted from published literature. Uncertainty was potential as a tumor marker in cancer. The aim of this study was to investi- assessed by deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analyses. gate the expression level of HDA C3
 in colorectal cancer and its relationship Strategy (1) dominated all remaining strategies. Compared to no testing, it with the clinicopathological features of patients. resulted in only marginal QALY increases but a cost reduction of €600 per Materials and Methods: Total RNA was first isolated from 48 pairs of co- patient. Strategy (2) resulted in the same health gains but increased costs by lorectal cancer tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues. Afterwards cDNAs €11,000. Deterministic sensitivity analysis shows that uncertainty for this were synthesized and the expression level of HDA C3
 was quantified by real strategy originated primarily from costs for irinotecan-based chemothera- time PCR. The Correlation between the expression level of HDA C3
 and cli- py, from the prevalence of neutropenia among heterozygous patients, and nicopathological features was studied and the capability of HDA C3
 to func- from whether dose reduction is applied to both homozygotes and heterozy- tion as a CRC tumor marker was also explored. gotes or only to the former. Results: Over expression of HDA C3
 was observed in colorectal cancer tis- This model-based synthesis of the most recent evidence suggests that phar- sue samples compared with their paired adjacent nontumour tissue samp- macogenetic UGT1A1 testing prior to irinotecan-based chemotherapy do- les (P=0.03). The Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis on minates non-personalized colon cancer care in Germany. However, as struc- HDA C3
 showed that the area under the ROC curve was high (0.72). There tural uncertainty remains high, these results require validation in clinical was no significant correlation between HDA C3
 expression and clinicopatho- practice, e.g. based on a managed-entry agreement. logical features of patients. PM12.062 Conclusions: These findings suggest that HDA C3
 can serve as a novel pro- Diffuse large B cell lymphoma developing simultaneously in recipient gnostic indicator in colorectal cancer and may be a potential target for dia- and donor twenty two months after allogeneic bone marrow gnosis and gene therapy. transplantation. PM12.060 S. Laird1, L. Chiecchio1,2, A. Fisher1, C. Waterman1,2, J. Cullis3, M. Morgan4; Detection of copy number alterations in pediatric acute lymphoblastic 1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Medicine, leukemia using the 450k DNA methylation array University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 3Haematology Department, N. Marzouka1, J. Carlsson Almlöf1, J. Nordlund1, C. L. Bäcklin2, G. Lönnerholm3, A. Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 4Children‘s oncology and Syvänen1; haematology centre, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. 1Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Medical Sciences, Cancer Pharmacology and Computational Medicine, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, Donor cell hematological neoplasms are rare complications arising after al- 3Department of Women‘s and Children‘s Health, Pediatric Oncology, Uppsala University logeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (alloHSCT). We present an and for the Nordic Society of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology (NOPHO), Uppsala, eight-year-old boy diagnosed with AML, who underwent alloHSCT a year Sweden. later with his 42-year-old mother as HLA-matched donor. After twenty-two months, he presented with thigh and buttock pain; bone marrow (BM) sho- et al. wed 20%-30% blast-like cells, suggesting relapsed AML. However, BM cyto- Pediatric Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) represents about one quar- genetic analysis showed all cells to be of female (donor) origin. Morphology ter of pediatric cancers. Our previous study (Nordlund Genome Biology, and immunostains on BM, skin and spinal lesions confirmed infiltration by 2013) investigated differences in genome-wide DNA methylation patterns diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). FISH on the skin biopsy showed all across the recurrent ALL subtypes. Here we focus on structural alterations lymphoma cells with two copies of the X chromosome centromere and no Y and Copy Number Alterations (CNAs), which are important genetic factors centromere, confirming that the DLBCL cells were donor-derived. FISH on in ALL. This is the first study that uses bioinformatic tools for CNA analysis the spinal mass detected concurrent MYC and BC L6
 rearrangements, consi- in cytogenetic subtypes of pediatric ALL based on DNA methylation data. stent with “double hit” lymphoma. A month after the boy’s lymphoma dia- The Illumina Infinium HumanMeEthSyHlaGtio 2n405105 B |e aGd LAArrSayG wOaWs a,p SpClieOd TfoLrA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 249 gnosis, the donor was found with a large abdominal mass diagnosed as DLB-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CL ABC type, with evidence of a BC L6
 but not a MYC rearrangement. The ab- oncogenic hits driving the premalignancy transition to a clinically manife- sence of a MYC rearrangement in the donor’s tumour suggests that this was sted tumour disease. secondary to the BC L6
 rearrangement, possibly arising after transfer into Support: IGA MHCZ NT13492, OPVK CZ.1.07/2.3.00/20.0183. the recipient as a consequence of clonal evolution. It is possible that both the PM12.066 conditioning regimen pre-transplant and the replicative stress on the donor Gene panel analysis in Spanish breast and ovarian cancer families stem cells post-transplant had a role in the acquisition of this second event. testing negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 This hypothesis is consistent with the fact that the donor achieved complete S. Bonache1, I. Esteban2, A. Tenés1, G. Montalban1, E. Carrasco2, N. Gadea3, G. Caratú4, F. remission after six cycles of R-CHOP, while double-hit lymphoma is usually Mancuso4, J. Balmaña2,3, S. Gutiérrez-Enríquez1, O. Díez1,5; resistant to such aggressive treatments. 1Oncogenetics Group. Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, 2High Risk and Cancer Prevention Group. Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology VHIO, Barcelona, P S12
.063 Spain, 3Medical Oncology Department. Vall d‘Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 4Cancer EGFR genomic variations in five different types of cancer - tissue Genomics Group. Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, 5Molecular microarray survey and potential for targeted therapy Genetics Unit, Vall d‘Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. I. Dimova1, B. Rukova1, B. Zaharieva2, D. Nesheva1, R. Dimitrov1, C. Slavov1, D. Toncheva1; 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States. Introduction: Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) is a heteroge- neous genetic condition. Susceptibility cancer gene panels allow simulta- neous analysis of multiple genes and broaden genetic diagnosis compared EGFR was the first receptor that has been directly connected to carcinoge- to sequential single testing. nesis. EGFR-targeted agents have been showed to have different response Patients and Methods: Two-hundred BRCA1/2-negative patients from HBOC efficacy in anti-cancer therapy suggesting the role of specific indicators such families were enrolled for massive sequencing of 98 cancer susceptibility as EGFR alterations in selection of appropriate targets for treatment. genes. Inclusion criteria were BC <35y, presence of OC <50y or at least 3 BC/ We have successfully analyzed by FISH the copy number of EGFR in samp- OC <60y in the family. DNA samples were processed using Agilent’s Sure- les from five different tumor types, arranged in tissue microarrays: 1075 Select Target Enrichment and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq. Bioinforma- larynx, 355 ovarian, 239 colon, 144 lung and 86 uroepithelial cancers. tic pipeline includes read alignment, variant calling (GATK and VarScan2), The copy number increases were detected to the highest proportion in lung and annotaPtiAoLnB (2A N(2N)OAVTAMR (a2n)dB AALRADM1U, FTA)N. CA, FANCE, FANCI, FANCL, PTEN, cancer (22.2% of them), following by 10.7% of ovarian and 10.6% of larynx RSLeXsu4lts: InX RtChCe2 49 families sequenced toT dPa5t3e we identified 12 truncating cancers, 4.7% of urothelial and in very low number of colon cancer (0.8%). variants in , , In the last we have observed only EGFR gain whereas in uroepithelial and and , one missense variant in , and 25 variants predicted as larynx cancer we have found mostly EGFR amplification. probably pathogenic by bioinformatic analysis: 17 (missense) affecting pro- Studying the correlation with tumor phenotype, we established that EGFR tein function and eight affecting splicing (six missense, one synPoAnyLmB2ouPsT aEnNd aberrations affect to the highest extent the group of squamous cell lung can- one sTm P5
a3ll deletion of a consensus splice site). So far, the gene panel was cli- cer (in 23.5% of cases), mixed and non-epithelial ovarian cancer (both in nically beneficial for four patientsT wPi5th3 deleterious variants in , , 13.3% of the cases), poorly differentiated and high stage uroepithelial tu- and . PhePnToEtyNpically, these families had one in situ BC wPAitLhB 12 first de- mors (14.3% and 12.9%, respectively). The study provided with data which gree with BC, both under age 35 ( ), young onset BC with family history could be useful in considering of anti-EGFR anti-tumor therapeutic strat- of BC and OC ( ), or an extensive family history of BC (2 ). egy. Conclusions: Multiplex genetic testing of a certain subset of high penetrant P S12
.065 genes might be clinically useful for genetic diagnosis of HBOC families. Exome sequencing and SNP arrays to confirm genetic instability (Financial support: AECC grant, FIS PI12/02585; FIS PI13/01711). increasing from premalignant to tumour cells in monoclonal P S12
.067 gammopathies Diagnostic yield of a next generation sequencing gene panel in A. Mikulasova1,2, B. A. Walker3, C. P. Wardell4, E. M. Boyle5, M. Wayhelova1, J. Smetana1, L. Pour6, P. Kuglik1,7, R. Hajek8,9, G. J. Morgan10; familial cancer analysis 1Department of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, A. P. Knopperts, A. H. van der Hout, K. K. van Dijk-Bos, Y. J. Vos, B. Sikkema-Raddatz, C. Czech Republic, 2Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk C. van Diemen, H. Westers, R. J. Sinke, R. H. Sijmons; University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Centre for Molecular Pathology, Royal Marsden University of Groningen, University Medical Center of Groningen, Department of Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Laboratory for Genome Sequencing Analysis, RIKEN Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. Centre for Integrative Medical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 5Division of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom, 6Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, Background: The current trend in familial cancer diagnostics is the use of 7Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, NGS gene panels. Potentially, this method could increase the yieldB oRf CmAo1l/e2- 8Department of Haematooncology, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, cular diagnoses. We sAtuPdCi/eMd U1T7Y4H patients suspected of hereditary breast 9Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 10Myeloma Institute (ovarian) or colorectal cancer, who had been tested negatively for for Research and Therapy, University of Arkansas Medical School, Little Rock, AR, United States. and Lynch syndrome/ , respectively. Methods: We designed and validated a targeted NGS gene panel with 73 ge- nes associated with familial cancer syndromes. We tested this panel anony- Whole exome sequencing (WES) and SNP arrays have opened a new lands- mously on all 174 patients. Outcome was interpreted in terms of explanati- cape to study compreshensive tumour genetic architecture and its evolution on of the cancer family history. We also compared the test results with the during tumour associated processes at the genome-wide level. Transforma- number and types of variants in the panel genes found by WGS in a control tion from monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) to group: 498 individuals from the Genome-of-the-Netherlands (GoNL) pro- multiple myeloma (MM) can be used as a unique model for cancer develop- ject. ment studies as an analysis of pure tumour population in clearly clinically Results: In 174 patients only one new firm diagnosis was established. In distinguishable states. addition, in another 14 cases (8.0%), a pathogenic variant was detected in Overall, 33 and 69 MGUS patients were included in a WES and SNP array 6 different autosomal dominant genes traditionally associated with cancer study, respectively. For WES, NEBNext kit and SureSelect Human All Exon types that did not match the cancer family history. Of these 14 mutations, 10 V5 (Agilent) were used, samples were sequenced by HiSeq2000 (Illumina). were actionable. We identified 414 VOUS of which 38 (9.2%) in autosomal Copy number alterations (CNAs) were tested by SurePrint G3 CGH+SNP, dominant genes that were likely pathogenic. In the GoNL controls, 22 (4.4%) 4x180K (Agilent). Results were compared to 463 and 91 MM patients ana- pathogenic and 740 VOUS were identified of which 85 (11.4%) were classi- lysed by WES and SNP arrays, respectively. fied as likely pathogenic. CNAs and somatic gene mutations (SNVs) were detected in 68% (47/69-4) Conclusions: Use of an extended gene panel did not instantly increase the and 100% (33/33) of MGUS patients in comparison to 100% (91/91, p<10 ) number of molecular diagnoses explaining the cancer family history. Fur- and 100% (463/463) of MM patients, respectively. However, overall number thermore, many likely pathogenic variants were identified in both our pa- of both CNAs and SNVs per patient was significantly lower in MGUS (CNAs: tient and control groups, suggesting that these variants are less relevant in median 2, range 0-15; SNVs:- 1m8edian 89, range 9-315) than in MM (- C4
NAs: familial cancer diagnostics. median 16, range 2-49, p<10 ; SNVs median 123, range 1-897, p<10 ). We proved that complex genetic instability is formed before tumour clinical ma- nifestation at the gene level followed by the chromosome level. Then, the n2u5m0ber of random genetic hits increases tE oS foH rmG a2 l0 an1 d5 sc a| pG e L foA r S siG gnO ifiW can, tS COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM12.068 Monoallelic FANCG mutation in a patient with multiple tumours: is FANCG a tumour susceptibility gene? mology-directed repair (HDR) if a homologous DNA template is available. In A. Baumer, S. Azzarello, R. Abbas, J. Brecher, M. Zweier, E. Wey, A. Rauch; our work, we targeted exon 5 of FAA P100
 in U2OS cells. Initial experiments Institute of Medical Genetics, Schlieren, Switzerland. revealed that the CRISPR-Cas9 tool is suitable for tackling FAA P100
 in U2OS cells and that stable InDel mutations were introduced through NHEJ. Cur- rently we are trying to isolate single cell clones with a deleterious mutation We report on the DNA sequencing results we obtained for a 54 year old and to grow an FAA P100
 null cell line for further experiments including im- female patient with suspected familial tumour syndrome. She presented munoblots, analysis of chromosomal breakage and cell cycle analysis. with several tumours (lipoma, myoma, breast cysts) and fibromyalgia. The P S12
.071 patient’s mother died at the age of 57 of breast cancer. Her maternal grand- Unusual characteristics in Fanconi anemia subtype FA-Q mother died of a brain tumour. In addition, several family members present I. Rost1, K. Chandler2, M. Punekar3, M. Meenakshi4, D. Schindler1, S. Meyer5; with lung cancer (all smokers). 1University of Wuerzburg, Department of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany, 2Central We performed NGS using the TruSight Cancer Panel (Illumina, total of 94 Manchester Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Lancashire Teaching cancer genes). The analysis revealed a heteroallelic frameshift mutation in Hospitals, Preston, United Kingdom, 4Genetic Medicine, Central Manchester Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5University of Manchester, Manchester, United the FANCG gene: p.A495Qfs*23. No further mutation was detected in the Kingdom. genes covered by the panel, which includes all known breast cancer suscep- tibility genes and all known Fanconi anemia genes. Unfortunately, no DNA samples of the patient’s mother and grandmother are available for segrega- Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare X-linked or autosomal recessive genetic disor- tion analyses. der, characterized by a broad genetic and clinical heterogeneity. Molecular FANCG is one of the three most commonly mutated genes out of 13 genes testing is impeded by the presence of at least 16 genes, which are compo- coding for proteins active in the same DNA-repair pathway, that may lead to nents of the FA/BRCA pathway (FANCA, -B, -C, -D1, -D2, -E, -F, -G, -I, -J, -L, Fanconi anemia (FA) when biallelically mutated (exception: FANCB, X reces- -N, -O, -P, -Q, S). Stringent genotype-phenotype correlations are usually not sive inheritance). FA is a chromosome instability syndrome characterized by applicable to these FA subtypes. childhood anemia, susceptibility to leukemia and cancer. A majority of patients belong to the complementation groups FA-A, -C and Monoallelic mutations with increased susceptibility for breast cancer have -G. For several rare subgroups only a few patients have been identified so far. been reported for only few FA genes: FANCD1 (BRCA2), FANCN (PALB2), Long term phenotype-genotype data collection of these minor subgroups is FANCJ (BRI P1
) and very recently FANCM. We consider the possibility that essential for a better understanding of the molecular roles of the correspon- the FANCG mutation detected in our patient may underlie the familial tu- ding proteins as well as for the clinical management of those patients. mour syndrome in her family and suggest FANCG heterozygosity as a novel Here we report on a 49-year-old patient who belongs to the rare and unu- breast cancer susceptibility factor. sual subgroup FA-Q. Causative are biallelic mutations in the ERC C4
/XPF P S12
.069 gene. Other mutations in this gene have been associated with Xeroderma Characterization of a Fanconi anemia candidate gene pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome or a progeria syndrome (XF-E). Unlike J. Kuehl, D. Schindler; most individuals with FA our patient never developed bone marrow failure Department of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany. or malignancies, typical features of other FA patients at that age. Interestin- gly, she shows skin photosensitivity to sunlight, a trait previously not seen in FA patients of other complementation groups except for one of the two pre- Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal or X-linked recessive disease which viously described FA-Q patients. Hence, sunlight sensitivity in unclassified displays a heterogeneous phenotype. Besides congenital developmental de- FA patients may give a hint for their assignment to complementation group fects, FA is characterized by bone marrow failure and genomic instability FA-Q such that mutations in ERC C4
 should be tested preferentially. resulting in cancer predisposition. Due to a DNA repair defect the cellular PM12.072 phenotype is characterized by hypersensitivity to DNFAA-NcrCoAs,s -liBn, k-Cin, g-D a1g,e -nDt2s,, Participation of apoptosis-related genes in breast tumorigenesis and l-eEa, d-Fin, -gG t, o- Ii, n-Jc,r -eLa, s-eNd, -cOh,r -oPm, -oQs oma l- Sbreakage, reduced cell survival and G2 their association with clinicopathological features of disease phase arrest in the cell cycle. Currently 16 FA genes ( A. Mendelova1, I. Kapustova2, P. Zubor2, P. Moricova2, V. Holubekova1, K. Kajo3, I. and ), whose products are members of the Svecova2, Z. Lasabova1, J. Danko2; FA/BRCA pathway, were reported to be causative for FA. uBpassterde aomn thed aoswson-- 1Department of molecular biology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Comenius cstiaretiaomn of corresponding mutations with the loss or retention of FANCD2/ University in Bratislava, Martin, Slovakia, 2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, FANCI monousbiniqgulei tninuactlieoonti, dteh eesxec hgaenngees are class ified as or Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Comenius University in Bratislava, Martin, FA genes. In one cell line derived from an FA patient we detected a Slovakia, 3Department of Pathology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Comenius homozygous in an FAcandidate gene, which is a University in Bratislava, Martin, Slovakia. member of the FA/BRCA pathway but not an FA gene. The mutation results in an amino acid substitution at a conserved position. This cell line exhibits reduced levels of FANCD2 monoubiquitination and FANCD2 foci formation Fas and its ligand (FasL) are known to play a crucial role in the genetically as well as MMC-induced G2 phase arrest in the cell cycle. Complementation controlled mechanism of cell death and disruption of this pathway has been with the wild type form of this gene rescues the MMC sensitivity and normal associated with tumorigenesis. The goal of this study is to investigate the as- cell cycle progress. In addition, FANCD2 monoubiquitination and FANCD2 sociation between -1377G/A (rs2234767) and -670A/G (rs1800682) poly- foci formation were raised. Currently, we are generating animal and human morphisms in Fas and single nucleotide polymorphisms -844C/T (rs763110) cell models in order to draw closer connections to the FA/BRCA pathway. in FasL in a breast cancer samples. The study group consists of 254 subjects, including 122 patients with breast cancer and 132 healthy controls. DNA PM12.070 extracted from peripheral blood was analyzed by TaqMan real-time PCR and Gene editing of FAA P100
 by the CRISPR-Cas9 system S. Pickel, J. Kühl, D. Schindler; allelic discrimination assay. We have found a significant association between University of Wuerzburg, Department of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany. patients with aberrant A allele in genotype for FAS-1377 SNP and larger size of tumors compared to GG genotype carriers (p=0.0356). Moreover patients with FAS-1377A and FASL-844T genotype showed significant association FAA P100
 is a component of the Fanconi anemia (FA) nuclear core complex. to poorly differentiated breast cancer specimens of higher tumor grade Together with FANCL and FANCB it forms a subcomplex, which is necessary (G2+G3) (p=0.0378 and p=0.0001, respectively). Patients with FAS-1377A for the monoubiquitination of FANCD2 and FANCI and the stability of the and FAS-670G genotype showed significant association to positive expres- core complex. Chicken DT40 cells that are faap100-deficient show a cellular sion status of progesterone receptor (p=0.0263 and p=0.0169, respective- phenotype similar to human FA cells, which includes reduced mitomycin C- ly). The significant association was observed also between the FAS-670G induced cell survival and increased chromosomal breakage rates as well as and FASL-844T genotypes with HER-2 positive status (p= 0.0177 and p= compromised FANCD2 monoubiquitination. 0.0009, respectively). These data suggest that functional polymorphisms in In order to generate an FAA P100
-deficient cell line we used the recently dis- the death pathway genes FAS and FASL may contribute to the occurrence of covered RNA-guided CRISPR-Cas9 system. The CRISPR-Cas9 technology for breast cancer and modify its biological profile in Slovak population. genome engineering is based on the adaptive immune system of bacteria Acknowledgement and archaea. This system can be applied to introduce DNA double strand This work was supported by project ,,Increase of career opportunities breaks at a target sequence into genomic DNA similar to ZFN nucleases and in research and development in the field of medical sciences“ ITMS code TALENS. After DSBs have been elicited, the damage can be repaired through 26110230067 co-financed by EU funds. error-prone non-homologous enEd SjoHinGin g2 (0N1H5EJ )| oGr LthAroSuGghO eWrro, rS-fCreOe ThoL-AND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 251ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM12.074 PM12.076 Genetic susceptibility to gastric cancer: replication in Spanish and The frequency and functional significance of T P53
 mutations in the Portuguese populations of variants identified in the EPIC-EurGast russian patients with de novo DLBCL study E. Voropaeva1, T. Pospelova2, M. Voevoda1, V. Maximov1; N. Sala1, M. A. García González2,3, C. Duraes4, V. Cervera5, C. Bonet1, N. García1, M. Galán1, 1Institute of Therapy and Preventive Medicine SB RAMS, Novosibirsk, Russian M. J. Paúles6, L. Bujanda7,3, S. Santolaria8, C. Thomson9, J. Espinel10, R. Campo11, A. Lanas12, Federation, 2State Medical University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. J. C. Machado4, C. A. González-Svatetz1; T P53
 1Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO-IDIBELL), Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain, 2Aragon T P53
 Health Research Institute (IIS Aragón), Aragon Health Sciences Institute (IACS), Introduction: dysfunction is implicated in lymphomagenesis and di- Zaragoza, Spain, 3CIBERehd-Networked Biomedical Research Center of Hepatic and sease progression. Information about thTeP 5fr3equency and spectrum of Digestive Diseases, Barcelona, Spain, 4Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal, 5Genomics Unit, Bellvitge mutations in the russian pathients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLB- Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain, 6University CL) in the current versionT Po5f 3the IARC Mutation Database R17 is not Hospital of Bellvitge-IDIBELL, Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain, 7Donostia Hospital/ represented. The goal of this work was to study the frequency, spectrum and Biodonostia Institute, the University of Basque Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastián, functional significance of mutations in russian patients with DLBCL. Spain, 8Hospital San Jorge, Huesca, Spain, 9Hospital Obispo Polanco, Teruel, Spain, Material and Methods: At the present time the pilot group of 14 patients 10Complejo Hospitalario de León (CHLeon), León, Spain, 11Hospital Parc Taulí, Sabadell, were included in the study. Diagnosis was assessed according to the criteria Spain, 12Aragon Health Research Institute (IIS Aragón). Clinical University Hospital oTfP t5h3e WHO classification system. Genomic DNA was isolated from formalin- Lozano Blesa, Zaragoza, Spain. fixed, paraffin embedded tissue blocks. Direct sequence analysis of gene was performed according to the IARC protocol, 2010 update. Results: In two patients were identified single nucleotide substitutions Introduction: In a previous study (EPIC-Eurgast) of association between ge- that are not described in the current version of the PubMed database. All netic variation in candidate genes and gastric cancer (GC) risk we observed of mutations occurred in the DNA-binding domain of p53. The nonsense several associations that required replication in independent populations. mutation Arg196Ter was detected in one patient. Previously it was shown Methods: 96 SNPs from 57 genes that in the EPIC-Eurgast study were found that formation of this premature stop codon might activate the nonsense- associated with GC or any of its subtypes were genotyped (Fluidigm SNPty- mediated RNA decay pathway. The second patient had two missense mutati- pe assays) in 328 non-EPIC GC cases and 322 healthy controls from different ons - Leu130Phe and Arg156Cys. The first of them leads to p53 inactivation Spanish regions, as well as 375 GC cases and 709 controls from the North of according to the analysis oTf Pth5e3 functional importance of amino acid substi- Portugal. Associations were analyzed using unconditional logistic regressi- tutions using service PolyPhen-2. on. Conclusions: We detected mutation in 14% cases. The mutational rate Results: Unless otherwise stated, the results indicated are those obtained in in our study is in good agreement with other studies where the frequency of the combined analysis of both the Spanish and the Portuguese populations, the T P53
 mutations in patients with DLBCL ranged mostly from 13 to 23%. under the additive model. These results confirmed previously reported as- sociations between GC and PSCA rs2294008 (OR=1,21; 95%CI:1,06-1,40) P S12
.077 and MU C1
 rs4072037 (OR=0,82; 95%CI:0,72-0,94). Furthermore, asso- Genome-wide association study of childhood acute lymphoblastic ciations with GC were replicated in another six genes. DRD4 rs12280580 leukemia risk with gender-specificity S. K. Singh1, P. J. Lupo2, M. E. Scheurer2, A. Saxena1, A. E. Kennedy3, B. Ibrahimou1, J. L. (OR=0.83;95%CI: 0,72-0,97), VEGFA rs833060 (OR=0,84;95%CI:0,72- McCauley4, M. Okcu2, M. T. Dorak5; 0,97), TFF3 rs8133510 (OR=0,75;95%CI:0,61-0,93; AG vs GG) and MIRLE- 1Florida International University, Miami, FL, United States, 2Baylor College of Medicine, T7I rs10877888 (OR=1.29;95%CI:1,00-1,65; recessive model), were asso- Houston, TX, United States, 3National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, ciated with GC in general. ABO rs657152 was associated with diffuse GC 4University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States, 5Liverpool Hope University, Liverpool, (OR=1,45;95%CI:1,02-2,06; dominant model) and NQO1 rs7359387 was United Kingdom. associated with cardia CG (OR=0,50;95%CI:0,30-0,85). Conclusions: variation in PSCA and MU C1
 also is associated with GC risk in Iberian populations. Variants in genes for cell signalling (DRD4 and VEGFA), Similar to most cancers, males have a higher risk than females for childhood mucosa protection (TFF3), region of MIRLET7I (micro RNA let7i), blood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). To gain insight into the genetic basis of group (ABO) and carcinogen metabolism (NQO1), also are associated with this difference, we performed a case-only GWAS to identify gender-specific GC or its histological/anatomical subtypes in European populations. risk markers among 240 ALL cases recruited at Texas Children’s Cancer (Acknowledgements: ISCIII PI12/01187 and P S09
/00213) Center using the Illumina Infinium HumanCoreExome Chip. Results were P S12
.075 ranked both by statistical significance and effect size, and then subjected to Vitamin D and prostate cancer: a Mendelian randomization study bioinformatics analysis to evaluate relevant pathways and potential under- O. Trummer1, E. M. Thurner2, T. Langsenlehner2, U. Langsenlehner3, S. Krenn-Pilko2, T. R. lying mechanisms. RASSF2 rs4813720 yielded the statistically most signi- Pieber1, W. Renner4, B. Obermayer-Pietsch1; ficant result for interaction with sex (OR = 0.29; P = 2E-06). Two HLA-DQA1 1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical missense SNPs (rs12722042 and rs12722039) and ADAM28 rs11992342 University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology, yielded the largest effect sizes (OR > 14.0; P < 0.05). The HLA-DQA1 SNPs Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 3Division of Internal Medicine, GKK Outpatient correspond to DQA1*01:07, and their association with risk confirms a pre- Department, Graz, Austria, 4Clinical Institute of Medical and Chemical Laboratory viously reported male-specific association with DQA1*01. No sex chromoso- Diagnostics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. me variant appeared to be involved in the interaction of risk with sex. While bioinformatic screening of our top hits did not implicate a particular mecha- nism for male-specific risk, RASSF2 has an estrogen receptor-alpha binding Introduction: Decreased 25-hydroxy (25-OH) vitamin D levels have been site in its promoter. Additionally, a functional SNP among our top hits (by P associated with prostate cancer, but it is unclear whether this association is value) in (MAGI2 rs798292) is associated with expression of KAT7 in lym- causal. To examine the hypothesized inverse relationship between vitamin phoblastoid cells (P = 2E-08), which is a histone acetyltransferase that re- D status and prostate cancer we performed a Mendelian randomization presses androgen receptor-mediated transcription. Our results suggest that study and studied the association between a common single-nucleotide po- autosomal variants are likely to underlie the sex differential in childhood lymorphism (SNP) strongly associated with 25-OH-vitamin D and prostate ALL risk. Our approach and results provide a foundation for further studies cancer. to fully characterize the sex differential in childhood ALL risk. Material and Methods: Genotypes of the group-specific component gene (GC, rs2282679) were determined in the prospective PROCAGENE study PM12.078 comprising 702 prostate cancer patients with a median follow-up of 82 Spectrum of mutations identified in a 25-gene hereditary cancer months. Logistic regression was used to estimate the associations between panel for patients with breast cancer the genetic variants and biochemical recurrence, development of metastasis L. Sharma1, J. Kidd1, J. Abernethy1, H. McCoy1, K. Brown1, K. Copeland2, J. Saam1, M. Landon1, R. Wenstrup1; and mortality of prostate. 1Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Myriad Genetics, Results: GC genotypes were not associated with biochemical recurrence (HR Inc., Zurich, Switzerland. 0.89, 95% CI 0.70 - 1.13; p = 0.32), development of metastases (HR 1.20, 95% CI 0.88 - 1.63; p = 0.25) or overall survival (HR 1.10; 95% CI 0.84 - 1.43; p = 0.50). Introduction: Advancements in next generation sequencing allow patients Conclusion: We conclude that a causal role of vitamin D status, reflected by with a personal and/or family history of cancer that may not be suggestive the GC polymorphism, in prostate cancer is unlikely. of one cancer syndrome to be tested for mutations in multiple cancer-pre- disposing genes simultaneously. The focus of this analysis was to determine 252 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOthTe LspAeNctrDum, U ofK g e|n We mWutWat.ioEnSsH obGse.OrveRdG in patients with a personal historyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of breast cancer. Methods: Nine pairs of tumor and adjacent normal tissue samples with sta- Methods: A commercial laboratory database was queried for patients with ge III-IV HNSCC were obtained from the Tissue Bank of the TPEVGH. DNA a personal diagnosis of brBeRaCsAt 1c,a BnRceCrA 2w, hToP 5u3n,d PeTrwENen, Mt tLeHs1ti,n Mg SwHi2th, M aS 2H56-, were captured using SureSelect Human All Exon kit and Illumina Paired-End PgeMnSe2 ,h EePrCedAiMta, rAyP Cca, BnMcePrR p1aAn, eClD Hfr1o,m C DSKeNp2teAm, MbeUrT Y2H01,  S3
M tAhDro4u, SgThK N11o vCeHmEbKe2r, Sequencing Library Prep, then were sequenced by Illumina Genome Analy-  P2
A0 L1
B42. T, AhTe Mp,a nNeBlN in, cBlAuRdDes1 , BRI P1
, CDK4, RAD51C RAD51D zer IIx platform. Results: In total, 1788 novel variants, including 676 missense, 146 synony- and . All patient mous, 61 nonsense, and 7 splicing site variants, were identified (with an data regarding clinical history was obtained by health care provider report average 199 variants per patient, range 51-532 variants). Genetic variants on the test requisition forms. on ninety-nine genes were recurrently found in maximally two patients. Results: A total of 17,142 patients with a personal histBoRryC Ao1f /b2reast cancer Five out of nine HNSCC patients carried the T P53
 novel variants. Most of were identified. In this cohort, 9.8% (n=1,685) oBfR pCaAt1ie/n2ts were positive for the variants are located on the PI3K, MAPK, EGFR, and NOTCH pathways, at least 1 pathogenic mutation, 49.9% of which were in . The 51.1% while some of them are oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and DNA repair of patients with mutations in genes other than included 151 pati- genes. ents with mutations in genes not associated with breast cancer. 45 patients Conclusion: Using exome sequencing, we identified several candidate genes were identified with mutations in mBoRrCeA t1h/a2n one gene. for HNSCC predisposition. Their contribution to HNSCC will be further inve- Conclusions: Testing patients using a 25-gene panel provided a 104.5% in- stigated by using larger cohort of patients with HNSCC. crease in mutations identified over testing alone. Panel testing also P S12
.081 allowed patients with mutations in genes not associated with breast cancer NOVEL CHEK2 LARGE GENOMIC REARRANGEMENTS IDENTIFIED IN or with multiple mutations to make more appropriate medical management GREEK BREAST CANCER PATIENTS decisions. P. Apostolou1, V. Mollaki1, F. Fostira1, T. Walsh2, E. Faliakou3, G. Fountzilas4, M. C. King2, I. P S12
.079 Konstantopoulou1, D. Yannoukakos1; 1NSCR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, Identification of gains and losses of genomic regions characteristic for 3Mitera Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, head and neck cancers of oral cavity and oropharynx/hypopharynx. Greece. N. Kokalj Vokac, B. Zagradisnik, D. Krgovic, S. Stangler Herodez, A. Zagorac, A. Erjavec Skerget, B. Lanisnik, B. Cizmarevic; University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. Although certain germline missense and loss-of-function CHEK2 mutations have been reported, Large Genomic Rearrangements (LGRs) seem to be qui- Introduction te rare genomic events. To date, only two LGRs have been reported, a 5.6 Copy number variations of large genomic regions are an important mecha- kb deletion encompassing gene’s exons 9 and 10, which is a founder Czech nism implicated in the development of head and neck cancer however for mutation, and a duplication encompassing gene’s exons 8 to 14. most changes their exact role is not well understood. It was the aim of this The present study aimed to define the contribution of CHEK2 LGRs in Greek study to find possible associations between gains/losses of genomic regions breast cancer patients. and clinically distinct subgroups of head and neck cancer. Initially, 2355 breast cancer patients (mean age of onset 54.6 years) were Methods genotyped for the Czech LGR by diagnostic PCR. No individuals of Greek Array CGH analysis was performed on DNA samples from 64 patients with descent were found to carry the particular deletion. cancer in oral cavity oropharynx or hypopharynx. Overlapping genomic re- Subsequently, three novel LGRs were detected by BROCA panel and were gions created from gains and losses were used for statistical analysis. confirmed by MLPA. These included: a ~600bp deletion including the 5’ Results UTR region, a ~1100bp deletion of exons 2 and 3 and a ~7.5Kb deletion Following regions were overrepresented: in tumors with stage I,II a gain of including exon 6. The genomic breakpoints of the latter were determi- 2.98 Mb on 6p21.2-p11, a gain of 7.4 Mb on 8q11.1-q11.23; in tumors with ned (g.30219_37783del7565, p.D308fsXO) and subsequently analyzed by grade I histology a gain of 1.1 Mb on 8q24.13, a loss of a large part of chro- a custom-designed diagnostic PCR. The deletion was detected in 0.22% mosome 3p, a loss of a 1.24 Mb on 6q14.3, a loss of 32 Mb telomeric region (5/2355) of breast cancer cases, indicating a possible Greek founder effect. (8p23.3); in cases with affected lymph nodes a gain of 0.75 Mb on 3q24, a Three carriers were diagnosed with early onset breast cancer, while all of gain of 0.9 Mb on 3q26.32-q26.33; in cases with unaffected lymph nodes a them had at least one additional family member diagnosed with breast can- gain of 1.1 Mb on 8q23.3; in patients not treated with surgery a gain of 12.2 cer. None of the 1163 controls carried the aforementioned deletion. Charac- Mb on 7q21.3-q22.3 and a gain of 0.33 Mb on 20q11.22. terization and screening of the two other LGRs is in progress. Conclusions The present study highlights the existence of rare genomic events in breast Our analysis identified several genomic regions of interest which appear to cancer predisposing genes which can explain a small -but significant- pro- be associated with various clinically distinct subgroups of head and neck portion of high risk families. cancer. They represent a potentially important source of biomarkers useful PM12.082 for clinical management of head and neck cancer. Prevention of hereditary breast cancer by personalized optimization Grant references: This work was supported by ARRS grant P-220. of body Se, Zn, Fe levels using diet supplements PM12.080 J. Lubinski1, A. Morawski2; 1Read-Gene SA, Szczecin, Poland, 2Westpomeranian University of Technology, Szczecin, Whole exome sequencing identifies novel variants for head and neck Poland. squamous cell carcinoma M. Lin1,2, W. Y. Wu1, T. Liu3, H. Wang4, M. Wu5, S. Tai6, M. Yang7,8; ~ 1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department ~ of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3VTY Genome Hereditary predisposition to breast cancer (HBC) can be diagnosed in 1.5 Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Institute of mio. of women in Poland including 100 000 carriers of BRCA1mutations. Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Koo Up to now, the critical preventive options for above females give strong ad- Foundation Sun Yat-Sen Cancer Center, Taipei, Taiwan, 6Division of Laryngology-Head verse effects (preventive adnexectomy and mastectomy, tamoxifen). There- and Neck Surgery, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 7Institute of Clinical fore, the main goal of herein project is validation of results from pilot studies Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 8Department of Hematology, indicating that risk of breast cancers can be reduced significantly (even 10 Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. times) by personally tailored optimization of Se, Zn and Fe levels using diet supplements. The major tasks will include: Introduction: The head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is ran- I. Elaboration of diagnostic “DNA test basic for chemoprevention of breast king as the fifth most common cancer worldwide and it is also the second cancers.” (10 candidate changes; sera collected before breast cancer detec- leading cause of cancer deaths in the South-East Asia region, including Tai- tion in 150 cases; 300 matched controls). wan. The major risk factors associated with HNSCC are smoking, alcohol II. Hereditary breast cancer risk reduction by providing Se, Zn, Fe diet sup- consumption, and human papillomavirus subtype 16 (HPV-16) infection. plements in amounts to achieve optimal serum levels individualizing them However, most of the HNSCC patients in Taiwan were HPV-16 infection ne- also depending on DNA changes. (2000 females with BRCA1 mutation, 12 gative. This implicates that genetic variants underlying the HNSCC in Taiwan 000 unaffected women with other forms of HBC randomly selected for stu- might be different from other populations. To obtain a comprehensive over- died and control groups; expected results - patents owned by Read-Gene SA view of genetic alternations underlying HNSCC, we applied whole-exome- and publications on new method of HBC prevention. sequencing on HNSCC patients. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 253 III. Zn, Fe diet supplements - large scale production, studies of their stabilityABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and delivery for clinical trial. Acknowledgements Acknowledgements: The study is funded by the National Centre for Research COMPETE/FEDER and Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology and Development on the basis of the agreement number INNOMED/I/16/ (FCT): Project FCT PTDC/SAU-GMG/110785/2009; Post-doc grants to HP, NCBR/2014. PO, GA and JC. P S12
.083 P S12
.085 Increased risk of male cancer and identification of a potential A cancer susceptibility hotspot in HLA class I region prostate cancer cluster region in BRCA2 A. E. Kennedy1, C. Lane1, D. Seminara1, M. T. Dorak2; H. R. Nielsen1,2, J. Petersen3, C. Therkildsen4, A. Skytte5, M. Nilbert6; 1Epidemiology and Genomics Research Program, Division of Cancer Control and 1Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 2University of Southern Denmark, Population Sciences, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Odense, Denmark, 3HNPCC Register, Clinical Research Center, Copenhagen University MD, United States, 2School of Health Sciences, Liverpool Hope University, Liverpool, Hospital,, Hvidovre, Denmark, 4HNPCC Register, Clinical Research Center, Copenhagen United Kingdom. University Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 6Institute of Clinical Sciences, Division of Oncology and Pathology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. The HLA region is well recognized as the regulator of immune response, but Background is less known for its non-HLA gene content. Besides having the highest gene density in the genome, the HLA region also has remarkable gene diversi- The risk of cancer in men from BRCA families is BreRlCevAa1n t to ty. A particular subregion in the HLA class I region contains a number of BdeRfCinAe2 to motivate genetic testing and optimize recommendations for sur- candidate cancer susceptibility genes and a large number of ncRNA genes. veillance. In a cohort of 301 Danish families with mutations in and Using disease association databases, we screened SNPs from the overlap- we assessed the risk of cancer in male mutation carriers and first- ping genes CCHCR1/TCF19/POU5F1 and flanking regions (chr6:30.9-31 dReegsruelets relatives BinR CreAl1a tion to a sex-matched and birth-matched control po- .4Mb) correlated with cancer susceptibility, and annotated them to assess pulation. BRCA2 their causality. At the statistical significance threshold of 0.0001, there were Men in families were not at increased risk of cancer, except independent associations (rs6457327, rs1634718, rs130067, rs2596503, fBoRrC aA t2rend for prostate cancer before age 65, whereas men in fami- rs3130544, rs7750641) with lung/breast/cervical/prostate cancers, non- lies were at increased risk of male breast cancer and prostate cancer. Male Hodgkin lymphoma, and glioma. The lung cancer-associated SNPs were not mutation carriers were at a cumulative risk of 11% for breast cancer in LD (r2<0.50) with the primary lung cancer risk marker BAG6 rs3117582. 19% for prostate cancer. Male breast cancers developed at a mean age of 59 Each one of these SNPs had a RegulomeDB score <2b and/or CADD C-score years and were typically ER/PR positivBe RdCuAc2tal carcinomas. Prostate can- >2.5, suggesting high functionality, although none of the cancer-associated cer developed with a HR of 4.0 (p<0.001) in mutation carriers and a HR 3.3 SNPs in the region were deleterious to protein function. When their statisti- (p=0.001) in first-degree relatives. The -associated prostate cancers cally similar (r2>0.8) SNP sets were examined, they also had high functiona- developed at a mean age of 68 years and were frequently high-grade with lity scores (C-scores up to 15.8; RegulomeDB scores up to 1f). Most of these GleasoBnR CscAo2r es ≥8 in 22% of the tumors. Genotype - phenotype correlations SNPs were eQTLs for ncRNAs in this subregion (linc00243 which derives wCoenrec liudseinotnified with a HR of 9.7 (p≤0.001) for men with mutationsB iRnC aA r2egi- from IER3; HCG22 which is expressed exclusively in lymphoid tissues, lung, on of defined by nucleotides 6373-6492. breast, prostate, brain and few other tissues). These data suggest that the Male mutation carriers and first-degreBeR rCeAla2t ives in fa- subregion of HLA class I region examined in this survey contains multiple milies are at an increased risk of breast cancer and prostate cancer with a independent cancer susceptibility risk for multiple cancer types, which may potential prostate cancer cluster region within the gene. act via modifying the activity of ncRNA content. The study was financially supported by Aase and Einar Danielsens Fund, PM12.086 Region of Southern Denmark and Lillebaelt Hospital, Denmark Determination of the JAK2 V617F mutation in thrombosis patients PM12.084 S. Magmuang, S. Kantak, N. Ngaoburanawit, K. Krathong, T. Chareonsirisuthigul, B. Identification of rare CDH1 non-coding variants in Hereditary Diffuse Rerkamnuaychoke; Gastric Cancer Human Genetics Laboratory, Departments of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine H. Pinheiro1,2, P. Oliveira1,2, S. Sousa1,2, K. Shumansky3, S. Shah3, J. Senz3, G. Almeida1,2, D. Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. Ferreira1,2, J. Carvalho1,2, D. Huntsman3, C. Oliveira1,2,4; 1IPATIMUP, PORTO, Portugal, 2I3S, Instituto de Inovação e Investigação em Saúde, Porto, Portugal, 3BCCA, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Departamento de Patologia e Oncologia, Introduction: Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) gene mutation causes uncontrolled Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. myeloproliferation independent of cytokines and abnormal formation of en- dogenous erythroid colony. This mutation was found in myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs) especially in polycythemia vera (PV) and essential throm- Introduction bocythemia (ET). In addition, MPDs represent a risk factor for development Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is a rare, severe, highly penetrant of thrombosis that is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients. and difficult to diagnose syndrome. Forty-five percent of HDGC-families are Materials and Methods: We aimed to consider the correlation between JAK2 associated with germline CDH1/E-cadherin coding alterations.1-3 Other mutation and thrombosis. Thirty-nine patients who had clinical diagnosis as susceptibility genes were recently implicated in ~5% of CDH1-negative fa- thrombocytosis and Budd-Chiari syndrome from 2010 to 2014 were collec- milies.4 Of the 50% that remain without molecular diagnosis, 2/3 present ted to determine JAK2 V617F mutation. DNA from all specimens were am- germline monoallelic CDH1 downregulation5,6 and >90% display loss of E- plified and detected the presence of JAK2 V617F mutation by AS-PCR. cadherin expression in tumours.7 HDGC families lacking CDH1-coding mu- Results: In this study, we demonstrated JAK2 V617F mutation in both pa- tations may harbour causative germline alterations in non-coding regions. tients who had clinical diagnosis as thrombocytosis and Budd-Chiari syn- Material and Methods drome. We found that 11 of 37 (29.7%) thrombocytosis patients had JAK2 The entire CDH1 locus was sequenced from the germline DNA of 90 HDGC V617F mutation. Moreover, one of two patients who had represent as Budd- probands without mutations in classically screened regions. Bioinformatics Chiari syndrome was detected JAK2 V617F mutation. criteria were used to prioritize novel NCVs to be evaluated from a biological Conclusions: JAK2 V617F mutation has associated with thrombosis. Howe- standpoint: 1) chromatin status from the adjoining region; 2) occurrence in ver, further study in large series is needed to support. Determination of the putatively transcribed regions; 3) conservation level; and 4) predicted crea- JAK2 V617F mutation may be useful for screening latent or occult MPDs pa- tion/deletion of repressors/enhancers consensus sequences. tients who have occurrence of thrombosis to adjust the appropriate treat- Results and Discussion ment for good patient outcome. Thirty rare heterozygous germline CDH1 NCVs were sorted-out as putative- P S12
.087 ly disease causative for 25% of CDH1-negative probands. NCVs were clu- Revisiting the Li-Fraumeni syndrome from 415 T P53
 mutation stered in silico suggesting the existence of two different pathways impac- carriers ting gene expression: 1) promoter/enhancer-related variants that create/ G. Bougeard1, M. Renaux-Petel1, J. M. Flaman1, C. Charbonnier1, P. Fermey1, M. Belotti2, eliminate binding sites for CDH1 expression repressors/enhancers; and M. Gauthier-Villars2, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet2, E. Consolino3, L. Brugières4, O. Caron5, P. R. 2) transcription-related variants that may impair the normal CDH1 locus Benusiglio5, B. Bressac-de Paillerets3, V. Bonadona6, C. Bonaïti-Pellié7, J. Tinat1,8, S. Baert- expression pattern. This hypothesis will be biologically addressed in order Desurmont1,8, T. Frebourg1,8, the French LFS network; to confirm NCVs impact in CDH1 expression. Any pathogenic alteration will 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in warrant a complete redefinition of the screening methodology currently ap- Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Department of Genetics, Curie Institute, Paris, France, plied to HDGC families, providing simultaneously important insights for the 3Department of Genetics, Gustave Roussy Institute, Villejuif, France, 4Department of u2n5d4erstanding of CDH1 expression regulaEtiSonH.G 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Pediatric Oncology, Gustave Roussy Institute, Villejuif, France, 5Department of Medical Austria. Oncology, Gustave Roussy Institute, Villejuif, France, 6CNRS UMR 5558, University of Lyon 1, Leon Berard Cancer Centre, Lyon, France, 7Inserm UMR-S 669, University of Paris-Sud, Villejuif, France, 8Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France. Introduction Recent progress in the analysis of cell-free DNA fragments (cell-free circula- ting tumor DNA, ctDNA) now allows monitoring of tumor genomes by non- Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a remarkable cancer predisposition charac- invasive means. However, previous studies with plasma DNA from patients terised by extensive clinical heterogeneity. We performed, in the context of with cancer demonstrated highly variable allele frequencies of ctDNA. The a national study, a clinical update from the mutation carriers that we iTdPe5n3- comprehensive analysis of tumor genomes is greatly facilitated when plas- tified over the last 20 years. From 1730 patients suggestive of LFS, we iden- ma DNA has increased amounts of ctDNA. Therefore, a fast and cost-effective tified 415 mutation carriers in 214 families harbouring 133 distinct pre-screening method to identify such plasma samples without previous alterations. The 322 affected carriers developed 552 tumours and 43% knowledge about alterations in the respective tumor genome could assist in had developed multiple malignancies. The mean age of first tumour onset the selection of samples suitable for further extensive qualitative analysis. was 24.9 years, 41% being affected by age 18. In childhood, the LFS tumour Methods spectrum was characterised by osteosarcomas, adrenocortical carcinomas To address this, we adapted the recently described FAST-SeqS method, which (ACC), central nervous system tumours, and soft-tissue sarcomas (STS) was originally established as a simple and effective, non-invasive screening observed in 30, 27, 26 and 23% of the patients, respectively. In adults, the method for fetal aneuploidy from maternal blood. preseTnPt5a3ti on was characterised by the predominance of breast carcinomas Results observed in 79% of the females, and STS observed in 27% of the patients. We show that our modified FAST-SeqS method (mFAST-SeqS) can be used The mutation detection rate in children with ACC or choroid plexus as a pre-screening tool for an estimation of the ctDNA percentage. Plasma carcinomas, and in females with breast cancer before 31, without additional samples with an mFAST-SeqS z-score above 5 showed highly concordant features indicative of LFS, was 45%, 42% and 6%, respectively. The mean results compared to copy number profiles obtained from our previously age of tumour onset was statistically different (p<0.05) between carriers described plasma-Seq approach. Therefore, mFAST-SeqS revealed a general harbouring dominant-negative missense mutations (21.3 years) and those overview about the aneuploidy status of the tumor genome on the resoluti- with all types of loss of function mutations (28.5 years) or genomic rearran- on of chromosome arms. gements (T3 P55
.83 years). Affected children, except those with ACC, harboured Conclusion mostly dominant-negative missense mutations. The clinical gradient of the Advantages of this approach include that no prior knowledge about the ge- germline mutations suggests that it might be appropriate to stratify netic composition of tumor samples is necessary in order to identify bet- the clinical management of LFS according to the class of the mutation. ween plasma DNA samples with more than 10% of ctDNA content, and the PM12.088 speed and cost-effectiveness of the assay. Comparison of Real-Time PCR, fluorescent in situ hybridization and PM12.090 Immunohistochemistry for detection of MDM2 gene amplification in Pharmacogenomic study of non-small cell lung cancer Well-Differentiated and Dedifferentiated Liposarcoma about 15 cases Z. Hammoudeh1, N. Chilingirova2, L. Balabanski3, S. Ivanov3, R. Vazharova3, D. Nesheva1, S. Louati1,2, L. Chbani1,3, N. Senhaji1,2, K. Amrani Joutei2, S. Bennis1,3; B. Rukova1, S. Karachanak-Yankova1, O. Antonova1, R. Staneva1, S. Hadjidekova1, I. 1CHU Hassan II, Fez, Morocco, 2Faculty of Science and Technology, Fez, Morocco, 3Faculty Dimova1, V. Damyanova1, G. Kurteva2, D. Toncheva1; of Medicine and Pharmacy, Fez, Morocco. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Specialized hospital for active treatment in oncology –Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Malinov hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. Introduction Liposarcomas are a heterogeneous group of malignant adipocytic neoplasms that consist of 3 distinct clinicopathological entities: well-differentiated/de- Background: Lung cancer is a leading cause of death. Non-small cell lung differentiated liposarcoma, myxoid liposarcoma, and pleomorphic liposar- cancer (NSCLC) accounts for approximately 85% of all cases. Platinum coma. Dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDLPS) results from the progression based therapy is used as standard treatment for patients with NSCLC. The of a well-differentiated liposarcoma (WDLPS) to a nonlipogenic sarcoma of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been shown to play an impor- variable histologic grades and morphologic patterns that acquires metasta- tant role in the growth and survivor of many solid tumors, including NSCLC. tic potential. Gefitinib and erlotinib are EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) that Our objective is to a correlate between Real-Time PCR (RT-PCR), fluorescent blocks the signal transduction pathways implicated in the proliferation and in situ hybridization (FISH) and Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for detection survival of cancer cells. Little is known about other pharmacogenetic vari- of MDM2 gene amplification in WDLPS and DDLPS. ants in NSCLC. Methods Methods: We performed DNA analysis on 19 patients with NSCLC. Tumor 15 cases of liposarcoma were selected from the Pathological Anatomy ser- sample DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples. vice to make this correlation. Diagnosis is based on a standard histology. The samples were NGS sequenced using Illumina cancer panel (96 genes Immunohistochemical confirmation was carried out by the antibodies anti- and 256 variants) by MiSeq instrument. The pharmacogenetic significance MDM2 and anti-CDK4. The amplification of MDM2 was performed by FISH of our variants was evaluated using the information from PharmGKB data- and RT-PCR. base. Results Results: Pharmacogenetic variants were found in different genes: ERC C2
 The average age of patients is 54 years, ranging from 27 to 75 years with a (63% of the samples), T P53
 (74%), XPC (68%). These variants define NS- slight female predominance. CLC as sensitive to treatment with the platinum based therapy. Another va- 8 cases of tumors are diagnosed WDLPS and 7 other cases DDLPS. These riant in EGFR gene (EGFR R497K) sensitive to EGFR-TKI was found in 47% tumors are characterized by a heterogeneous aspect of malignant cells and of the samples by NGS sequencing. These variants can’t be detected by the positivity of anti-MDM2 and anti-CDK4 antibodies. MDM2 amplification by current IVD labelled real time PCR assays for NSCLC target therapy. FISH was found in 6 of 15 liposarcoma cases ((3/8) of WDLPS and (3/7) Conclusion: Our data shows that next generation sequencing tests reveals a of DDLPS) and in 7 cases by RT-PCR ((3/8) of WDLPS and (4/7) of DDLPS) new useful information for the personalized therapy of NSCLC. something which shows more than 85% concordance between the two tech- P S12
.091 niques knowing the sensitivity of FISH is higher than that of the RT-PCR. HLA Region Contains Multiple Lung Cancer Susceptibility Genes Conclusions I. Stasik1, A. E. Kennedy2, S. K. Singh3, M. T. Dorak1; MDM2 amplification has been shown to have high sensitivity in characteri- 1Liverpool Hope University, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 2National Cancer Institute, zing WDLPS and DDLPS. Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Florida International University, Miami, FL, United States. Differences in MDM2 amplification profiles among liposarcomas could help further define and predict progression to high-grade neoplasia. P S12
.089 The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) was strongly implicated in the Rapid aneuploidy screening of plasma DNA samples from cancer development of lung cancers in animal experiments. Lung cancers show the patients using a modified FAST-SeqS approach highest number of cancer associations with human MHC (HLA) region. For a J. Belic1, P. Ulz1, M. Auer1, K. Fischereder2, E. Petru3, T. Bauernhofer4, J. B. Geigl1, M. R. systematic analysis, we extracted 73 SNPs located within chromosome 6: 29 Speicher1, E. Heitzer1; to 33Mb and associated with lung cancer from the GWAS catalog, dbGAP, and 1Institut of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Urology, Graz, Austria, GRASP database (P<5E-04), of which 59 exceeded the genome-wide statisti- 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graz, Austria, 4Division of Oncology, Graz, cal significance threshold (P < 5E-08). Only three of those were listed in the GWAS catalog (rs3117582, rs3817963, rs2395185), with BAG6 rs3117582 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 255 being the most consistently observed. Associations were with squamousABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index MSH2 cell and adenocarcinoma, as well as lung cancers in never-smoked women. permethylation of the promoter was found in botEhP tCuAmMors and normal These SNPs also show associations with Hodgkin lymphoma, breast, and colon tissue, but noEtP inC ApMeripheral blood or oral mucosa cells of our index pa- prostate cancers. Three SNPs occur as somatic mutations in breast and co- tient, mimicking the situation inM pSaHti2e nts with a 3’end deletion. lon cancers (rs7750641, rs3749971, rs3134942). Two SNPs (rs3117582, The heterozygous variant cosegregated rs1150752) map into CgG islands, one (rs9276472) is within 500bp of a with hypermethylatioEnP oCfA Mthe promoter in his M faStHh2e r and sister. A microRNA sequence (MIR3135B), three in non-coding RNA genes, and two Lynch-like surveillance regimen was advised for all first-deEgPrCeeA MrelMatSivHe2s. are deleterious missense variants (rs9262143, rs7775397) in KIAA1949 Cosegregation of the variant c.*136C>G with EPCpArMomoter me- and  C6
orf10. Only one SNP was in an HLA gene (rs2187668, HLA-DQA1, thylation in the tumors indicateM thSaHt2 an aberration in the - lo- non-coding) and none were in a sequence encoding peptide-binding region cus other than a deletion of the polyadenylation signal of MSH2 can of HLA molecules. However, 35 of the 73 SNPs scored the highest gene regu- induce hypermethylation of the promoter. Whether there is a causal latory function in RegulomeDB analysis. Most notably, rs3117582 and its six relation between this variant and hypermethylation of the promoter statistically indistinguishable (r2 = 1) and 41 statistically similar (r2 > 0.8) is currently unclear. SNPs had high levels of functionality. These results strongly suggest that the PM12.094 HLA region contains multiple lung cancer susceptibility markers acting via An unusual case study of Lynch syndrome solved through Next more than one and non-immune-related mechanism. Generation sequencing PM12.092 B. S. Speight1, T. Elsen1, S. Abbs1, M. Tischkowitz1,2; Genomewide Copy number variation analysis and Targeted Next 1East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Academic Dept of Medical Genetics and National Institute for Health Generation Sequencing in suspected Lynch syndrome families reveals Research, Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, novel potential causative candidate genes United Kingdom. K. Kayser1, F. Degenhardt1, S. Holzapfel1, I. Spier1, E. Holinski-Feder2,3, W. Schmiegel4, S. Horpaopan1, M. Draaken1, B. Royer-Pokora5, M. von Knebel-Doeberitz6,7, H. Schackert8, C. MSH6 Engel9, M. Löffler9, J. Wijnen10, M. Nöthen1,11, P. Hoffmann11, S. Herms11, A. Hofmann11, S. Aretz1, V. Steinke1; Lynch syndrome caused by inherited mutations is characterised by an 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of increased cancer risk, predominantly of the bowel and endometrium. This Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 3Center of Medical Genetics, case study describes a cluster of three endometrial cancers in first-degree Munich, Germany, 4Clinic of Internal Medicine, Knappschaftskrankenhaus, University relatives, wiMthS Hth2e probMaSnHd6 diagnosed at 60 years. Her mother and sister of Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Heinrich Heine University were diagnosed at 59 and 74 years, respectively. The proband’s tumour sho- of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 7Cooperation Unit wed loss of and protein immunostaining, but no mutations in Applied Tumor Biology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, either gene were identified by dHPLC and MLPA testing mMeStHho2ds in M20 S0
H86. 8Department of Surgical Research, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany, Colonoscopy screening was initiated for the proband and close family mem- 9Institute for Medical Informatics Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, bers according to Lynch syndrome guidelines. In 201M4S, H6 and Leipzig, Germany, 10Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, gene testing was repeated using Next Generation sequencing and a hetero- Leiden, Netherlands, 11Institute of Human Genetics Department of Genomics, Life&Brain zygous duplication of a single nucleotide in exon 5 of was identified Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. which was verified by fluorescent sequence analysis. This finding confirmed the diagnosis of Lynch syndrome in the proband and the need for bowel screening in this family. The result also enabled predictive gene testing in Introduction: In up to 50% of suspected Lynch syndrome (LS) families with relatives and the exclusion from risk of some individuals found not to carry typical signs of mismatch repair (MMR) defect in tumor tissue, no germline the familial mutation. mutation in the MMR genes can be detected. Loss-of-function copy number This case study highlights the importance of Lynch syndrome testing in fa- variants (CNVs) in these patients might give a hint to yet unidentified genes milies with endometrial cancer that do not meet clinical diagnostic criteria. responsible for LS. It also shows 1) the utility of multi-gene testing following aberrant immu- Methods: Genomic DNA from 81 unrelated mutation-negative patients from nostaining results and 2) how updated genetic testing techniques can detect the German HNPCC Consortium and four patients from the Netherlands was pathogenic mutations previously missed by older methods. The role of the genotyped. Putative CNVs were identified and filtered according to stringent Clinical Genetics professional in conveying new personal risk information criteria to select rare, non-polymorphic deletions and duplications. Candi- derived from the use of updated technology is also discussed. date genes in validated CNVs were screened for germline point mutations P S12
.095 by a targeted NGS approach in 44 patients. Assessment of clinical history, immunhistochemical phenotype, Results: In total, 30 deletions and 18 duplications encompassing 71 protein- and germline DNA analysis in detection of LS-related PM S2
 gene coding genes were found in 35 patients. Five of these genes are promising mutations in at risk individuals from Ontario/Quebec, Canada. candidate genes that are highly expressed in normal colorectal tissue. Three J. M. Kerkhof1, M. Braga1, J. Baril1, J. A. Stuart1, P. J. Ainsworth1,2; of these genes are involved in cell adhesion, cell development and transfor- 1London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada, 2Department of Pathology, mation, cell cycle checkpoint regulation, and cell volume or polarity control. Western University, London, ON, Canada. One is involved in double strand break repair and recombination and the last one possesses DNA helicase activity. Analysis of NGS data is still ongoing. Conclusion: By applying stringent filter criteria we identified a group of rare, Lynch Syndrome (LS) is characterized by mutations in the DNA mismatch non-recurrent loss-of-function CNVs which might contain novel predispo- repair genes MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, and PM S2
. However, the identification of sing genes for LS. The ongoing NGS analysis will reveal whether there are PM S2
 specific mutations is complicated by the presence of PM S2
 pseudo- also point mutations in one of these genes confirming a possible causative genes, along with the allelic diversity of the 3’ region of PM S2
, a complexity effect for LS. which has probably led to under-reporting PM S2
 gene mutations as a cau- The study was supported by the German Cancer Aid (grant no 109370). se of LS. Acting as a referral centre serving a population of >2m. people we P S12
.093 have developed a technique to identify deleterious PM S2
 gene mutations by Unexplained hereditary hypermethylation of the MSH2 promoter combining MLPA analysis with SNP-specific probes, along with methodology, M. Ariaans1, J. Moline2, M. Schouten1, N. Hoogerbrugge1, I. Nagtegaal1, A. Mensenkamp1, adapted from Clendenning et al. (Human Mutation, 2006), utilizing genomic M. Ligtenberg1; long-range PCR enabling sequence analysis of both PM S2
 and PM S2
CL. 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, Over the past two years 85 patients were referred to this centre for PM S2
 United States. analysis because of a personal and family cancer history, and/or mis-match repair protein immunohistochemical (IHC) tumour analysis suggestive of LS. IHC findings were reviewed where available, along with tumour DNA for mi- A 43-years old male was diagnosed with two primary colorectal cancers crosatellite instability, and leukocyte-derived germline DNA was examined (CRC). The family fulfilled the Amsterdam criteria, with a father and pater- for PM S2
 gene mutations. nal grandmother with CRC at age 57 and 50, respectively. A sister was dia- 24 of the 85 referred patients demonstrated an isolated IHC loss of PM S2
, gnosed with a colorectal adenoma at age 42. MSH2 MSH6 14 of the 24 (58%) proved to be PM S2
 mutation positive, with 2 of the 24 The CRCs of both our iEnPdCeAxM and his father were MSI-high with lackE PoCf nAuMc lear demonstrating an MLH1 mutation. In the remaining 61 patients (primarily sMtaSiHn2ing of MSH2. Neither a germline EmPuCtAaMtio, n in or nor a copy showing MLH1/PM S2
 loss by IHC) no PM S2
 gene mutations were identified. number alteration in and the intergenic region between and We propose that it is reasonable to limit PM S2
 gene analysis to patients con- was detected. In the 3’UTR of about 280 nt upstream of the sidered to be at risk of LS to those individuals who demonstrate isolated IHC p2o5ly6-adenylation signal, a heterozygous vaEriSanHt Gwa 2s 0pr1e5se n| tG: cL.*A13 S6
GC>OGW. Hy, -SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG loss of PM S2
 protein.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM12.096 Uterine cancer in Lynch syndrome: clinico-pathological and molecular features peripheral-blood cytopenias, and a risk of progression to acute myeloid leu- L. Libera1, I. W. Carnevali1, L. Cimetti1, N. Sahnane1, A. Chiaravalli1, D. Furlan1, T. Rossi2, kPeamtieian. tCso annvden Mtieotnhaol dcys:t ogenetic analysis (CCA) is one of many prognostic A. Viel3, F. Sessa1, C. Riva1, M. Tibiletti1; factors included in International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS). 1Department of Surgical and Morphological Sciences, University of Insubria and We investigated 804 patients with primary MDS in Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy, 2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University years 2003-2014. The CCA was performed on bone marrow samples using of Insubria and Ospedale Filippo Del Ponte, Varese, Italy, 3Division of Experimental short time cultivation. Interphase FISH was carried out using DNA probes Oncology I, CRO, Aviano, Italy. dReessiuglntesd: to detect 5q, 7q, 11q, 12p, 17p and 20q deletions, trisomy 8, loss Y Background: (MetaSystems Germany, Abbott Molecular). We cultivated 94,5 % of samples successfully. Chromosomal aberra- Lynch Syndrome (LS) arises from a geMrmeltihnoed ms:u tation in tions were detected in 23 % of patients using CCA and I-FISH. CCA revealed MMR genes and predisposes to colorectal and uterine cancers (UC). The aim chromosomal aberrations in 9 % of patients with negative I-FISH results. of this work was to deeply characterize the UC iRne LsSu. lts: 29 LS-UC For statiestt iacla.l analysis of our data we followed The New Comprehensive Cy- and 38 sporadic cancer for comparison were studied for clinicopathological togenetic Scoring System of chromosomal abveerrray tgioonosd in MDS gdoeofidn e- d by features, MMR IHC, MSI and MLH1 methylation. The mean age at Schianntezr media (t2e012) andp owoer classified pavteieryn tpso aocrcording to chromosomal the UC diagnosis of LS patients was 46 years respect to patient with sporadic aCbonnocrlumsailoitnie: s into five prognostic subgroups: - 3,0 %, 80,9 UC (55 years, p=0.007). BMI of LS patients was 24 (normal weight) respect %, - 5,8 %, et a- l3. ,7 % and - 6,6 %. to the patients with sporadic cancer (BMI=27,3; p=0.04). UC arose as first Our comparison with New Comprehensive Cytogenetic Scoring manifestation of the pathology in 34,5% of LS patients. Corpus of the uterus System defined by Schanz (2012) will be discussed in the poster. Ho- was the prevalent site of onset, while 3 LS-UC arose in the Lower Uterine wever we were able to classify 757 of our patients into this scoring system. Segment (LUS) and 4 in the cervical canal. Most of the tumors showed an According to our results it is important to combine both cytogenetic me- endometrioid histotype. Abundant tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) thods (CCA and I-FISH) to correct classification of patients into prognostic and peritumoral lymphocytes (PL) were observed in LS-UC in comparison to subgroups and suggest appropriate therapy. the sporadic ones. IHC loss of at least one MMR protein was observed in 27 P S12
.099 cases (93%), including 19 cases with MSH2 and/or MSH C6
o lnocsslu asniodn 8s :c ases The analysis of somatic mutations in melanoma patients using with M LH1 and PM S2
 loss. MSI was detected in 27 cases (93%). Interestin- hybridization with diagnostic biochips gly, 4 LS-UC presented also MLH1 promoter methylation. This M. Emelyanova1,2, L. Lyubchenko2, L. Demidov2, A. Zasedatelev1,2, T. Nasedkina1,2; study demonstrates that the evaluation of these clinico-pathological and 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, molecular features is an efficient strategy to identify LS and to refer those Russian Federation, 2Clinical Oncology Research Institute, N. N. Blokhin Russian Cancer patients to the genetic counseling. Research Center of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. P S12
.097 Developing and implementing gene-specific clinical management guidelines for Lynch syndrome Melanoma is one of the most aggressive cancers. Target inhibitors are being B. DeSouza1,2, Z. Kemp1, J. Wiggins1, K. Kohut1, A. George1,2, N. Rahman1,2, H. Hanson1,2; developed for the tre aBtRmAeFntK oIfT caNnRcAeSr pMaEtiKe1n/ts2 wGiNthA QparticuGlNarA 1tu1m or geno- 1Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Division of type. A diagnostic biochip has been developed which allowed analyzing 40 Genetics & Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom. somatic mutations in , , , , and genes po- tentially relevant to existing and emerging targeted therapies in melanoma. The technique of LNA-blocking PCR was used for specific amplification of Background: Lynch syndrome is genetically heterogeneous, caused by mutant DNA in a large excess of wild-type DNA. The amplified fragments mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes: MLH1, MSH2 (including were labeled via incorporation of fluorescently labeled nucleotide during EPCAM-deletion mediated MSH2 hypermethylation), MSH6 and PM S2
. It is the second round of PCR and were hybridized with specific oligonucleotides characterised by predisposition to colorectal (CRC), endometrial and other immobilized on a biochip. The assay was tested using cell lines, fresh-fBroRzAeFn cancers. Cancer surveillance and risk-reduction strategies have been intro- tNisRsAuSe, KaInTd formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue. The clinical samples duced on the basis of cancer risks in MLH1 and MSH2 mutation carriers. from 52 patients with melanoma of skin were analyzed. Mutation in , However, emerging data suggest the cancer spectrum and penetrance may , genes were detected in 52%, 15% and 3% of patients, respec- differ substantially between the MMR genes. tively. The validation was done using Sanger sequencing. This approach was Objectives: To review cancer penetrance and evidence for risk-reducing in- able to detect approximately 1% of mutated alleles in wild-type DNA back- terventions in MMR mutation carriers, and to provide management recom- ground. mendations for carriers based on individualised cancer risks. We consider that the biochip-based assay is a reliable and inexpensive me- Methods: A systematic literature review was conducted to identify relevant thod for the identification of melanoma patients, who may respond to a spe- studies meeting inclusion and quality criteria. Using these data manage- cific target therapy. ment recommendations were then developed and implemented following This work was supported by grant of the Russian Science Foundation (grant a consensus meeting. # 14-35-00107) and the co-financing provided by the Federal Agency for Results: Available data supports gene-specific management protocols for the Scientific Organizations. MMR genes. We recommend colonoscopy at 18-monthly intervals starting at PM12.100 25yrs for MLH1 and MSH2 carriers and 30yrs for MSH6 and PM S2
 carriers. Genetics of inherited cutaneous melanoma in Latvia: functional and This is based on the reduced and later age-dependent CRC penetrance for next-generation sequencing approach MSH6 and PM S2
 carriers. We recommend female MLH1 and MSH2 carriers A. Ozola, R. Veinalde, I. Mandrika, D. Pjanova; consider risk-reducing hysterectomy and bilateral-salpingo-oophorectomy Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Rīga, Latvia. (BSO) from 40yrs, but available data does not support recommendation of BSO in premenopausal MSH6 and PM S2
 carriers. Conclusion: We have implemented gene-specific protocols for MMR muta- IntroductioCnD: KANp2pAroximately 10% of cutaneous melanomas occur in the fa- tion carriers at the Royal Marsden. The protocols, accompanying FAQs and miCliDalK s4etBtiAnPg1. HPeOreTd1itMarIyT FmelanoTmERaT is mainly caused by germline mutati- background document are freely available at www.icr.ac.uk/protocols (pro- ons in the gene (in approximately 39% of all families) and rarely tocols 9-12). in , , , , and genes. However, in more than half of This work was funded by the RM/ICR NIHR BRC the familiesC tDhKe4 inherited mutations causing melanoma aCreD KstNil2l Au/npk1n4oAwRnF. PM12.098 In Latvia melanoma predisposition is mainly associated with R24H muta- Prognostic significance of cytogenetic and molecular-genetic changes tion in the gene and recently the first family with in patients with MDS promoter deletion c.– 20677_–20682delGTACGC was found. Although, in the A. Strnkova1, B. Drevojankova1, M. Stoklasova1, L. Truhlikova1, A. Burdova1, T. majorityC DoKf Nfa2mA/ilpie1s4 A(1R9F/23 (83%)) the inherited gene mutations causing Sablaturova1, M. Wrobel2, D. Klodova2, J. Gumulec3, D. Adamova4, M. Brejcha2; melanoma are not found. The aim of this study was to analyse the associa- 1Laboratore AGEL a.s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Hospital Novy Jicin a.s., Novy Jicin, tion of promoter deletion with melanoma and to test its Czech Republic, 3Faculty Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 4Hospital Opava, Opava, Czech Republic. functionality, as well as, to analyse Latvian melanoma families for mutations in newly characterized mCelDaKnNom2Aa/ spu1s4cAeRpFtibility genes using next-generati- Introduction: on sequencing. Materials and Methods: promoter region with deletion The myelodysplastic syndromes are a group of hematopoietic disorders characterized by clonaEl SheHmGat o2p0o1ie5si s|, GimLpAaiSreGd OdiWffe,r eSnCtiOatiToLn,A NwDa,s UgeKno |t yWpeWd oWn .aEnS AHBIG 31.O00R SGequencer. Two sided Fisher’s exact tes 2t w 5a 7s applied for statistical analysis. Luciferase expression system was used forABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia. deletion’s functionality assessment. Agilent SureDesign tool was used to MLH1 create HaClDoPTKMlNex2 Ac/upst1o4mAR dFesign panel for next-generation sequencing on the LMySnHc2h sMynSdHr6ome P(LMSS)2 is an autosomal dominant inherited cancer caused by a Ion Torrent system. germline mutation in one of the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes: , Results: deletion c.-20677_-20682delGTACGC was found , , or . Individuals with LS will commonly present with co- in 7 of 211 melanomas patients and 2 of 326 controls (OR=6B.3A5P, 195T%ER CTI lorectal cancer (CRC), however female carriers also have an increased risk  P1
.O3T41-3 C0
D.2K2N, p2=A0C.0D1K74). MDeCl1eRtion’s functionality and next-generation sequen- of developing endometrial cancer (EC). It is important to distinguish LS pati- cing results using HaloPlex platform that includes six full size ( , , ents from sporadic cancer patients in order for appropriate disease surveil- , , , ) and 60 SNPs from 15 other melanoma suscep- lance and family members to be counselled. tibility genes will be discussed. The Molecular Oncology Laboratory currently performs a number of genetic P S12
.101 tests aimed at identifying these patients, including immunohistochemistry Severity score for multiple endocrine neoplasia (IHC), microsatellite instability (MSI) and MLH1 promoter methylation. A. Sakurai1,2, S. Suzuki2, T. Okamoto2, T. Imai2, S. Kosugi2, S. Uchino2; Methylation of specific regions of the promoter for the MLH1 gene results in 1Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan, 2MEN Consortium of Japan, Sapporo, epigenetic silencing of the gene and the patient may present with a similar Japan. clinical picture to a patient carrying a germ-line MMR gene mutation. Iden- tification of MLH1 methylation will indicate that LS is unlikely and that MMR gene mutation screening is not required. Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) is autosomal dominantly inherited tu- Methylation testing is carried out using a methylation-sensitive multiplex- mor syndrome which is characterized by occurrence of various endocrine ligation dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) technique which targets and non-endocrine tumors. Clinical features and severity of each manifesta- 5 sites in the MLH1 promoter corresponding to regions A, B, C and D and tion varies among patients even in the same family. As involvement of many intron 1. specialists of different specialty is necessary for comprehensive clinical care A review has been performed comparing the MLH1 methylation results at 5 of patients with MEN, parameters to objectively evaluate patient’s clinical sites in EC patients, with results in CRC patients. The incidence of EC patients severity will be useful. For this purpose, members of the “MEN consortium with MLH1 methylation is 86%, with 97% of patients showing methylation of Japan” prepared a “Severity score chart for MEN1 and MEN2” in trial. In across all 5 regions, compared with 74% of CRC patients. Therefore MLH1 this chart, evaluation of each patient is performed with three steps. In Step promoter methylation testing in combination with IHC and MSI provides a 1, absence or presence of each disorder and degree of burden is evaluated useful diagnostic tool for identifying patients with LS. by five-level rating scale (0, absence of the disease; 4, the most severe). De- PM12.104 gree of burden is judged based on Karnofsky Performance Status Scale (Kar- Sanger sequencing of low amount of genomic DNA and FFPE DNA with nofsky and Burchenal, 1949). Then in Step 2, absence or presence of distant PCR Primers derived from the Ion AmpliSeq cancer hotspot panel metastasis of the tumor is scored and in Step 3, severity grade of the patient K. Varma1, E. Schreiber1, A. Broomer2, M. Adams2; is judged. Presymptomatic subjects who have pathogenic mutation but no 1Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Thermo Fisher apparent diseases are categorized as Grade I and the most severe case is ca- Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, United States. tegorized as Grade VI. Although current trial model solely evaluates physical disorders, we are aware that patient’s psychological burden should also be evaluated. We are now estimating the utility of this score chart for future The introduction of Ion AmpliSeq™ panels for characterization of mutati- standardization after necessary modification. ons occurring in tumor tissue has revolutionized translational oncology re- PM12.102 search. The Ion Ampliseq™ cancer hotspot panel version 2 (CHP v2) includes mir-221 as a pre- and post-operative plasma biomarker for laryngeal 207 actionable mutation targets in 50 genes and the Ion Oncomine™ cancer squamous cell carcinoma patients panel over 2000 mutations. A hallmark of these Ampliseq cancer panels is S. Salman Yilmaz1, E. Guzel1,2, O. F. Karatas1,3, M. Yilmaz4, M. B. Duz1, M. Ozen1,2,5; the low amount of input DNA needed which is critical when specimen mate- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical School, rial is limited such as with needle biopsy or FFPE samples. Typically, 10 ng Istanbul, Turkey, 2Biruni University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Molecular Biology and Genetics of DNA is sufficient to produce informative sequencing data. Often, cancer- Department, Erzurum Technical University, Erzurum, Turkey, 4Department of causing or promoting mutations are detected at low allele frequencies like Otorhinolaryngology, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Department of Pathology & Immunology Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 10-20 % compared to the normal allele. Many researchers wish to verify United States. these low frequency mutations by an orthologous method such as Sanger sequencing on a capillary electrophoresis (CE) instrument. To that end, we have developed a workflow that enables the amplification and traditional Larynx Cancer (LCa) comprises about 1% to 2.5% of all human neoplasms Sanger sequencing of individual Ion AmpliSeq targets directly from the Am- and it mostly originates from squamous cell carcinoma. Although distinct pliSeq library starting material. The method requires 1 μl (~ 5%) of the ori- diagnostic and therapeutic approaches have been suggested for LCa, they ginal AmpliSeq preamplification material. A dilution of this aliquot is used are still controversial and more efforts are required for their effective use. as template source for individualized PCR/sequencing reactions. We show MicroRNAs (miRNA) have been shown to play significant roles in the regula- that a selection of 48 targets from the CHPv2 panel could be successfully tion of carcinogenesis and they were demonstrated to be present in a stable amplified and Sanger-sequenced from an Ampliseq library originally prepa- form in various human body fluids including plasma. Besides, miRNAs have red from 10 ng of FFPE DNA. Furthermore, we show the successful Sanger- been postulated in distinct studies as strong diagnostic or prognostic bio- re-sequencing of all individual 24 targets covering the T P53
 exons from the markers. same sample processed and pre-amplified with the OncoMine AmpliSeq pa- In this study, we aimed to compare the miRNA profile of plasma samples ob- nel. This method enables researchers to reflex-test potential mutations from tained from 30 LCa patients (pre-operative and post-operative serum samp- very material-limited specimen using Sanger CE sequencing. les) and 30 healthy controls to identify a miRNA expression signature, which PM12.106 can be used to distinguish LCa patients from healthy individuals. NAB2-STAT6 fusion gene: Meningeal hemangiopericytomas and MiRNA profiling of eight plasma samples (four from pre-operative LCa samp- meningomas comparative study. les, four from control individuals) were performed using miRNA microarray. S. Trabelsi1, D. H‘mida Ben Brahim1, N. Mama2, M. Ladib3, S. Popov4, A. Burford4, M. Two of the significantly deregulated miRNAs were selected for further con- Chourabi1, M. Haddaji Mastouri1, M. Mokni5, K. Tlili6, H. Krifa7, C. Jones4, M. T. Yacoubi8, A. Saad1; firmation using quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (qRT-PCR). Statisti- 1Department of Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology, Farhat cal analysis was performed using Student’s t-test. Hached University Hospital, Sousse , Tunisia, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of imagery, Microarray profiling showed that miR-221 was upregulated and miR-133b Sahloul University Hospital Sousse, Tunisia., Sousse, Tunisia, 3Department of Neuro- was downregulated in LCa plasma samples. qRT-PCR analysis confirmed the Surgery, Sahloul University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Divisions of overexpression of miR-221 in plasma samples of LCa. Further analysis qRT- Molecular Pathology and Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, PCR analysis demonstrated the reduced level of miR-221 to the normal level Sutton,London, UK, London, United Kingdom, 55. Department of Histopathology- in the post-operative plasma samples. Cytopathology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, Sousse, Tunisia, 6Departement of radiology, Sahloul university Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia., Sousse, Tunisia, P S12
.103 7Departement of Neurosurgery, Sahloul university Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia., Sousse, Assessment of MLH1 promoter methylation in patients with Tunisia, 8Departement of pathology, Farhat HACHED Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia., Sousse, endometrial cancer. Tunisia. K. Ambler, M. Zawitkowski, M. Ho; 258 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG Background: Meningeal hemangiopericytoma (MHPC) is a vascular tumorABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index arising from pericytes. Most intracranial MHPCs resemble meningiomas tation darker than usually seen in Nf1. She had vtehry mild axillary and groin (MNGs) in their clinical presentation and histological features and may freckling. Her head circumference was on the 97 centile. Her grandmother therefore be misdiagnosed, despite their important differences in progno- was affected with bowel cancer. Homozygous pathogenic MSH6 mutations sis. were found in our patient, confirming a diagnosis of mismatch repair cancer Methods: We report 8 cases of MHPC and 5 cases of MNG collected from (Turcot) syndrome. No mutations were found in the Nf1 gene. 2007 to 2011 from the neuro-Surgery and histopathology departments. All At age 11yr she developed two bowel malignancies. Her mother was also 13 samples were re reviewed by two independent pathologists and investi- diagnosed with colon cancer. gated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) using mesenchymal, epithelial and There are only 6 reports of MSH6 homozygosity in the literature. Sadly the neuro-glial markers. Additionally, we screened all tumors for a large panel prognosis is poor. Problems include childhood intracranial astrocytomas or of chromosomal alterations using Multiplex Ligation Probe Amplification lymphomas, and colon cancer from 8yrs but usually in the teens or twenties. (MLPA). Presence of the NAB2-STAT6 fusion gene inferred by immunohisto- The parents and other family members will be MSH6 mutation carriers and chemical staining for STAT6. require surveillance for bowel and endometrial cancers. Result: Compared with MNG, MHPCs showed strong VIM (100% of cases), The presence of atypical signs, consanguinity or a family history of bowel CD99 (62%), bcl-2 (87%), and p16 (75%) staining but only focal positivity cancer means that the diagnosis may not be Nf1 even in a child who meets with EMA (33%) and NSE (37%). The p21 antibody was positive in 62% of the diagnostic criteria. MHPC and less than 1% in all MNGs. MLPA data did not distinguish HPC from P S12
.109 MNG, with PTEN loss and ERBB2 gain found in both. By contrast, STAT6 nu- Genetic Testing Of Hereditary Breast And Ovarian Cancer Using Next clear staining was observed in 3 MHPC cases and was absent from MNG. Generation Sequencing And MLPA. Conclusion: MNG and MHPC comprise a spectrum of tumors that cannot be V. FELIPE, L. Pérez-Cabornero, D. Valero-Hervás, A. Romera-López, D. Cantalapiedra, G. easily differentiated based on histopathology. The presence of STAT6 nu- Hernández, M. Roca, D. Diego-Alvarez, C. Buades, C. Collado-Micó, Á. Arilla-Codoñer, G. clear positivity may however be a useful diagnostic marker. Marco, O. Rodríguez, J. Triviño, S. Santillán; SISTEMAS GENOMICOS, PATERNA, Spain. P S12
.107 Genome-wide copy number analysis of pediatric malignancies. P. Clark1, S. Addya2, K. McCormick2, P. Koduru3, L. J. Kricka4, D. Rakheja3,5, A. Ertel2, E. Londin6, J. Y. Park7,5, P. Fortina8; 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children’s Hospital of Molecular diagnosis oBfR HCeAr1e ditarByR BCrAe2ast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) is es- Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2Cancer Genomics Laboratory, Sidney sential for the appropriate genetic counseling and to establish preventive Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States, screening strategies. and screening is offered to patients from 3Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, high risk families. Several studies have demonstrated the potential of NGS in TX, United States, 4Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Department of Pathology the field of research and genetic diagnosis. BRCA1 and Laboratory Medicine, Children’s Health, Dallas, TX, United States, 6Computational TherBeRfoCrAe2, we designed a NGS targeted panel for genes associated with Medicine Center, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, HBOC. Target regions (coding exons, splice sites and 5’-3‘UTRs) for Philadelphia, PA, United States, 7Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and and were enriched and captured using SureSelect system (Agilent) Development, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United and sequenced with MiSeq (Illumina). This panel was validated for dia- States, 8Cancer Genomics Laboratory, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson gnostic use with two HapMap cell lines and a set of cases with a previously University, Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. known mutation detected by Sanger sequencing. After validation, samples from 180 patients with clinical suspicion of HBOC were tested in our labo- ratory. Clinically relevant findings were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Neuroblastoma and hepatoblastoma are two cancers commonly characteri- Negative results were tested for large genomic rearrangements using MLPA. zed by chromosomal abnormalities such as copy number gains and losses, A test report was issued in 5 weeks. and regions of loss of heterozygosity (LOH). Typically, these abnormalities We identified 69B vRaCrAia1nts in 55 pBaRtiCeAn2ts. All sequence variants could be are detected through traditional cytogenetic and microsatellite assays. The confirmed by Sanger. Thirty-one were classified as disease-causing (8 novel heterogenous nature of these diseases suggests that additional genomic mutations; 18 in and 13 in ) and 38 as VUS. Thirty out of 180 events, such as DNA variants and chromosomal gains/losses contribute to patients (16.6%) were genetically diagnosed. The mutation spectrum inclu- the disease etiology. With this in mind, we explored the use of the Affymetrix ded SNVs, small deletions/duplications, and large rearrangements. OncoScan FFPE Assay to improve on the diagnostic cytogenetics of these Our results suggest that the combined NGS + MLPA panel may benefit ap- 2 cancer types. DNA was tested from FFPE pediatric tumor samples from propriately selected patients for the molecular diagnosis of HBOC, as it has 6 hepatoblastoma and 8 neuroblastoma cases. 6 of 8 neuroblastoma cases been proven as a fast, reliable and cost-effective alternative to Sanger se- had MYCN amplification assessed by FISH. Cytogenetics was normal for the quencing. 6 hepatoblastoma cases, while Oncoscan testing revealed all 6 had copy PM12.110 number gains in 1q32 or 2p24, previously reported to be frequent in hepa- Predisposition to breast cancer in NF1 occurs before, but not after, toblastoma. For neuroblastomas, the cytogenetic and FISH findings were all age 50y and is unrelated to NF1 gene mutation type or site confirmed by Oncoscan. In addition, multiple CNV and LOH were identified I. M. Frayling1, R. van Minkelen2, D. Baralle3, D. M. Eccles3, A. Varan4, S. Aktas5, H. Cox1, S. by Oncoscan. Furthermore, Oncoscan analysis of all tumor samples revealed Ferkal6, P. Wolkenstein7, V. Mautner8, M. Upadhyaya1; 6 single nucleotide variants in 4 genes previously shown to be associated 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Klinische Genetica, Erasmus MC, with neoplasia. The variants were independently validated using targeted Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Faculty of Medicine, Southampton University, Southampton, panels on both the Ion Torrent and MiSeq DNA Sequencers. These results United Kingdom, 4Hacettepe Üniversitesi Kanser Enstitüsü, Hacettepe, Turkey, 5Dokuz show that the OncoScan assay can accurately identify both chromosomal ab- Eylül Üniversitesi, Izmir, Turkey, 6Service de Santé Publique, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 7Immunity Transplantation Infections, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, normalities and DNA variants that may otherwise be missed by traditional France, 8Neurofibromatose–Ambulanz–Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. methodologies. PM12.108 Homozygosity for MSH6 mutations Misdiagnosed as Breast cancer (BC) is reported to occur in women with NF1 at increased in- Neurofibromatosis Type 1 cidence, especially those under 50y. We therefore ascertained women with S. M. Sharif, A. Dobbie; NF1 and BC known to colleagues across Europe: total = 31. NF1 testing had Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Leeds, United Kingdom. found mutations in 26. Five had also undergone BRCA1/2 testing, revealing one BRCA2 mutation (BC age 46y; excluded). Mean age of onset of BC was 44.7y (n = 20; range 30-65y; SD 10y). 15 cases Homozygosity for MSH6 mutations Misdiagnosed as Neurofibromatosis occurred <50y, with 5y cohort standardised incidence ratios significantly Type 1 raised in this group: 45-49y = 4.6(1.2-11.7), 40-44y = 5.8(1.2-17), 35-39y Saghira Malik Sharif, Dr Angus Dobbie = 19.2(6.2-45), 30-34y = 27.0(5.4-79), but it is not possible to estimate the Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Leeds, United Kingdom precise absolute risk from our data. A 7 year old girl presented with multiple café au lait patches and mild de- There was no difference in mutation type: truncating v. missense, compared velopmental delay. She was the middle of three children of consanguineous to the NF1 LOVD (23, 3, 2158, 288; Fishers exact, ns).[www.lovd.nl/NF1] Pakistani parents. She was given a diagnosis of Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Mutations were distributed from exons 6 - 54, not significantly different (Nf1). At age 9yr, she developed seizures and a brain MRI showed a multi from those on the LOVD, and there was also no relationship with either the focal grade 3 anaplastic astrocytoma. She was seen in the genetics clinic. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANGDR,D U oKr A |T WP-bWindWin.gE dSoHmGai.nOs.(RFGisher’s exact). 259 She had multiple café au lait patches and unusual speckled hyperpigmen-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S12
.113 Detection of NRAS and KRAS mutation in AML patients by This is the first such study combining clinical and molecular data. We con- Pyrosequencing clude that BC occurs in a subset of women with NF1 at a young age, and A. Kongruang, N. Limsuwannachot, T. Chareonsirisuthigul, B. Rerkamnuaychoke; while the absolute risk is low, the relative risks appear high. The risk >50y Human Genetics Laboratory, Departments of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine is not increased. This predisposition does not appear to be a function of the Ramathibodi Hospital,Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. underlying NF1 mutation type or site. This needs to be confirmed in other or larger cohorts, or possibly prospective studies, before recommendations might be made regarding surveillance. Genomic analysis may provide addi- Introduction: RAS genes play important roles in the regulatory processes tional insights. of proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. RAS mutations result in oc- P S12
.111 currence of protein that induces uncontrolled cell proliferation and inhibit Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) analysis of 850 patients with apoptosis. These mutations have been described in various human malig- Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer: mutational spectrum in 94 nancies including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). cancer associated genes Materials and Methods: We demonstrated NRAS and KRAS mutation in AML A. Benet-Pagès1, A. Rump2, R. Janavicius3, C. Rapp1, A. M. Nissen1, A. Laner1, M. Locher1, patients by pyrosequencing. Twenty samples from AML patients were eva- E. Schröck2, E. Holinski-Feder1; luated for mutation of these genes around the hot spots in codons 12, 13 and 1MGZ - Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 2Institut für Klinische 61. Pyrosequencing was performed for detection of KRAS and NRAS mutati- Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, on on the Pyromark Q24 system. Dresden, Germany, 3Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania. Results: Three of twenty patients (15%) had NRAS mutations and one of twenty patients (5%) had KRAS mutations. We found NRAS mutation in all of three codons; one case in codons 12, one case in codons 13 and one Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) is caused by germline mutations mainly case in codons61. Both NRAS mutation in codons 12 and codons 13 were in BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BC:5-7%, OC:11-15%), but mutations in low-pene- resulting in changes from glycine to asparagine (GGT>GAT) whereas NRAS trance susceptibility genes have been also demonstrated to account for si- mutation in codons 61 was resulting in changes from glutamine to histidine gnificant cancer risk. Knowing the underlying molecular defects can be very (CAA>CAT). Only one case that found KRAS mutation in codons 12 was re- valuable for diagnosis, guiding treatment and estimating recurrence risks. sulting in changes from glycine to asparagine (GGT>GCT). Here we report the results of panel-based NGS screening of 94 genes asso- Conclusion: In this study, pyrosequencing is a powerful tool for detection ciated with hereditary cancer predisposition. 850 patients were consecutive of and KRAS mutation. The detection rate of NRAS mutation is higher than tested for BRCA1/BRCA2 and a comprehensive diagnostic HBOC-panel in- KRAS mutation in AML patients. However, a large number of AML cases is cluding 38 genes. Patients with negative or inconclusive results were further needed for further studying the molecular mechanisms in the pathogenesis analyzed for the remaining genes. Target enrichment with the Illumina Tru- and for prognostic value of the KRAS and NRAS mutations. Sight Cancer Panel was followed by paired-end sequencing and bioinforma- PM12.114 tics data analysis. Diagnostic quality criteria ensured a minimal depth of 30X From oral cancer genetic and epigenetic alterations to clinical in at least 98% of the analyzed regions with 99.99% sensitivity and spe- outcome prediction cificity in variant calling. For BRCA1/BRCA2 more stringent criteria were I. P. Ribeiro1,2, F. Caramelo3, F. Marques2,4,5, A. Domingues1, A. Estevinho1, M. J. Julião6, A. required (i.e. 100% coverage at >30X and deletion/duplication analysis). Ferreira7, I. P. Baptista2,4, J. B. Melo1,2, I. M. Carreira1,2; Results show that 8% of the patients have BRCA1/BRCA2 pathogenic mu- 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, tations (class 4, 5), 7% were inconclusive (class 3) and 85% were negati- Coimbra, Portugal, 2CIMAGO - Center of Investigation on Environment, Genetics ve (class 1, 2). Analysis of the HBOC-panel increased the diagnostic yield and Oncobiology - Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, to 20%. Pathogenic variants were additionally found in ATM, BLM, BRI P1
, 3Laboratory of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, IBILI - Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Department of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine, BUB1B, CHEK2, FANCA, FANCC, FANCD2, NBN, PALB2, RAD51D, RECQ L4
 University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Stomatology Unit, Coimbra Hospital and and T P53
. 41% presented VUS and 39% were negative. Further screening of University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Department of Pathology, Coimbra the remaining cancer predisposition genes revealed pathogenic variants in Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Maxillofacial Surgery genes with no confirmed association with HBOC: BA P1
, ERC C2
, ERC C3
 and Unit, Coimbra Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal. MUTYH. Some of the genes were identified as causative only once, emphasi- zing the advantage of diagnostic panels for HBOC testing. PM12.112 Introduction: Oral cancer is a clinical and molecular heterogeneous malig- Multigene panel testing in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer nancy characterized by low survival and high mortality rates. The biological patients behavior of this neoplasm varies and tumors with the same clinic-pathologi- U. E. A. Faust, C. Schroeder, T. Benkert, F. Harmuth, M. Heilig, S. Hertler, S. Gauß, M. cal features often respond differently to the same treatment. Thus, the iden- Sturm, K. Grundmann-Hauser, K. Bosse, H. Nguyen, O. Riess, P. Bauer; tification of genetic and epigenetic biomarkers is mandatory to improve dia- Dept of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, Germany. gnosis, prognosis, early detection of tumors and relapses and ultimately to delineate individualized therapy. Methods: Tumor tissues from 73 patients with oral tumors and gingival samples from 16 healthy donors were used as Objective: Here, we summarize our experience over the last 2.5 years of controls. Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampli- HBOC-NGS-panel testing in a cohort of 364 patients that were referred to fication (MS-MLPA) was conducted to screen copy number alterations and our institute for genetic testing. DNA methylation patterns in 54 tumor suppressor genes. Results: From the Methods: DNA of all patients was enriched using a custom-design panel 54 tumor suppressor genes analyzed those that most frequently exhibited (Haloplex, Agilent) and sequenced on a MiSeq (Illumina). A median of 1.45 hypermethylation were WT1, MSH6, PAX5 and GATA5. The most frequent million reads was generated per sample resulting. Further analysis was li- copy number alterations were located at chromosomes 3, 9, 11, 12, 16, 17 mited to a set of 12 core genes. The median overall 20x-coverage was 98.01 and 19, highlighting, for example, CTNNB1 and FHIT genes with losses and %. Genes directly requested by the genetic counselor were complemented CDH1, BRCA1, PYCARD, STK11 and CHFR genes with gains. It was possible by MLPA as well as Sanger sequencing for low coverage regions (< 20x). The to find some statistically significant associations among these alterations custom-design panel was continuously optimized and a reduction of mis- and the clinic-pathological features of the patients, such as metastases and sing bases by a factor of four was possible over time. also smoking habits. Conclusion: The combination of genetic and epigenetic Results: Adding 10 more genes in diagnostic HBOC testing revealed the ge- studies together with the pathological diagnosis seems to be mandatory not netic underlying cause in additional 6% of all patients. In total, 19.4 % of only to early detect these tumors and relapses but also to predict their cli- our patients carried a mutation within one of the 12 core genes: 7.82 % in nical behavior. In this way, the increasing knowledge about the genetic and BRCA1, 4.85 % in BRCA2, 4.04 % in CHEK2, 1.35 % in ATM, 0.81 % in CDH1 epigenetic mechanisms associated to oral cancer, opens new possibilities at and 0.27 % in NBN. the diagnostic, prognostic and treatment level. Conclusion: Taken together, we demonstrate that NGS is a fast and cost ef- P S12
.115 ficient genetic screening tool to analyze for variants in genes associated with Impact of multi-gene testing in ovarian carcinoma patients selected the development of hereditary breast cancer However, with an increasing for personal and/or family history number of genes, correct variant interpretation is challenging and requires M. T. Ricci1, V. Gismondi1, V. Rea1, P. Bruzzi2, L. Varesco1; extensive genetic expertise. Furthermore, clinical guidelines for the new 1IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, Unit of Hereditary Cancer, Genoa, Italy, 2IRCCS AOU San diagnostic BRCA genes still need to be agreed on. Martino-IST, Unit of Clinical Epidemiology, Genoa, Italy. 260 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG Background: 20-25% of Ovarian Carcinomas (OC) are the result of an inhe-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index BRCA rited predisposition. Besides and MMR genes, several additional con- ATM and NBN genes were recorded with low frequency in Czech populati- tributing genes have been identified. Multi-gene panel testing provides an on, and therefore they can not be recommended for routine clinical testing. efficient method for a comprehensive assessment of genes associated with In contrast, the analysis of c.1100delC mutation and large exon 9 and 10 cancer risks. We report our experience of effective multi-gene testing in OC deletions in CHEK2 gene were recommended for practice in the CzR; cur- patients selected during genetic counselling (GC) for personal and/or family rently, missense variants of this gene are subject of focused research. PALB2 history. gene testing in patients with BOC, but with a normal sequence in BRCA1 Methods: The myRisk panel from Myriad Genetics Laboratories (25 clini- and 2 showed that point mutations and major reconstruction of PALB2 (16 cally significant genes) was run in consecutive patients who met one of the in total, 3.9%) can cause the disease in Czech patients (n = 409). Most of following criteria: diagnosis before age 40, multiple prim ary tumors and/ these mutations were observed in the subgroup of patients with the inhe- or at least one first/second degree family member affected by a distinctive rited form of BC - here occurrence reaches 5.5% (13/235). Thus, the signi- cancer of known hereditary cancer syndromes at any age. ficance of PALB2 gene mutation analysis in this particular subpopulation is Results: Twelve out of 20 OBCR pCaAt1ients who uBnRdCeArw2eMntS HG C6
 fPrMom S2
 September comparable to that of the BRCA2 gene. We believe that the PALB2 should be 30, 2014 to December 31, 2014, met incluNsBioNn criteria: 5P oMf  S122
 B(4R2C%A2) cAaTrMry included in the algorithm of clinical genetic testing in BC patients negative dAePlCetPerTiEoNusM mLuHta1tiPo5n3s (B2R iInP 1 ; 1 each in , , ). Ten vari- for mutations in the BRCA1 and 2. ants of unknown significance (VUS) (2 in ; 1 each in , , , Supported by IGA MZ ČR, the project NT/13343-4/2012 , , , , ) were identified in eight subjecMtsU (T8Y/H12; 67%): PM12.118 of these, three also carried a deleterious mutation and one was a suspected Germline and somatic HIF2A mutations associated with somatic mosaicism. Moreover, two deleterious monoaBlRleClAic carriers Phaeochromocytoma and Paragangliomas. were detected. G. R. Clark1, D. M. Walsh2, H. Mujcic1, A. Luchetti1, G. Kirby3, M. A. Simpson4, R. C. Conclusion: The use of multi-gene panels including and MMR genes Trembath4, E. R. Woodward2, E. R. Maher1; allows the “one-step” detection of actionable mutations in a large fraction of 1University of Cambridge, Academic Dept. of Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United OC patients with second primaries and/or family history. The identification Kingdom, 2Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalised Medicine, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 33Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalised of VUS is stimulating from a scientific perspective but should be appropria- Medicine, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4King‘s College tely managed during GC. London, London, United Kingdom. PM12.116 High uptake of risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutation carriers at The Royal Marsden Phaeochromocytomas (PCCs) and paragangliomas (PGLs) are rare autono- A. George1,2, J. Wiggins1, K. Kohut1, Z. Kemp1, N. Rahman1,2, H. Hanson1,2; mic nervous system tumours, which typically hypersecrete catecholamines. 1Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Division of A notable feature of PCCs/PGLs is the high incidence of inherited cases, such Genetics & Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom. that germline mutations in at least 12 susceptibility genes can be detected in 30-40% of all cases. Recent gene expression profiling studies have shown that a large proportion of inherited cases show activation of the hypoxic Background: Risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (RRBSO) in gene response pathways. It has also been shown that loss of function muta- BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers is highly effective in reducing ovarian tions in VHL and SDH subunit genes lead to the stabilisation of the hypoxia- cancer (OC) risk, by up to 95%. However, reported rates of RRBSO uptake inducible factor (HIF) proteins. These HIF proteins are a family of transcrip- vary widely. We recommend consideration of RRBSO to BRCA1 carriers aged tion factors (HIF-1, HIF-2 & HIF-3) that bind to and activate multiple genes ≥40yrs and BRCA2 carriers aged ≥45years. Here we have assessed RRBSO associated with angiogenesis, glycolysis and cell growth. The stability of the uptake amongst BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers at Royal Marsden (RM) hospi- HIF proteins is dependent on two specific proline residues located in the tal. oxygen dependent degradation domain, that are hydroxylated by the oxygen Methods: We reviewed the electronic patient record for carriers in the RM dependent prolyl hydroxylases (PHDs). Once hydroxylated, the HIF proteins Genetics unit BRCA carrier register. Our primary endpoint was uptake of can be targeted for proteasomal degradation by the VHL complex. Recently, RRBSO. Secondary endpoints were rates of occult malignancy at RRBSO and several groups have reported gain of function mutations in HIF2A/EPA S1
 in reasons for not undergoing RRBSO. PCC/PGL cases, which result in the stabilisation of the HIF-2 protein. To date, Results: 858 female mutation carriers were identified, of whom 557 met our the majority of the HIF2A mutations have been detected as somatic mutati- age criteria (304 BRCA1, 253 BRCA2). 73 women had been diagnosed with ons, with little evidence of germline mutations. Here we report the finding OC, leaving 265 BRCA1 and 219 BRCA2 carriers. Of these, 234(88%) BRCA1 of six novel variants, four of which were found present in the germline, and carriers and 192(87%) BRCA2 carriers underwent RRBSO. Occult OC was cluster around the secondary hydroxylation site. We also present functional identified in three BRCA1 carriers; two further BRCA1 carriers had intra- data, which provides further evidence that these variants are pathogenic. epithelial neoplasia. Reported reasons for not undergoing RRBSO were per- sonal choice (36 women), metastatic breast cancer (12 women) and preser- P S12
.119 vation of fertility (six women - all BRCA1 mutation carriers in early 40s). We Whole genome expression, gene network and pathway determination do not undertake NHS ovarian surveillance because of unproven efficacy but by microarray analysis in pituitary tumors of those who declined RRBSO, six have private ovarian surveillance. T. Demircioglu1, K. Koc2, D. Sunnetci Akkoyunlu1, E. Yilmaz1, H. Savli1, N. Cine1; 1Kocaeli University, Medical Genetics, Kocaeli, Turkey, 2Kocaeli University,Neurosurgery Conclusions: We observed a high rate (87%) of RRBSO uptake amongst BR- Department, Kocaeli, Turkey. CA1 and BRCA2 carriers at the Royal Marsden. Introduction: This work was funded by the RM/ICR NIHR BRC. P S12
.117 Pituitary tumorigenesis suggests that genetic alterations that Analysis of PALB2 and other predisposing genes in patients without associated with cell cycling, cell proliferation and angiogenesis may play mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 - benefits for counseling in major role in the initiation and promotio n of pituitary adenomas.The aim families with recurrent breast cancer oMf attheisr isatlusd ayn cdo nMsiestths oind isd:entification of novel genes and/or pathways with A. Panczak1, M. Janatová2, M. Borecká2, J. Střibrná2, J. Kotlas1, J. Soukupová2, P. potential roles in pituitary tumorigenesis. Kleiblová2,1, K. Veselá1, J. Židovská1, J. Přibylová3, Z. Ušiaková3, M. Zimovjanová3, Z. Kleibl2, RNA samples were obtained from a hundred pi- P. Pohlreich2; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, General Faculty Hospital and First Faculty tuitary tumors and three pituitary tissues taken from healthy cadavres.RNA of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biochemistry and quality, based on the 28S,18S ribosomal RNA ratio, was assessed with an Experimental Oncology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Agilent Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies,Palo Alto,CA,USA) and RIN scores Republic, 3Oncology Clinic, General Faculty Hospital and First Faculty of Medicine, arrounds 4 were included.Tumor size and invasiveness were defined on Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. the basis of preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and surgical findings.On these basis; 24 microadenoma,30 microadenoma and 46 inva- sive pituitary adenoma were analyzed.RNA samples were hybridized with Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2, main predisposing to breast (BC) and ova- microarray chips (Agilent Human 4X44K Oligo Microarrays).Gene expressi- rian cancer (OC) genes, were found in less than half of the families suspect oRness,u clatns:onical pathways and network analyisis were performed using Gene- for hereditary form of BOC; mutation carriers in either gene constitute Spring GX13.0 and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. only about 25% of the population of high risk patients. Other genes were Microarray analysis identifed 40 downregulated and 58 upregu- identified (ATM, CHEK2, NBN, PALB2 etc.), whose mutations can increase lated genes in invasive adenoma; 40 downregulated and 51 upregulated the risk of BC in BRCA1 and 2 negative patients. These were described as genes in macroadenomas; 41 downregulated and 42 upregulated genes in medium-risk genes or genes witEhS mHoGde r2a0te1 p5e n| eGtrLanAceS. GMOutWati,o SnsC iOn TthLeA NmDi,c rUoaKd e|n WomWasW.Th.Ee ScaHnGon.iOcaRl Gpathways significantly regulated were2 6ce1l-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index lCuolanrc lmusoivoenm:ent,cellular growth and proliferation,cell cycle,cell death and mononuclear cells of PV patients. survival,cancer, nervous system development and function. This research performed limitied number of patient the increased number Some gene profiles showed good agreement with our data such of patient would enhance our knowledge. as IDH1 and CLU.In addition, GATA3, RACGA P1
, SSX2IP and PTPRA genes Our project supported by TUBITAK 1001 grant.Project No:112 S483
 were overexpressed in our invasive and macroadenomas.It’s suggested that PM12.122 these genes might be used as a molecular marker set for invasive,proliferation Therapy response monitoring in patient with prostate cancer using and agreessiveness in pituitary tumors.These candidate genes will be vali- plasma-Seq approach date with RT-qPCR method in our future study J. Belic; PM12.120 Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria. Frequent coexistence of hyperdiploidy and high-risk cytogenetic changes in plasma cell myeloma in Chinese L. L. P. SIU, W. S. Wong, H. F. Wong, K. F. Wong; Background: Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy in males. Pro- Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong. state cancer progression can be inhibited by androgen-deprivation thera- py but nearly all patients progress to castration-resistance prostate cancer (CRPC). There still remains the unsolved question how patients can be best Introduction matched with targeted therapies according to characteristics of their tumor We report our experience in the application of fluorescence in-situ hybridi- genome. zation (FISH) to characterize genetic abnormalities in plasma cell myeloma Methods: We analyzed a total of 73 plasma samples from 20 CRPC and 9 (PCM) among Chinese patients. CSPC (castration-sensitive prostate cancer) patients using our previously Materials and Methods established plasma-Seq approach including low coverage whole-genome A total of 100 patients with PCM were studied. Their age ranged from 28 to sequencing to establish copy number profiles and targeted resequencing of 87 years (median and mean = 59) with a male to female ratio of 1.45:1. FISH prostate cancer associated genes on an Illumina MiSeq platform. was performed on CD138-sorted bone marrow samples. Results: Analysis of plasma DNA from prostate cancer patients revealed a Results variety of copy number changes characteristic for prostate cancer. In a sub- High-risk genetic changes were found in 46 patients (Table 1). Some pati- set of patients we were able to observe the emergence of AR gene amplifica- ents had more than one unfavourable factor. 15 patients had concomitant tion at the time of progression from CSPC to CRPC. AR gene amplifications high-risk genetics and hyperdiploidy while 31 patients had high risk ge- were found in approximately 70% of CRPC patients. Furthermore, we were netics without hyperdiploidy. 22 patients had died of their diseases. 59% able to monitor the evolution of novel focal amplifications and clonal shifts (13/22) were in the high-risk group with only two having concomitant hy- due to therapy changes in one third of the patients. Moreover, plasma DNA perdiploidy, suggesting that hyperdiploidy might have ameliorating effect. analyses reflected the treatment response to second line treatment, i.e. cy- Furthermore, 14 patients were relatively young in age (60 years or below) totoxic chemotherapy. with five having high-risk genetics but without hyperdiploidy. Conclusions: Our study showed that analyzing plasma DNA offers a non- Conclusions invasive method to monitor patients’ therapy response and may identify Our results suggested a beneficial effect of concomitant hyperdiploidy in the occurrence of novel changes associated with resistance against a given pTlaabslme a1 cell myeloma with high-risk genetics. This will help identify patients therapy. Plasma DNA analyses may evolve to a novel tool for monitoring of for targeted personalized therapy. patients with cancer and for development of personalized medicine. . Incidence of high risk genetics and hyperdiploidy. P S12
.123 del(1) 1q del(17) Combined high Testicular lipomatosis as a presentation of PTEN Hamartomatous t(4;14) t(14;16) hyperdiploidy risk genetics and p gain p Tumour Syndrome - A case report hyperdiploidy % J. Whitworth, K. Ong, Y. Wallis; cases 7.8 40.6 16.0 5.1 12.1 32.3 16.1 Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. P S12
.121 PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome (PHTS) is associated with a variety Assessment of JAK2V617F Mutation in CD133/ CD34 Cell of clinical manifestations including macrocephaly, characteristic skin lesi- Compartments ons and other benign or malignant tumours in various tissues such as the I. Uslu1, G. Atag1, B. Yilmaz1, H. Hekimoglu1, A. S. Yavuz2, S. Sozer Tokdemir1; thyroid gland, breast, endometrium, bowel and fat. Testicular lipomatosis 1Research Institute of Experimental Medicine (DETAE), Department of Genetics, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Internal Medicine Division, has been reported in a series of individuals with PTEN mutations but it is Department of Hematology, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. not known what proportion of patients presenting with this condition have PTEN mutations. Here we present a case of unilateral testicular lipomatosis in a 23 year old male, referred to clinical genetics services due to the fact Introduction; BCR-ABL negative Myleeulokpemroilciferative Neoplasms (MPNs) are that macrocephaly was noted in conjunction. He had previously had two clonal stem cell disorders which are the results of genetically transformed lipomas removed from the neck area at age 5 and examination revealed a stem cells and risks of increased transformation. MPN includes lesion consistent with a lipoma on his right foot. No other features of PHTS polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythosis, primary myelofibrosis. were noted on examination or in the family history. Germline genetic ana- JAK2V617F mutation occurs in MPN patients with a high range between lysis revealed a heterozygous G to C base substitution within the invariant %50-98. The aim of study is to analyse and compare mononuclear and spe- splice acceptor site for exon 8 that is considered to be pathogenic. We sug- cific stem cell compartment of PV patients having JAK2V617F mutation. gest that testicular lipomatosis in conjunction with a characteristic feature Materials and Methods; The mononuclear cells were isolated by ficoll– of PHTS should prompt consideration of PTEN analysis. gradient method in three PV patients’ peripheral blood samples taken by PM12.124 phlebotomy. Those cells were staine-d by a group of cell surface mark+er and- The first consensus based guideline on PTEN Hamartoma Tumor selecte-d in ce+ll sorter. +Initiall+y CD45 c-ells w-e re gated and then CD133CD34, Syndrome (PHTS) in the Netherlands CD133CD34, CD133CD34, CD133CD34 stem cell compartments sorted C. M. Kets1, S. W. ten Broeke2, P. Bult1, B. A. H. Caanen3, N. Hoogerbrugge1, J. A. de Hullu1, by cell sorter. T. P. Links4, A. van der Mei5, J. van der Meijden6, S. Pouwels6, J. H. Schieving1, H. F. A. In orde+r to -investiga-te JAK+2V617F +mutat+ion in m-onon-uclear cells and Vasen2, M. J. Velthuis7, H. M. Zonderland8; 1Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical CD133CD34, CD133CD34, CD133CD34, CD133CD34 stem cell com- Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University Medical Centre +, Maastricht, partments, allel specific Nested PCR was performed. Netherlands, 4University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, Results; JAK2V617F mutation analysis were compared between mononu- 5Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer Organisation, Groningen, Netherlands, 6not clear cells and different stem cell compartments. According to this compa- applicable, not applicable, Netherlands, 7Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer rison there has been no difference for JAK2 mutation screening between Organisation, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands. mononuclear cells and different stem cell compartments. Conclusions; We aimed to investigate the presence of the JAK2V617F muta- tion in both stem cells compartments and mononuclear cells of PV patients Here, we present the new Dutch consensus-based guideline on PTEN Ha- in this study. martoma Tumor Syndrome (PHTS). The guideline is designed to improve As a result of the detailed research in terms of JAK2 mutation is revealed early diagnosis, surveillance and care of patients with PHTS. t2h6at2 there has been no differences betweEeSn HstGem 2 c0el1ls5 c o| mGpLaArtmSGenOtsW an,d S CODeTvLelAopNmDen, tU oKf t h| eW guWidWeli.nEeS hHasG b.eOenR aG collaborative effort of a multidis-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ciplinary group of health care professionals and patient representatives. dataset), and two independent groups of luminal BC regardless of their HER Several questions on detection, surveillance and care were defined and ans- status. The most pronounced differences of the DNA methylation patterns wered by pubmed literature searches. are observed between normal breast tissues and BC cell lines, the latter pre- The guideline describes clinical criteria for PHTS diagnosis and criteria for senting the highest CpG methylation levels within the samples, notwithstan- referral for genetic counselling and/or DNA analysis of the PTEN-gene. ding different immunoprofiles (LumA, LumB and triple negative). The following advices for surveillance are given: follow up of development One of the most striking findings is separation of the luminal tumors into is recommended from diagnosis until 18 years, including control of the thy- two clusters differing by the density of CpG methylation, independently on roid. Adult male and female patients are advised to have surveillance of the HER status (LumA or LumB). This separation may reflect differences in the thyroid above the age of 18 and of the colon above the age of 40. For female tumor biology between groups and requires further research in terms of patients, surveillance of the breasts is recommended from age 25 and endo- utility for prognostication and treatment that may arise from the DNA me- metrial screening from age 30. thylation markers. It is recommended to inform the patients about the benign features of PHTS The research was supported by RFBR grant 14-04-01606 А. and the increased risk of cancer, for which information on the exact risks is P S12
.127 not reliable. This is because the risks in the cohort studies are probably an Resveratrol promotes apoptosis, autophagy and suppressed cell overestimation due to bias. Patient information can also be given on paper, division via upregulated autophagy-related gene, caspase 3 and Cyclin websites or social media. dependent kinase inhibitor in human K562 cells. Surveillance is preferred in a specialized university medical centre. To sup- Z. Mutlu1, C. Caliskan1, B. Goker1, O. Ozalp1, G. Saydam2, C. Gunduz1, C. Biray Avci1; port the surveillance a roadmap has been developed. 1Ege University Medicine Faculty Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege This guideline on PHTS describes recommendations on detection, surveil- University Medicine Faculty Department of Hematology, Izmir, Turkey. lance, and care of patients with PHTS and aims to improve quality of care. P S12
.125 RAD51 paralogs in breast and ovarian cancer predisposition Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a malignant disorder of the haematopoi- L. Golmard1,2, L. Castéra3,4, S. Krieger3,4,5, A. Laugé1, K. Abidallah1, H. Tenreiro1, V. etic stem cell arisen from the reciprocal translocation between the break- Moncoutier1, D. Bidon1, P. Morice1, J. Tarabeux1,2, M. Stern1,2, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,2,6, D. point cluster region (BCR) gene on chromosome 22, and the Abelson (ABL) Vaur3,4, C. Houdayer1,2,6; murine leukemia virus gene on chromosome 9, t(9;22)(q34;q11), resulting 1Département de Biopathologie, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2Inserm U830, Paris, in the formation of Philadelphia chromosome. France, 3Laboratoire de Biologie et Génétique du cancer, Centre François Baclesse, Caen, Resveratrol is a natural phytoalexin and induces apoptosis, erythroid diffe- France, 4Inserm U1079, Rouen, France, 5Université de Caen, Basse Normandie, Caen, rentiation and autophagy in leukemic cells. France, 6Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. In this study we aimed to evaluate the cytotoxic, apoptotic and autophagic RAD51 RAD51B RAD51C RAD51D XRC C2
 XRC C3
 effect of resveratrol in CML cells by questioning gene expressions which are RAD51C associated with CML progression. RAD51D paralogs ( , RAD51B, XR,C  C2
 , ) have recently K562 cells were treated with resveratrol time and dose dependent man- been implicated in breast and ovarian cancer predisposition: and ner and cytotoxicity was evaluated by using WST-1 assay. The RT-qPCR is in ovarian cancer, and in breast cancer through used for gene expression analysis. Gene expression levels were evaluated by mXRoCnCo3allelic germline deleterious mutations. Previous studies were mostly using RT2 Profiler PCR Array. conducted on family cases selected for high predisposition risk. In addition, Significant increase was observed in K562 cells treated with resveratrol ac- polymorphisms have been assoRciAaDte5d1 with breast cancer in case-con- cording to control. The gene expression levels of ATG5 (autophagy-related trol studies but no deleterious mutation has been reported. gene), CAS P3
 (caspase 3) and p27KI P1
(Cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor) To better estimate the contribution of paralogs in breast and ovarian were increased respectively 10.41, 8.63 and 36 fold via resveratrol. cancer predispositionB, RthCeAs1e/ g2enes were analysed in 2,991 consecutive un- Our findings showed that Resveratrol induced apoptosis and autophagy in related patients diagnosedR wADith51 breast and/RoAr Dov5a1rBian canceRrA aDn5d1 pCrevious- K562 cells. Resveratrol upregulated caspase-3 activation in apoptosis and RlyA tDes5t1eDd negativXeR fCoCr2 muXtRatCiCo3ns. Deleterious truncating mutations modulation of Atgs in autophagic pathway in K562 cells. Also, resveratrol were detected in the five paralogs: (n=4), (n=14), regulates autophagosome formation via upregulated-ATG5 expression. Cdk (n=7)R, AD51 (n=2), and (n=5). The mutation rate was 1.1% inhibitor p27KI P1
 is a tumor suppressor gene and includes in cell cycle pro- (32/2,991 patients). Likely deleRteArDio5u1s missense variants were also detec- cess. Thus upregulated p27KI P1
 expression in K562 cells induced preven- ted in the five paralogs at a lower rate: 0.5% (15/2,991 patients). ted progression from G1 to S-phase and suppressed cell division. Therefore, This is the first study of the five paralogs coRnAdDu5ct1ed on a large series Resveratrol prevented the formation of tumors in K562 cells. These results of consecutive unrelated patients, allowing a better evaluation of mutation provide that Resveratrol may be a therapeutic candidate for chronic myeloid rate (overall rate: [1.1-1.6%]); not surprisingly, paralog muXtaRtCioCn3 leukemia treatment. rate is lower in this series of unselected patients than previous estimates in patients at high predispRosAiDti5o1n risk. This is also the first report of PM12.128 truncating mutations in breast and ovarian cancer predisposition. To as- Identification of novel mutations in RB1 gene in retinoblastoma sess more accurately the paralog mutation rate, functional assays patients for interpretation of missense variants are ongoing. This study constitutes L. Abu Safieh, S. Al Mesfer, M. Othman, M. Karoui, H. Al Katan, D. Edward; King Khaled Eye Specialist hospital, riyadh, Saudi Arabia. a sound basis for penetrance risk estimates through the genetic testing of relatives of mutation carriers. Purpose: PM12.126 Retinoblastoma initiated by biallelic loss of RB1 can be successful- Breast cancer molecular classification based on DNA methylation lMy ettrheaotdesd:. However, multimodal treatment failures results in enucleation. assessed by reduced representation bisulfite sequencing We hypothesized that mutations may contribute to treatment failure. A. S. Tanas1, E. V. Poddubskaya2, T. V. Kekeeva1, I. D. Trotsenko3, E. B. Kuznetsova1, D. V. We studied 2 retinoblastoma cases with multimodal Zaletayev1, V. V. Strelnikov1; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2N.N. Blokhin treatment failure. Clinical findings, pathologic features following enuclea- Russian Research Center for Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Peoples’ Friendship tion and treatment were documented. DNA extracted from patient tumor, University of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation. adjacent normal and blood was subjected to direct sequencing for mutation detectRioensu ilnt sR: B1 gene. Sequences were analysed using DNAstar software. Effect of variants was predicted using Polyphen-2 and mutation taster soft- We have developed a modification of the RRBS method applicable to assess ware. Patient 1, 17 month male presented with unilateral methylation in large collections of DNA samples within biomedical research. sporadic group D. After 6 cycles of chemo and radiotherapy, patient deve- Briefly, our modification further reduces the size of the representation to be loped recurrent active tumor. Pathology showed vitreous seeding, viable sequenced simultaneously increasing the inner fraction of CpG islands and intraocular tumor without high risk features. Patient 2, 13 month male with shores. By use of this approach we have obtained RRBS data for 80 breast sporadic bilateral group D retinoblastoma, right eye (enucleated). Left eye cancer (BC) samples, 6 BC cell lines and 10 samples of normal breast tissue. received 9 cycles of chemo and radiotherapy but progressed to stage E, also To date, this is the most comprehensive collection of RRBS data for a set of enucleated. Pathology showed viable tumors of the same organ. Cluster analysis of this data distinguishes at least intraocular tumor, focal choroidal invasion and optic nerve invasion with five molecular subtypes of breast tissues (cells) based on the CpG methyla- negative surgical margin. We are reporting two novel mutations in the RB1 tion. Specific subtypes are assigned to normal breast tissues, BC cell lines, gene. Patient 1, had insertion of two base pairs that resulted in frameshift triple negative and HER positiveE (SinHdGist i2n0gu1is5h a|b GleL bAasSeGd OonW th, eS pCrOesTenLtA NaDnd, UprKot e| iWn trWunWca.tEioSnH (pG: E.O97RRGfs*15). Patient 2 showed a stop mutati2on63ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S12
.131 Conclusion: Development and validation of the Oncomine Cancer Research Panel early in the protein sequence (p: Q35*). (OCP), a scalable next-generation sequencing system for assessing These novel germline truncating mutations inR pBa1tients with recurrent somatic alterations in solid tumors advanced retinoblastoma resulted in poor ocular survival despite extensive K. Rhodes1, S. Tomlins2, A. Cani2, D. Hovelson2, A. McDaniel2, A. Liu2, G. Bien1, P. Choppa1, treatment. Truncating mutations represent over 50% of all mutations. J. Schageman1, G. Liu1, F. Hyland1, R. Gottimukkala1, S. Bandla1, P. Williams1, B. Johnson1, It is possible this type of mutations responsible for tumor resistance. Scree- P. Wyngaard1, S. Sadis1, D. Rhodes1; ning additional patients with similar clinical history is required to confirm 1Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, United States, 2University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. this data. P S12
.129 From guideline recommendations to familial cancer risk assessment Treating cancer effectively requires an understanding of the molecular al- decision support in primary care: US Experience terations driving each patient’s tumor. Targeted sequencing efforts that L. A. Orlando1, R. Wu1, C. McCarty2, D. Dimmock3, G. S. Ginsburg1; characterize prevalent somatic alterations and require limited sample in- 1Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, 2Essential Rural Healthcare Institute, Duluth, MN, United States, 3Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States. put may provide an effective diagnostic approach. Herein, we describe the design and characterization of the Oncomine Cancer Research Panel (OCP) that includes recurrent somatic alterations in solid tumors derived from the Introduction: There are several U.S. guidelines for identifying and managing Oncomine™ cancer database. Using Ion AmpliSeq™, we designed a DNA pa- risk for hereditary cancer syndromes. While fundamentally similar, they nel that includes assays for 73 oncogenes with 1,826 recurrent hotspot mu- each differ in details that can lead to differences in assignment of risk levels tations, 26 tumor suppressor genes enriched for deleterious mutations, as (Orlando, AJMG, 2014). In order to better understand how these differences well as 75 genes subject to recurrent focal copy gain or loss. A complemen- in guidelines affect individuals, we describe preliminary results from a na- tary RNA panel includes 183 assays for relevant gene fusions involving 22 tionally representative population of individuals. fusion driver genes. Recommended sample inputs were 10 ng of nucleic acid Materials and Methods: Eligible participants are patients visiting enrolled per pool. Sequencing libraries were analyzed on an Ion Torrent Personal Ge- primary care clinics at: Duke University, Medical College of Wisconsin, Es- nome Machine. Initial testing revealed an average read depth of > 1,500X sential Rural Healthcare Institute, David Grant Medical Center, or University with > 95% uniformity and on target frequency. The panel was shown to of North Texas. Enrolled participants enter their personal and family health reliably detect known hotspots, insertions/deletions, gene copy changes, history information into MeTree, a patient facing risk assessment and clini- and gene fusions in molecular standards, cell lines and formalin-fixed par- cal decision support web-service. affin embedded clinical specimens. Retrospective analysis of large clinical Results: To date 222 participants have completed MeTree. Characteristics cohorts has been completed and the results of analysis of 100 lung cancer include 62% female; 89% white, and mean age 59.6 (range 24-84). The and 100 prostate cancer cases will be summarized. In addition, a prospecti- mean no. of relatives entered is 13.3 (range 6-62). In an initial assessment ve cohort of 100 clinical samples from the University of Michigan Molecular of one guideline 1.8% (n=4) had > 20% lifetime risk of breast cancer and Diagnostics laboratory was profiled with OCP. Overall, we achieved >95% 33.3% (n=148) met criteria for a possible hereditary cancer syndrome. As- sensitivity and specificity for detection of KRAS, EGFR and BRAF mutations sessment of risk level using three additional hereditary cancer syndrome and ALK gene fusions. guidelines will be performed on the enrolled population as of May 30th, P S12
.135 2015 and data presented showing discrepancies in those identified as at Association between GWAS-derived rs966423 genetic variant and risk by each guideline. overall mortality in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer Conclusion: Hereditary cancer risk assessment guidelines are developed M. Swierniak1, A. Wojcicka1,2, M. Czetwertynska3, J. Dlugosinska3, E. Stachlewska3, W. based on expert opinion and experience, which has the potential to lead to Gierlikowski1, B. Gornicka1, L. Koperski1, M. Bogdanska1, W. Wiechno1, K. Jazdzewski1,2; 1Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, variations in recommendations by different agencies. Establishing a data- 3Maria Skłodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, base of family health histories linked to outcomes can inform guideline de- Poland. velopment and lead to greater consistency and accuracy in risk assessment algorithms PM12.130 Background: Five germline genetic variants (rs116909374, rs965513, An assessment of known skin cancer risk variants in a population of rs944289, rs966423, rs2439302) have been associated in genome-wide as- renal transplant patients sociation study (GWAS) with increased risk of thyroid cancer, but their role C. P. Stapleton1, M. McCormack1, D. Connaughton2, G. L. Cavalleri1, P. J. Conlon1; in mortality of patients with thyroid cancer has not been established. 1Royal College of Surgeons Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 2Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. Study design: Retrospective study of 1836 patients with differentiated thy- roid cancer (1643 women and 193 men) with a median age at diagnosis of 49 years (interquartile range, 38-57years) and an overall median follow-up The risk of a kidney transplant recipient developing skin cancer is appro- time of 8.7 years (interquartile range, 5-12.5years) after initial treatment at ximately 33 times higher than the general public. Multiple robust genetic a single comprehensive cancer center between 1990-2013. loci for skin cancer have been identified via large genome-wide association Results: APmong 5 variants, rs966423 was associated with increased morta- (GWA) studies. We wished to test the hypothesis that these loci are risk fac- lity, which was 6.4% (33/518P) vs. 3.7% (47/1259) in TT-carriers vs. CC/CT tors for skin cancer in post-transplant populations. We were also interested carriers ( =0.017). Deaths per 1000 person-years were 6.81 vs. 4.01 in TT in determining if the odds ratio changed in the transplant population, com- vs. CC/CT patients (HR=1.6; =0.038) after adjustment for age at diagnosis, pared to the general population in which they were discovered. We iden- and sex. Importantly, the association of rs966423 with mortality Premained tified 21 robustly associated SNPs from the GWA studies and tested these significant when lymph-node metastasis, extrathyroidal invasion, angioinva- SNPs in a cohort of 325 cadaveric kidney transplant recipient patients. The sion and distant metastasis were included in the model (HR=1.89; =0.014). cohort was cross referenced with the Irish cancer registry resulting in the A higher rs P966423
-associated patient mortality was also observed in seve- identification of 94 cases that developed skin cancer post-transplantation ral clinicopathological subcategories, e.g. in TT patients with angioinvasion and 231 controls. Illumina 660K bead-chip data was available for all 325 (HR=3.48; <0.001). individuals. Logistic regression and survival analysis was applied to test for CBoRnAcFlusions: rs966423-TT genotype was significantly associated with in- correlaMtiCo1nR with skin cancer. creased overall mortality among patients with thyroid cancers. Contrary to A nominally significant association was found with rs885479, a SNP found mutation and other somatic changes putatively associated with pati- in the gene (p= 0.0157) in the survival analysis. The variant was found ents mortality, the status of germline rs966423 is known before the treat- to have the same direction of affect as described in the original study and ment, and might be used in management of mortality risk by means of mo- the odds ratio was higher. The presence of one or more copies of the minor dification of therapy, nevertheless it requires further investigation in large allele caused a significant decrease in time to develop skin cancer post re- prospective studies before it is ready for clinical application. nal transplant (hazard ratio = 2.06). However, none of the variants survived Support: Polish National Science Centre (DEC-2013/11/B/NZ3/00193); Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. We are now seeking to extend European Commission (F P7
-REGPOT-2012-CT2012-316254-BASTION). this analysis to additional patient cohorts. PM12.136 This work is funded by the Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering An investigation of mitochondrial DNA haplogroups in patients with and Technology. thyroid cancer R. Cocos1,2, S. Schipor3, C. Badiu4,3, F. Raicu1,5; 264 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Chair of Medical Genetics, “Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2Genome Life Research Centre, Bucharest, Romania, 3National Institute of Endocrinology “C. I. Parhon”, Bucharest, Romania, 4Chair of Endocrinology Methods: We first sequenced the TSH-beta gene, performed a preliminary “Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 5Francisc I. association study involving 96 cases versus 96 controls, and then selected Rainer Anthropological Research Institute, Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania. four variants for the association studies in a larger population size using Taqman assays. Results: In the preliminary association study, three of the discovered SNPs, Introduction: Recent studies have shown that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) rs72695872_C>T [Odds ratio (95% Confidence Interval)=1.78(1.07-2.97); haplogroups could be associated with cancer development. The present stu- p=0.029] and rs1321108_A>G [2.15(1.28-3.62); p=0.004] in the promoter dy aimed to analyze mtDNA control region variation of 114 patients with region as well as the intronic rs17477369_T>A [2.50(1.03-6.06); p=0.048] thyroid follicular adenoma (TFA), 121 patients with papillary thyroid cancer were associated with DTC in a causative fashion. These results were confir- (PTC) and 212 healthy controls in order to investigate whether mtDNA ha- med in a larger study involving 507 cases versus 597 controls, at similar or plogroups contribute to the onset of cancer. higher significance levels. Also, 4-mer haplotype AGGT (x2=7.36; p=0.0067) Materials and Methods: The two hypervariable segments HVSI and HVSII of and its 3-mer flanking derivatives GGT (x2=11.71; p=0.0054) and AGG the control region were sequenced on ABI3130xl platform for all samples. (x2=7.45; p=0.0063) conferred significant risk for acquiring thyroid can- The unambiguously classified samples were assessed by means of PCR-RFLP cer. Another 4-mer haplotype, GAGT (x2=11.21, p=0.0008) and its 3-mer using a hierarchical system. We performed statistical analysis including derivative AGT (x2=11.71; p=0.0006) displayed equipotently protective Pearson’s chi-square test, Fisher’s exact test and binary logistic adjusted by properties against the disease, pointing to changes in the rs1321109_G>A, age and gender. rs10776792_A>G and rs1321108_A>G as the probable determinants of the- Results: The haplogroup K appeared underrepresented in TFA and PTC pa- se observations. tients when compared to healthy controls (p = 0.010; OR = 0.115; 95% CI = Conclusion: Our results indicate that the TSHβ constitutes a potential risk 0.015 – 0.883 and p = 0.010; OR = 0.109; 95% CI = 0.014 – 0.839, respective- for DTC in the Saudi population. ly). The haplogroup HV was associated significantly with increased TFA risk P S12
.139 (p = 0.032 OR = 2.697; 95% CI = 1.052 – 6.910). Identification of novel germline mutations in the T P53
 gene in Conclusions: We found that HV haplogroup may be associated with in- Swedish families creased risk of developing TFA, and K haplogroup can have a protective ef- P. Kharaziha1, E. Tham2, S. Bajalica Lagercrantz1; fect for TFA and PTC. 1Department of Oncology-Pathology, Cancer Center Karolinska (CCK), Karolinska The study was supported by CNCS-UEFISCDI grants PN-II-ID-PCCE 2011-2- Institutet, and Clinical Oncology, Karolinska University Hospital-Solna, Stockholm, 0013 and PN-II-PT-PCCA-2011-3.2-1337. Sweden, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, and P S12
.137 Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital-Solna, Stockholm, Sweden. A polymorphism in miR-146a tailors genetic predisposition to T P53
 differentiated thyroid cancer, modulates its clinical outcome and alters proliferation of tumor cells. Introduction: A constitutionally inherited mutation in the gene in- A. Wojcicka1,2, A. Kubiak1, M. Kotlarek1,2, A. Czajka1, M. Czetwertynska3, J. Dlugosinska3, creases the risk of cancer. It causes an autosomal dominant inherited cancer M. Swierniak1, N. Fedoryszak-Kuska1, B. Gornicka1, K. Jazdzewski1,2; syndrome named Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). LFS is associated with a risk 1Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2Centre of New Technologies, University of a wide range of tumors, however, mainly including breast cancer, brain of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and tumors, adrenocortical carcinomas, as well as osteo- and soft tissue sarco- Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. mas. In some families pediatric tumors are more frequent, while in others only breast cancer in adult is seen. The underlying cause for this variation remains unknown. Introduction: Rs2910164 in mir-146a was among the first polymorphisms Results: In an attempt to understTaPn5d3 the cancer for this genotype-phenotype described in a microRNA gene. The G-C substitution leads to reduction of corrTePla5t3ion and to design adequate surveillance program for these families, the amount of miR-146a and to regulation of different set of target genes. we formed The Swedish Clinical Study Group. The Swedish constitutio- The polymorphism was further shown to predispose to papillary thyroid nal cohort consists up to date of 32 families: Two-third of the families carcinoma (OR=1.62). However, no study analyzed the influence of the SNP were diagnosed as either LFS or LFS-like and the remaining families with ex- on the clinical outcome of thyroid cancer patients. clusively hereditary breast cancerT. PW5e3 found five novel germline mutations Materials and Methods: The rs2910164 was genotyped using the Sequenom i.e. previously not reported. Four of these were frameshift mutations that technology in blood-derived DNA from 2872 patients treated for differen- disrupted the major transcript of and were thus definitely pathogenic. tiated thyroid cancer (overall median follow-up time 8.7 years). Genotyping The fifth mutation was an in-frame deletioTnP o5f3 one amino acid that was also in thyroid tissue samples was performed using the Taqman assay. The influ- judged to be pathogenic. ence of miR-146a on the thyroid cancer cell lines was analyzed in K1 cells Conclusion: No obvious difference in the mutation spectra was seen with induced overexpression or silencing of pre-miR-146a. by 3D viewer, provided by IARC T P53
 database, in patients with hereditary Results: The germinal C allele in rs2910164 was associated with higher mor- breast cancer compared to those with LFS. Therefore, we currently analyze tality amonPg patients with follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. the novel mutations by CRISPR technology. Deaths per 1000 person-years were 25.64 vs. 4.I7n2v iintr oCC vs. GG/CG patients PM12.140 (HR=5.88; =0.008). Moreover, a somatic G-C mutation in mir-146a was ob- Pilot study with TruSight Cancer genes panel in high risk patients at served in 6.5% of the analyzed tumor samples. studies showed that MMCI - Czech Republic miR-146a significantly increased proliferation of thyroid cancer-derived cell E. Machackova, J. Hazova, P. Vasickova, E. Stahlova Hrabincova, M. Navratilova, M. line and the presence of the variant C allele resulted in lower proliferation Svoboda, L. Foretova; rates, possibly switching the cells towards migration. Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic. Conclusions: Rs2910164 in miR-146a predisposes to thyroid carcinoma, causes higher mortality of thyroid cancer patients and undergoes somatic mutations in tumor. G-C transition might be responsible for increased meta- Currently, more than 200 hereditary cancer syndromes has been described, static potential and aggressiveness of cancer. but in most countries testing is very restricted with respect to the number Support: Polish National Science Centre (DEC-2013/11/B/NZ3/00193); of genes and the number of people tested. European Commission (F P7
-REGPOT-2012-CT2012-316254-BASTION). As a retrospective research study the TruSight cancer panel (Illumina) - NGS PM12.138 panel targeting 97 cancer predisposition genes was used to analyze 50 high The TSH-beta gene confers a risk for differentiated thyroid cancer in risk cancer patients with significant personal and family history of cancer the Saudi population without previously identified mutation in BRCA1, BRCA2, T P53
, MLH1, M. Al-Rasheed1, A. Alzahrani2, A. Macadam3, A. Overall3, P. Gard3, N. Dzimiri2; MSH2, MSH6, APC or CDKN2A genes. All pathogenic mutations detected by 1King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Faisal Spec. Hospital and Research NGS technology have been confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Brighton University, Brighton, United Kingdom. Several deleterious (frameshift, nonsense) mutations were detected in ATM, ERC C2
, BA P1
, FANCI, PM S2
, RECQ L4
 genes. Several very likely pathogenic missense mutations were detected in the ATM, FANCA, PALB2, BRI P1
, MU- Background: The thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH-beta) is a heterodime- TYH, PM S2
, MEN1 and SDHB. These mutations affect highly conserved do- ric glycoprotein which regulates the secretion of the thyroid hormone and mains and were confirmed to affect protein function by available functional therefore thyroid function. In the present study, we evaluated the role of the assays, or were confirmed to be pathogenic as a Parent #2 allele in a se- TSH-beta polymorphisms as risk factors for development of differentiated rious recessive disease as Ataxia telangiectasia or Fanconi anemia. Majority thyroid cancer (DTC). ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAN oD f m, U isK se n| sW e vW ariW an. tE s S dH eteG ct. eO d R inG other genes remain to be classified b2 y 6 th5 eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Neuroscience Center and clinical relevancy in the future. Intermediate or low penetrance variants are Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, of limited clinical utility. 5hthalmology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. The value of panel genetic testing in high risk individuals with cancer pro- vides important information with respect to the cause and optimal treat- ment of the current cancer, and the risk and optimal management of future Aim: Germline mutations in BRCA1 associated protein-1 (BA P1
) predispose cancer. to uveal melanoma and other cancers. Here, we estimated the frequency of Supported by MH CZ - DRO (MMCI, 00209805) and research project of BA P1
 germline mutations in Finnish uveal melanoma patients. MSMT CR CZ.1.07/2.3.00/20.0045 (SuPReMMe) Methods: We collected genomic DNA from 149 patients treated between 2010 and 2013. In addition, we identified 10 families each with two uveal P S12
.141 melanoma patients. We were able to collect DNA from 13 members of uveal Evaluation of anti-tumor effect of combined use of thymoquinone melanoma families. All 17 exons of the BA P1
 were sequenced in total of 162 with mitoxantrone in YKG1 glioma cells patients. M. OZNUR, O. Hatipoglu, M. Acar, B. Yılmaz, E. Karagoz, E. Gunduz, M. Gunduz; Turgut Ozal University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics,, ANKARA, Results: We identified two pathogenic heterozygous BA P1
 mutations: a Turkey. donor splice site mutation in a highly conserved region in intron 2 in a spo- radic patient and a frameshift insertion in exon 14 in three familial patients. The frequency for sporadic mutation is 0,67% (1/149, 95%CI <0,0001 to Introduction: Since thymoquinone is isolated from Nigella sativa, its anti- 0,04). Including the three familial mutation carriers to calculations, the fre- oxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer effects have been investigated. quency of BA P1
 mutations is 2,5% (4/159, 95%CI <0,0076 to 0,0651). The Thymoquinone causes decrease in cell viability in tumor cells and causes insertion was found in two, possibly distantly related, families. The muta- DNA damage and leads to apoptosis in tumor. Especially it has been found tions were not present in ExAC database including 3325 Finnish controls that it does not damage healthy cells and this makes it more important as from the SISu project. therapeutic substance . In this study, we have proposed to reveal the role of Conclusions: BA P1
 mutations predispose to uveal melanoma also in Finland. thymoquinone on brain tumor cells by compairing with mitoxantrone and Mutations explained uveal melanoma in one sporadic patient and in two fa- aimed to find more effective and less toxic treatment method. milies of ten. Further studies are needed to study the genetic background of Materials and Methods: YKG1 cell line has been thawed and proliferated. uveal melanoma in Finland using genome wide analysis strategies. Main stock of thymoquinone was prepared in DMSO solution. Various con- Grants: Work was supported by Mary and Georg C. Ehrnrooth Foundation centrations of thymoquinone (T1:40 uM, T2:80 uM and T3:160uM ) were and Sigrid Jusélius Foundation. JAT was funded by Suomen silmälääkäriyh- prepared from main stock by diluting in DMEM solution. The cells were distys and SM was funded by Evald and Hilda Nissi Foundation. exposed to thymoquinone with these doses. Additionally the cells were ex- PM12.144 posed to 4 different doses of mitoxantrone (M4:0.5ug/ml, M3:0.05ug/ml, Genetic background of unilateral/bilateral Vestibular Schwannoma M2:0.005ug/ml and M1:0.0005ug/ml). Finally the cells were treated with (VS) both of mitoxantrone and thymoquinone series together. R. Birkenhäger, S. Arndt, W. Maier, A. Aschendorff, R. Laszig; Results: Antiproliferative effect of thymoquinone was seen only at T3 doses Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical Center while both M3 and M4 doses of mitoxantrone showed toxic effect to the cells Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. when they were applied individually. On the other hand, when combined use of mitoxantrone and thymoquinone were done, a significant antitumoral effect was seen in T2M4 combination. A vestibular schwannoma (VS) (acoustic Neurinoma) is a benign tumors ori- Conclusions: The effect of T2M4 combination on the cell suppression was ginated from Schwann cells (SC) of the vestibular nerve and located in the almost twice in M4 mitoxantrone alone application. We thought this result cerebello pontine angle or the inner auditory canal. The tumor results from shows synergistic effect of thymoquinone with mitoxantrone. an overproliferation of SC; these cells wrap themselves around nerve fibres, often causing gradual hearing loss, tinnitus and dizziness. It can also affect PM12.142 with the facial nerve causing paralysis by compression. Early detection of Analysis of polymorphisms and epidemiological factors in selected the tumour is sometimes difficult, because the symptoms may be subtle and genes coding for interleukins in women with uterine leiomyomas S. Jurgec1,2, U. Potočnik1,2; may not appear in the beginning. There are two types of VS: Bilateral and 1Center for Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine, unilateral. Until now there is only one single gene known for bilateral VS, University of Maribor, Slovenia, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Laboratory for Biochemistry, that leads to neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). Unilateral VS account for ap- Molecular Biology and Genomics, Faculty for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, proximately 8 % of all cranial tumours. The exact cause of unilateral VS is University of Maribor, Slovenia, Maribor, Slovenia. unknown, most occur spontaneously. Our study group consists of 144 pati- ents (from 139 independent families) of which 23 have a bilateral VS (NF2), 119 unilateral VS and 2 with an initial suspicion of VS. All patients were Several interleukins has been known to promote tumorogenesis in different clinically clearly defined. Genetically we performed a mutation analysis on tissues. Uterine leiomyomas (ULM) are the most prevalent pelvic tumors in the NF2 gene at the genomic and tumor level. So far we identified different women and it has been shown that genetic factors contribute to development missense/nonsense and splice mutations in NF2 gene, on the genomic le- of ULM. The aim of our study was to analyze SNPs in interleukins I L12
RB1, vel and in some cases exclusively in tumor cells, which all lead to a loss of I L12
B and I L23
R, which play an important role in immune response and to function of the gene product Merlin and the appearance of VS. In addition to correlate genotypes with clinical data of patients with solitary and multip- somatic changes and mutations there are possible indications of a genomic le leiomyomas. In our study 169 Slovenian ULM patients and 49 controls predisposition to unilateral Vestibularisschwannome. were included. We found significantly lower frequency of genotype AA for P S12
.145 SNP rs11575934 (I L12
RB1) in patients with solitary leiomyomas (39,0%, Complex chromosomal aberrations with gain of 1q32.2 and p=0,037) and multiple leiomyomas (45,9%, p=0,036) compared to healthy 3q25 to 3qter and deletion of 17p in relapsed Waldenström’s controls (62,5%). The results suggest that I L12
RB1 (rs11575934) AA geno- macroglobulinemia type is protective factor for developing ULM in Slovenian women for both N. Yu1, S. Shin2, Y. Kim3, J. Kim3, Y. Kim4, K. Lee2; forms of ULM. The analysis of epidemiological factors compared with allele 1Samkwang medical laboratories, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Department of Laboratory frequency showed significantly higher number of pregnancy (p=0,048) and Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3Department parity (p=0,004) in women with multiple leiomyomas with A allele for SNP of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, rs11575934 (I L12
RB1). Our results suggest that I L12
RB1 gene polymor- Republic of, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. phism might be candidate genetic marker for prediction of susceptibility to leiomyoma and also suggest a link between genotype and the development of one of the forms of leiomyomas in the presence of specific epidemiologi- cal factor. The genetic abnormalities in Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia (WM) are relevant for the differential iagnosis of related B-cell malignancies as well as P S12
.143 for risk stratification in WM patients. We present a case of WM progressed BA P1
 germline mutations in Finnish uveal melanoma patients to therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia, showing complex chromosomal S. Markkinen1, J. Turunen1,2, S. Lindh1, M. Muona1,3, V. Raivio2, M. Täll2, R. Wilska2, A. Lehesjoki1,4, T. Kivelä5; abnormalities found during tumor progression, including gains of 1q and 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Ophthalmology, University of 3q, deletion of 17p, and monosomies 18 and 20. In 2002, our patient at 53-years old was diagnosed with extranodal mar- 266 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOgiTnaLl AzNonDe , lUymKp |h WomWa Wof .EmSuHcoGsa.-OasRsoGciated lymphoid tissue by par-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index otid gland biopsy. She was treated with local radiotherapy and achie- 17p13.3 and telomeric probes en chromosomes 3, which showed a 17p13.3 ved complete remission. In 2010, she was diagnosed with WM and duplication and subsequently duplication of LI S1
 gene and 3p26 deletion treated with 6 cycles of a fludarabine, mitoxantrone, and dexametha- for many reasons: the deletion of 2.9 Mb on chromosome 17 and the dupli- sone regimen. But in 2011, BM biopsy revealed involvement of LPL cation of 3.6 Mb on chromosome 3 in her sister detected by CGH Array, the (52.2% of ANCs), and the karyotype was normal. In 2013, Microarray maternal translocation between the chromosome 3 and the chromosome and conventional karyotyping from BM involvement sample revealed 17. 45,XX,add(3)(q27),-18,-20,+mar[10/25].arr[hg19] 1q32.2(207,319,569- Conclusions: Phenotypic comparison with the other patients found in the 207,838,127)x3,3q25.1q27.1(150,744,552-183,300,655) literature revealed common phenotypic characteristics such as mild to mo- x2~3,17p13.3p11.2(18,900-16,450,821)x1~2,18p11.M32YpD1818.21(136,304- derate developmental delay psychomotor and facial dysmorphism including 1AR4I,D114A4,899)x1~2,18q21.2q23(51,396,071-77,611,182)x1~2, high forehead and small mouth. FLrIeSq1uently, MRI of patients shows agyria, 20q11.21q13.33(31,027,513-62,532,060)x1~2. The  L265
P and pachygyria⋯etc. However, our MRI patient returned normal but this does’nt mutation, identified as a recurring mutation in WM, were not de- mean that the duplication of the gene causes neuronal migration dis- tected in our case. In December 2013, she was diagnosed with t-AML and orders. treated with decitabine, but died in 2014. PM13.02 Deletion of 17p13, recurrent abnormalities in WM and associated with di- A new microdeletion involving 1q32.1 region identified by high- sease progressiKoLnH, w L6
as found in our case in the advanced stage suggests that density chromosomal microarray analyses the aberrations occur as a secondary event. Among these duplicated 3q regi- C. Venegas-Vega1,2, M. Guardado3, A. Martinez4, S. Kofman3, J. Berumen5; on in our case, (kelch-like protein 6) was identified as a target of so- 1Unidad de Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, DF, Mexico, 2Facultad de Medicina. matic hypermutation in CLL from whole-genome sequencing experiments. UNAM, Df, Mexico, 3Hospital General de Mexico, DF, Mexico, 4Facultad de Medicina Close monitoring of cytogenetic abnormalities during WM treatment would UNAM, DF, Mexico, 5Unidad de Medicina Genómica, Hospital General de Mexico, DF, Mexico. be needed for possibility of therapy-related leukemogenesis. PM12.146 Background: Y chromosome loss in blood is associated with colorectal and prostate Methods cancer and Results: To our best knowledge, only one case with a deletion invol- ved 1q32.1 characterized by aCGH has been previously reported. P. Noveski1, S. Madjunkova1, N. Matevska Geshkovska2, A. Eftimov2, E. Sukarova- Stefanovska1, A. Dimovski2, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1; Here, we described a 16 year-old female patient with mild fa- 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic Engineering cial dysmorphic features, intellectual disability (ID) and marfanoid habitus and Biotechnology “Georgi D. Efremov”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav (MH). CytoScan HD array analyses identified a 1q32.1 interstitial microde- Republic of, 2Center for Bimolecular Pharmaceutical Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy, letion of 1.87 Mb (hg19:200,852,854-202,726,877). To date, only one case University Ss Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. with 1q32.1 microdeletion that overlaps with our patient has been repor- ted. We identifeite da l3 additional cases with similar deletions annotated in the databases [DECIPHER (259811-288679) and ISCA (nssv575720)]. Intere- Although age-related loss of chromosome Y (LOY) in normal hematopoietic stingly, Olson (2012) described two patients with similar microdupli- cells is a well known phenomena, the phenotypic consequences of LOY have cations at 1q32.1 associated with neurodevelopmental delay that overlap been elusive. Recently, LOY was found in association with smoking, shorter with the four cases mentioned above. Excluding one case (259811) all had survival and different types of cancer. It was suggested that LOY in blood neurodevelopmental delay (NDD) or intellectual disability (ID). Our pati- could become a predictive biomarker of male carcinogenesis. ent presented the shorter genomic imbalance and the genotype-phenotype The aim of our study was to investigate the association of LOY in blood with correlation allowed us to identify a minimal overlapping region (MOR) that colorectal (CC) and prostate cancers (PC). For this purpose we have analy- includes 31 RefSeKqD gMen5eBs. We analyzed which of these genes are eKxDpMre5sBsed zed DNA samples, isolated from peripheral blood of 102 CC patients (mean in the brain and the probability of haploinsufficiency (HI) of this genomic age 59.8±13.2), 70 PC patients (mean age 68.8±8.0) and 93 healthy control region, resulting as the best candidate for the NDD/ID. is males (mean age 65.8±16.6). The methodology included multiplex quanti- a histone lysine demethylaCsoe nwchluicshio pnlas:y a role in neuronal differentiation. tative fluorescent (QF) PCR of chr.X/chr.Y (amelogenine gene), chr.1/chr.Y Neurodevelopment genetic disorders involving alterations in this mecha- and chr.3/chr.X homologous sequences followed by automatic detection nism have been described. We propose that the mKicDrMod5eBletion and analysis on ABI 3500 Genetic Analyzer. The mean Y/X ratios were signi- of 1q32.1 is a rare pathogenic CNV and that the MH is an unspecific finding ficantly lower in CC (0.881±0.15; p=2.32x10-9) and PC patients (0.941±0.06; of this genomic deletion. Finally, we suggested that the (HI) of gene p=0.00012) in comparison to the controls (1.015±0.15). Substantial LOY could be involved in the NDD/ID. (determined as Y/X ratio < 0.70) was significantly more frequent among CC P S13
.03 patients (10/102 or 9.8%) in comparison to the controls (2/93 or 2.15%; Array Based Comparative Genomic Hybridization Applying for p=0.0352) and PC patients (0/70 or 0%; p=0.0059). Multivariate regression Multiple Congenital Anomalies, Developmental Delay/Intellectual analysis adjusting for tumor localization, stage and Y chromosome lineage Disability, Autism Spectrum Disorders, and Seizure disorder in was unable to link substantial LOY to certain colorectal cancer subgroups. Taiwan Our results support the recent findings of association of LOY in blood with C. H. Lee1, H. Y. Lin1, C. K. Chuang2, P. S. Wu3, C. P. Chen2, S. P. Lin1; carcinogenesis in males. They also show that LOY is more significant among 1MacKay Chlidren‘s Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 2MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, colorectal cancer than prostate cancer patients. Taiwan, 3Gene Biodesign Co. Ltd, Taipei, Taiwan. P S13
.01 A 17p13.3 microduplication including the PAFAH1B1 and YWHAE genes resulting from a maternal balanced 17; 3 translocation Array Based Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) has been M. Hadj Amor1, S. Dimassi1, A. Mlika2, H. Hannachi1, K. Ben Helal3, A. Saad1, S. Mougou- confirmed to increase the diagnosis of unexplained multiple congenital ano- Zerelli1; malies (MCA), developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID), autism 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Génétique Moléculaire et Biologie de la Reproduction spectrum disorders (ASD), and seizure disorder (SD). The purpose of this Humaines, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de pédiatrie, CHU Farhat study was to provide related information in Taiwan because of the limited Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Service de pédiatrie, CHU Ibn Jazzar, Kairouan, Tunisia. statistic data before. We retrospectively collected the array-CGH results and medical records of 145 patients with MCA, DD/ID, ASD, or SD at Mackay Children’s Hospital from June 2010 to December 2014. Blood samples were Introduction: 17p13.3 is a chromosomal region of genomic instability due to analyzed by Affymetrix GeneChip Genome-Wide Human SNP array 6.0 with extensive repetitive sequences. In literature, microdeletions and microdu- a resolution ranging from 100 Kb to 200 Kb and NimbleGen ISCA plus Cy- plications have been described leading to different clPinAiFcAaHl p1hBe1notypYeWs.HAE togenetic Array with a resolution of 30 Kb. Of the 145 patients in this stu- Materials and Methods: We describe the case of 2-year-old girl with a micro- dy, 79 (54%) males and 66 (46%) females were enrolled and the median duplication of the MDS critical region, involving the and age was 5.16 years. The proportions of MCA, DD/ID, ASD, and SD were 68% genes. The microduplication is resulting from maternal balanced translo- (99/145), 43% (62/145), 6% (8/145), and 9% (13/145), respectively. Some cation. The patient presented with delayed psychomotor development and patients had more than one clinical feature. Copy number variants were de- dysmorphic featurs. She is born of inbreed marriage at the 2nd level, she haidn tected in 57 patients, including microdeletions in 37, microduplications in 8, aSi tburother and a sister died at one year old due to lissencephaly. His MRI is and two different rearrangements in 12 patients. Among these 145 patients, normal. To explore the genetic level, R-band karyotype and FluLoIrSe1scence 99 (68%) also had G-banded karyotyping examination. The positive results Hybridation (FISH) and Array CGH are performed. of array-CGH and G-banded karyotyping were found in 47 patients (47%) Results: We conducted a FISH usEinSgH aG p r2o0be1 s5p e| cGifiLc AfoSr GthOe W, S gCeOneT eLnA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 267 and 9 patients (12%), respectively. Our results further demonstrated theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index higher diagnostic yield in the assessment of patients with unexplained MCA, to provide temporal homeostasis with the external environment. The mam- DD/ID, ASD, and SD. The use of array-CGH also strongly supports as the first- malian circadian clock is based on a transcription-translation feedback loop tier cytogenetic test in place of G-banded karyotyping. in which CLOCK and BMA L1
 proteins act as transcriptional activators, CRYs PM13.04 and PERs proteins repress CLOCK/BMA L1
. SNPs in the clock genes are as- Array-CGH analysis in a large cohort of patients with intellectual sociated with many physiological disorders like sleep disorders, metabolic disability and/or congenital malformations disorders, and infertility. However, the effects of SNPs on biological clock C. Pinato, M. Cassina, C. Rigon, D. Frizziero, V. Vicenzi, A. Calò, D. Zuccarello, L. Salviati, and the related disorders are not well understood. E. Trevisson, M. Clementi; In the present study, the effects of SNPs on core clock protein’s function and Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. thus, on the biological clock was investigated. For each gene 8-10 SNPs that placed in functional domains like HLH and PA S1
-2 were chosen based on the SIFT and PolyPhen bioinformatics tools. Gene variants were created by site- Array-CGH analysis has improved the detection of pathogenic imbalances in directed mutagenesis. The effects of the SNPs were examined by looking the patients with intellectual disability and congenital malformations and de- interaction between clock proteins, and CLOCK/BMA L1
 dimer driven trans- monstrated that copy number variations (CNVs) are a major source of gene- ciption. We performed preliminary studies with Bmal1 gene. Based on lusi- tic diversity between normal individuals. Recurrent CNVs are usually caused ferase analyses, p.Arg84Cys (COSM296154) or p.Leu196Gln (rs112626431) by non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) between LCRs, while se- variation result in decrease in transactivation capacity of BMA L1
/CLOCK veral microhomology-mediated repair mechanisms including Non Homolo- dimer. Additionally, CRY2/PER2 dimer has different inhibition effect on va- gous End Joining (NHEJ) and Fork Stalling and Template Switching (FoSTeS) riant BMA L1
/CLOCK dimer than wild type BMAL/CLOCK dimer. have been proposed to explain the etiology of non-recurrent CNVs. As far as we know, this study will be the first study investigating the effects In this study we evaluated the frequency of CNVs in a cohort of 1051 pati- of SNPs resulting in amino acid changes in clock proteins at molecular level. ents referred to our institution because of intellectual disability, develop- The findings of the study will enable us to investigate the relation between mental delay, autism or multiple congenital anomalies. CNVs breakpoints investigated candidate clock SNPs and clock related diseases such as cancer, were analyzed to identify sequence microhomologies that may have meddie- metabolic disorders, diabetes, and obesity. This study was supported by TU- antoevdo the rearrangement. We also assessed whether the mechanism of for- BITAK 114Z879 grant. mation or the CNV pathogenicity were associated with the inheritance ( PM13.08 or inherited anomaly), the type (deletion or duplication) or the size of Characterization of the complex breakpoint junction of a CFTR gene the imbalance. deletion with discordant MLPA and qPCR findings Array-CGH adnea lnyosviso detected at least one pathogenic or likely pathogenic S. A. Taylor1,2, S. Haase2, N. Antonishyn1,2, M. Somerville1,2, M. Thomas3, L. Colvin James3, CNV in 15.8% of patients and the anomalies were more likely deletions and G. Bendiak4, C. Bjornson4, S. Hume1,2; CNVs arisen . Most of the imbalances were caused by microhomolo- 1Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 2Molecular Diagnostic gy-mediated mechanisms (74.2%) but no significant differences were ob- Laboratory, University of Alberta Hospital, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 3Clinical Genetics, served with regard to the type of CNV or the pattern of inheritance. Alberta Children‘s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada, 4Paediatrics and Respirology, Alberta Children‘s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada. Moreover, while most of the NAHR-mediated CNVs had dimensions ranging between 1Mb and 5Mb and were concentrated in few chromosomes, micro- homology-mediated CNVs had variable size and their frequency was statisti- The reported incidence of rearrangements of the CFTR gene varies from cally positively correlated with the dimensions of chromosomes. 2-20% in affected probands with multiple underlying mutation mechanisms P S13
.05 proposed. More recent investigations reveal that sequences at the break- Reciprocal autosomal balanced translocation and Yq duplication in an points of CFTR rearrangements can reflect more complex patterns of bre- azoospermic man akage and rejoining. As part of our provincial newborn screening program, M. Simioni, A. T. M. Guerra, G. G. Junior, N. L. Viguetti-Campos, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes; a male infant was found to be heterozygous for the deltaF508 variant (CFTR University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. c.1521_1523delCTT). Subsequently he had an abnormal sweat chloride test and full gene analysis for sequence variants and gene rearrangements of the CFTR gene was initiated. By MLPA he was found to carry a deletion of exons In male infertility sperm counts usually range from oligospermia to azoo- 17-20. Analysis by quantitative real-time PCR could only confirm the pre- spermia. Azoospermia is defined as the absence of live spermatozoa in se- sence of a deletion of exons 18-20. Sequencing of the deletion breakpoint men, and may be obstructive or nonobstructive depending on the presence revealed a complex rearrangement that confirmed the loss of exons 18-20, of blockage of the tubules or ducts. Chromosomal rearrangements are a but also found inserted at the breakpoint junction an inverted portion of recognized cause of reproductive failure in males, with a significantly hig- intron 18 (119 bp) joined to a GA dinucleotide and then an inverted portion her rate of cytogenetic anomalies observed in azoospermic (13.7%) than of exon 17 (66bp) (CFTR in oligospermic men (4.6%). In addition, Y chromosome microdeletion is c.2908+353_c.3368-1088delins(c.2988+1022_c.2988+1141inv:GA:c.2717_ a major genetic cause, specifically involving azoospermia factor regions c.2782inv)). The abnormal MLPA result for exon 17 is hypothesized to be (AZF). However, duplications involving AZF at Yq have been described both due to the duplicated portion of exon 17 acting as a “sink”, binding the MLPA in infertile and fertile men. Here we report the case of an azoospermic man probe whilst not permitting amplification. Microhomologies (2-8bp) and with a reciprocal autosomal balanced translocation and Yq duplication. Ka- short repetitive elements at or near the breakpoints, the size of the rear- ryotype in blood lymphocytes was 46,XY, t(6;13)(p12;p13) and array ge- ranged sequences, and their proximity to one another suggest that a repli- nomic hybridization was performed to search for copy number alteration cative-based mechanism such as fork stalling and template switching may at breakpoints. No abnormalities were found in these regiRoBnMs;Y a1lthough, a underlie this rearrangement. To our knowledge this represents the most 968kb duplication (24017591-24985599, hg19) at Yq11.223 was detected, complex CFTR rearrangement reported in the literature. including part of AZFc region and twelve genes, including , which is expressed during spermatogenesis. As the role of increased expression of P S13
.09 some genes inside the duplicated AZF region is controversial and Yq du- Three cases of complex X chromosome rearrangements that appear plication is inherited from his normal father, can be hypothesized that the to have been mediated by chromoanasynthesis translocation led to meiotic impairment or (and) disruption of an autosomal S. E. Anderson1, S. F. Jose1, F. Elmslie2, S. J. Davies3, D. A. Barrell1, S. M. Morgan1; 1Laboratory Genetics Service for Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2South West Thames gene involved in gametogenesis. Cases of male infertility in carriers of trans- Regional Genetics Service, London, United Kingdom, 3All Wales Medical Genetics Service, locations involving chromosomes 6 or 13 have been described. This case Cardiff, United Kingdom. reinforces the importance of cytogenetic together with molecular charac- terization. Supported by Fapesp (2011/23794-7 and 2012/10071-0) and CNPq (304455/2012-1). In recent years there have been a number of reports of chromothripsis-like P S13
.07 events in patients with developmental delay and congenital abnormalities. Molecular analyses of the effects of clock gene SNPs on the Biological Chromothripsis is believed to involve an initial trigger which causes chromo- Clock some shattering and repair by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). Howe- i. Baris, B. Gurkan, M. Tardu, H. Kavakli; ver, the vast majority of reported cases of constitutional chromothripsis have Koc University, istanbul, Turkey. copy number profiles that more closely resemble a replication-based event distinct to chromothripsis called chromoanasynthesis (Liu et al., 2011). The key difference between the two processes is that whilst chromothripsis is  C2
ir6c8adian clocks coordinate physiology anEd SbeHhGav i2or0 w1i5th |t hGe  L2
A4 hS sGolOarW da,y S COchTaLraActNerDise, dU bKy l|o Wss WandW r.eEteSnHtioGn. oOf RheGterozygosity, chromoanasynthesisABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM13.12 Whole exome sequencing detects p.Q155X mutation in CRYBB2 can also result in gains, including duplications and triplications. We report gene; evidence of heterogeneity genetic in a family with autosomal three patients, two male and one female, each with a developmental disor- dominant pulverulent cataract der, who were referred for array CGH analysis. They were all shown to have O. Messina-Baas1, M. Gonzalez-Garay2, J. Toral-Lopez3, H. Urueta-Cuellar1, M. Rivera- multiple duplications on the X chromosome. This has resulted in the partial Vega1, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias4; duplication of the MEC P2
 gene in one patient and the partial duplication of 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, 2UTHSC at Houston, Institute of the CDK L5
 gene in another. The presence of multiple copy number gains Molecular Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Ecatepec Medical Center, Toluca, Mexico, 4Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico clustered on a single chromosome is consistent with chromoanasynthesis. DF, Mexico. No similar complex rearrangements involving an autosome chromosome have been detected in our laboratory. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first patients reported with multiple copy number gains on the X Congenital cataract is an entity clinical and genetically heterogeneous with chromosome. high penetrance and represents 10% of a treatable cause of childhood blind- PM13.10 ness. Thirty percent of the cataracts are heredity with the nonsyndromic Chromosomes in a genome-wise order change the landscape of autosomal dominant form. About 30 loci have been associated to congenital genetics cataract. CRYBB2 gene belongs to β crystallin family together with 6 genes T. Liehr, S. Bhatt, K. Piaszinski, N. Kosyakova, F. Xiaobo, E. Alhourani, J. P. Chaudhuri, A. (4 CRYBA and 2 CRYBB) on several chromosomes and is related to congeni- Weise; tal cataract. In the present study, we analyzed a Mexican family affected by University Hospital Jena, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. autosomal dominant pulverulent cataract in four generations through who- le exome and identified the c C475
T (pQ155X) mutation on CRYBB2. Non- sense c C475
T (pQ155X) mutation has been reported previously from five Although a non-random distribution of chromosomes was suggested alrea- different countries and predicts a stop codon on Q155 losing 51 aminoacids dy in the early days of human cytogenetics it is commonly accepted by the and four Greek key domain in the C-terminal region of the CRYBB2 protein. majority of cytogeneticists that chromosomes in a metaphase spread are Gene conversion seems to be the cause of this type of cataract cataracts. This arranged in a completely random way. Since the observation of the bilate- is the first Mexican family with pulverulent cataract associated to a pQ155X rally symmetric distribution of DNA and chromosome specific fluorescence mutation. This data shows evidence of heterogeneity genetic in autosomal in situ hybridization (FISH) signals in leukocytes in 1990, we demonstrated dominant pulverulent cataract but a consistent presence of this morphology in a series of publications the genome-wise organization of chromosomes when CRIBB2 is affected. Exome sequencing comes more as a powerful tool in human and murine cells. In other words, the maternal chromosomes are for the detection of genetic origins of cataracts due to genetic and clinical tethered to one centriole while the paternal chromosomes are connected heterogeneity in this type of disease to the other. Between 1956 and 1991 similar observations were made in human, insect and plant cells, still these observations were widely ignored. P S13
.13 As a rule, rather than an exception, we found this genome-wise haploid or- Sequencing of CFTR gene at the patients with classical and atypical der of chromosomes in a variety of samples from different human and other forms of cystic fibrosis mammalian tissues; in numerically aberrant human karyotypes and samp- J. A. Nasykhova1, T. E. Ivashchenko1, T. E. Gembitskaya2, A. V. Orlov3, T. A. Stepanenko2, A. G. Chermenskiy2, V. S. Baranov1; les with small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC). Detailed ana- 1Ott Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Pavlov lysis of the 3 cases with SMC and uniparental disomy showed that there is a First Saint-Petersburg State Medical University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3St defined nuclear architecture in metaphase allowing bilateral organization of Olga Municipal Children‘s Hospital, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. the two haploid sets of chromosomes organized in haploid groupings corre- sponding to parental origin. Thus, we may have to refine the terms “Compa- rative Genomic Hybridization” or “Loss of Heterozygosity” by specifying the Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common autosomal recessive disease caused by involvement of the maternal and/or paternal genomes. Supported by Carl mutations in the CFTR gene encoding for the cystic fibrosis transmembra- Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH, Germany. ne conductance regulator protein. The CFTR gene is characterized by an P S13
.11 extremely large number of mutations (more than 1900). To date, after the PM S2
 inactivation by a complex FoSTeS-mediated rearrangement routine genetic testing including the analysis of the most frequent mutati- involving the inverted 100-kb duplicon on 7p22.1 and a HERV retro- ons of CFTR gene about 30% of mutations remain unidentified. We studied element CFTR gene in cohort of 50 CF patients with one or both unknown mutations. J. Vogt1, A. Wernstedt1, T. Ripperger2, B. Pabst2, J. Zschocke1, C. Kratz3, K. Wimmer1; We performed sequencing to characterize the mutations in coding regions, 1Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute promoter and splice sites in CFTR gene. To exclude large gene deletions/ of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 3Department of insertions the method of MLPA was used. 71% of patients including in this Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. study have classical form of CF and 29% - atypical mild form of disease. We identified 5 rare mutations with quite high frequency in Russian populati- on (3849+10kbC/T,  E92
K, 489+1G>T, Ser1231ProfsX4,  L1335
P) that aren’t Biallelic PM S2
 mutations are responsible for more than half of all cases of included in panel of mutations for routine CF testing in Russia. Three no- constitutive mismatch repair deficiency (CMMRD), a recessively inherited vel nonsynonymous mutations ( E92
A, K1468R, Ile1328Lys), one deletion childhood cancer predisposition syndrome. The 3’ region (exons 9-15) of (3816_3817delTG) were identified. One patient had a large deletion from the PM S2
 gene is located in a 100-kb sequence that is duplicated ~0.7-Mb 3 to 10 intron (CFTR40kbdel). In our study mutations of CFTR gene were centromeric in inverse orientation on 7p22.1. Sequence exchange, prima- found in 85,6% of CF chromosomes. Among patients with classical form mu- rily homologous recombination (HR) with crossover between the 100-kb tations were identified in 94% of CF chromosomes whereas among patients duplicons, is thought to be responsible for the known genomic inversion with atypical form - only in 61%. These results prompt studies of noncoding polymorphism of the 0.7-Mb sequence intervening the duplicons. PM S2
 regions of CFTR, including intronic regions, potentially involved in the regu- transcript and MLPA analysis in a new CMMRD patient rendered results that lation of gene expression at the patients with atypical form of CF. were best explained by a genomic rearrangement separating the N-terminal from the C-terminal region of the gene. GenomeWalker analysis and 3’RACE PM13.14 PCR uncovered the breakpoints of a complex rearrangement that is charac- DNA repair factors are upregulated following Dental Cone Beam CT terized by a ~918-kb inversion that exceeds the known inversion polymor- irradiation M. Louka1, L. Berkas2, E. Boutou1, G. Terzoudi3, C. Vorgias1, A. Donta2; phism by ~220-kb. This inversion was further associated with a duplication 1Faculty of Biology, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Dental School, Athens University, of ~100-kb of the inverted region. Fork stalling and template switching/ Athens, Greece, 3NCSR “Demokritos”, Athens, Greece. microhomology-mediated break-induced replication (FoSTeS/MMBIR) is the most parsimonious mechanism by which the rearrangement truncating the PM S2
 gene could be explained. These findings support the hypothesis The Dental Cone Beam CT (DCBCT) has been specifically developed for den- that inverted segmental duplications can not only mediate the formation of tal use and offers a volume 3-dimensional imaging similar to medical CT simple inversions by HR but also more complex structural rearrangements. but with significantly lower radiation exposure of the patient. Still, ionizing It further suggests that complex rearrangements with copy number alterati- irradiation is a source of DNA damage. ons could be hidden among the genomic inversion on 7p22.1. The aim of this study is to determine DCBCT irradiation consequences at molecular level by studying the expression of factors involved in DNA Dama- ge Response (DDR) pathways. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANHDE,K U29K3 |c WellsW, uWse.dE aSsH eGxp.eOriRmGental material, were placed into a h2ou6s9e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index made phantom device, manufactured to mimic as possible the respective neuropsychiatric abnormalities. CRI P2
 and ADSS L1
 are candidate genes doses an adult tissue would receive. Cells were irradiated using a NewTom for congenital heart defect. ZFYV E21
, PP P1
R13B, JAG2 and NUDT14 are DVT 9000, DwaCf1BCT. DDR response was monitored by detecting γH2AX, p53, associated with myopathy, spinal and kidney defects as well as contribute Rad51, p21 and BRCA1 proteins in two time points following irradiation, to immunological problems reported in these cases. The present study de- by immunofluorescence and western blot. The respective mRNA levels were monstrates that application of high-resolution array CGH analysis coupled also studied. with bioinformatics is able to shed light not only on gene misbalance, but Characteristic foci of phosphorylated γH2AX, a marker of ds DNA damage, also on formation mechanisms as well as molecular/cellular and phenotypic were clearly detected in HEK293 cell nuclei, in just half an hour after irra- outcome of genomic variations through gene-centric genotype-phenotype diation. In accordance, altered protein levels of key molecules involved in correlations. Supported by a grant from the Russian Science Foundation DNA repair such as BRCA1 and Rad51, were also observed. More specifi- (project №14-15-00411). cally, BRCA1 protein was significantly induced in at least half an hour after P S13
.17 irradiation, while Rad51 protein levels were higher than normal 48hours Functional characterization of congenital GPI-anchor deficiencies followwaf1ing irradiation. No significant modification was observed in p53 and reveals substantial differences in the expression profiles of GPI- p21 protein levels. anchored substrates In conclusion, DCBCT irradiation of HEK293 cells results in at least tempora- A. Knaus1,2, U. Kölsch3, D. Horn1, S. Mundlos1,4,2, P. M. Krawitz1,4,2; ry modification of molecules involved in DNA damage detection and repair. 1Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Based on these results, a more concrete evaluation of DCBCT irradiation risk Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Institute of assessment at the molecular level is required. Medical Immunology, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 4Berlin- Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité University Medicine Co-financed by NSRF-THALIS-UOA-MIS:377177 Berlin, Berlin, Germany. P S13
.15 Assisting research into human embryonic and fetal development D. Gerrelli1, D. Gold Diaz1, C. Santos1, Y. Cheng2, L. Overman2, M. Crosier2, S. Lisgo2, S. Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor deficiencies represent a pheno- Lindsay2, A. J. Copp1; 1UCL, London, United Kingdom, 2Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom. typically highly variable and diverse new class of congenital disorders of gly- cosylation. Over the recent years pathogenic mutations have been identified in 12 genes of the GPI-anchor synthesis and maturation pathway. There are certain features that are shared by most patients with a GPI-anchor defi- The Human Developmental Biology Resource (HDBR) is a unique resour- ciency such as intellectual disability or epilepsies. However, other features ce funded by the MRC and Wellcome Trust. It provides human embryonic such as a characteristic facial gestalt, certain organ malformations or abnor- and fetal tissue for gene expression studies related to congenital disease, malities in routine laboratory parameters, allow the delineation of distinct including birth defects and inherited metabolic disorders. Use of the mate- syndromes (Mabry syndrome, CHIME syndrome, MCAH S1
-3). rial should particularly illuminate developmental gene expression under- With more than 300 known GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-AP), we hypothe- lying aspects of functioning that characterise humans as opposed to lower sized that the differences in the phenotypic landscape of GPI-anchor defi- animals (e.g. higher brain function, language). This research is essential if ciencies might also be due to mutation specific changes in GPI-AP expres- we are to introduce new methods for prevention of congenital defects and sion. We established a comprehensive flow cytometric protocol comprising develop an improved understanding of “what makes us human”. 10 different GPI-anchored markers for different types of cell culture. We The HDBR has Tissue Bank ethics approval for the collection, storage and screened a cohort of 20 patients with pathogenic mutations in 5 different distribution of material between 4 and 22 weeks of gestation. A significant genes of the GPI-anchor synthesis and maturation pathway. proportion of the HDBR material is karyotyped and chromosomally normal We found characteristic flow cytometric expression patterns for GPI-ancho- material is provided for research but karyotypically abnormal material can red markers for each analyzed gene. So far it has been assumed that any also be provided on request. The HDBR’s material can be used to genera- impairment of GPI-anchor synthesis would affect all GPI-APs uniformly. te cell lines, stem cells, protein, RNA and DNA. The HDBR can also provide Thus our results are an unexpected finding and suggest that there might be cDNA from embryonic tissue for gene expression analysis. In addition, par- a correlation between certain phenotypic features and the absence of cer- affin wax and frozen sections of embryos and early fetuses are available for tain GPI-APs. in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry. Individuals wishing to use human and fetal tissue do not need to apply for local ethical permission as PM13.18 the HDBR ethics covers distribution of tissue to end users. Human embryo- Tissue distribution pattern of SM S1
 protein implies active post- nic and fetal tissue is provided free to registered users of the HDBR. transcriptional regulation Further information can be found on our web site www.HDBR.org. I. B. Filippenkov, O. Y. Sudarkina, S. A. Limborska, L. V. Dergunova; Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS Dept. of Molecular Bases of Human Genetics, Joint MRC/Wellcome Trust grant # 099175/Z/12/Z. Moscow, Russian Federation. PM13.16 14q32.3 deletions: molecular findings and genotype-phenotype correlations in two cases Sphingomyelin synthase 1 (SM S1
) catalyses the synthesis of sphingomye- I. A. Demidova1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, K. S. Vasin1,2,3, A. D. Kolotii1,2, M. A. Zelenova1,2,3, Y. B. lin and diacylglycerol from phosphatidylcholine and ceramide in eukaryotic Yurov1,2,3, I. Y. Iourov1,2,4; 1Mental Health Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research and cells. Sphingomyelin forms membrane rafts, which are important in mem- Clinical Institute for Pediatrics at the Pirogov Russian National Research Medical brane sorting and transport of proteins and in receptor signalling. The con- University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and sumption and production of important regulators of cell processes such as Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Russian ceramide and diacylglycerol, respectively, link SM S1
 function to the proces- Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian ses of membrane transport, cell proliferation and apoptosis. We have pre- Federation. viously determined the structure of the SGM S1
 gene encoding this enzyme and a number of its alternative transcripts. Here, we present a study of the expression of the full-length SM S1
 protein and the sum of the alternative 14q32.3 deletions are rare chromosome abnormalities. Nonetheless, stu- transcripts encoding this protein in human tissues. Abundance of SM S1
 pro- dying genomic rearrangements by array CGH has shown 2 cases out of 350 tein was detected using immunodetection. SM S1
 abundance was normalized to demonstrate 14q32.2q32.33 and 14q31.31q32.33 deletions. Deleted re- to the total protein amount. Abundance of SGM S1
 gene coding transcripts gions spanned 6,26 Mb at 14q32.2q32.33 and 4,83 bp at 14q32.31q32.33, was detected using real-time PCR. The amounts of the transcripts of SGM S1
 involving 386 and 268 genes, respectively. The former case also demonstra- gene were estimated relative to the average mRNA level of housekeeping ted mosaic 14q32.13q32.2 duplication (4,53 Mb) spanning 38 genes and genes (LDHА, GAPDH and RP L3
). The highest SM S1
 protein expression level non-mosaic 14q32.2 duplication (1,87 Mb) spanning 24 genes. We specu- was detected in the kidney; low levels were observed in the placenta and the late that duplications flanking the deletion are likely to contribute to the lymph node. Transcripts encoding the full-length SM S1
 were most abundant formation. The first case presented with microcephaly, structural congenital in the placenta, minimal level were observed in liver. Thus, the SM S1
 protein myopathy, spinal defects, congenital heart defect, short stature and failure to and mRNA levels in tissues differed significantly and were not correlated. thrive. The second patient presented with severe developmental and speech Computer sequence analysis of the SGM S1
 gene mRNA has revealed many delays, autism, hyperactivity, microcephaly, mild congenital heart defect and binding sites of miRNA associated with Argonaute proteins in coding regi- bilateral nephroptosis. To assess molecular basis of phenotypes, we perfor- on and 3’UTR. We imply the active post-transcriptional regulation of SGM S1
 med bioinformatic analysis. We found that DYN C1
H1, HS P90
AA1, TECPR2, gene expression. T2R7A0F3, СD C42
BPB, CKB, KL C1
,  C14
orf2 aEndS HPAGCS 22 0ar1e5 ca |n GdiLdaAteS gGenOeWs fo, rS COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S13
.19 Dosage effect of common trisomies in humans M. Volk, A. Maver, L. Lovrečić, B. Peterlin; Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have brought great promises for Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. disease modeling and cell-based therapies. One concern related to the use of reprogrammed somatic cells is the loss of genomic integrity and chro- mosome stability, a hallmark for cancer and many other human disorders. Chromosomal trisomies represent a significant share of morbidity and mor- We investigated the 16 human iPSC lines reprogrammed by non-integrative tality in the paediatric population. We performed a comprehensive survey of Sendai virus (SeV) and another 16 iPSC lines generated by integrative len- transcriptional landscape in three potentially viable human trisomies (T21, tivirus for genetic changes. At early passages we detected cytogenetic rear- T18, T13) to investigate whether global gene expression profile of these tri- rangements in 44% (7/16) of iPSC lines generated by lentiviral integration somies reflects a common homeostatic genome response or represents a whereas the corresponding figure was 6% (1/16) using SeV based delivery. specific gene-dosage effect of the underlying trisomy. The rearrangements were numerical and/or structural with chromosomes Transcriptomic analyses, comparing global gene expression profile between 5 and 12 as the most frequently involved chromosomes. We present herein trisomic and normal cell line, using Agilent’s Whole Human Genome Expres- the karyotypic aberrations in the iPSC lines including a duplication on chro- sion arrays, were performed in three groups: first and second comprised of mosome 5q13-q33 that restricts a candidate region for growth advantage. the cultivated amniocytes with T21 and T18 (10 and 9 samples), while the Our results suggest that the use of integrative lentivirus confers a higher third consisted of the cultivated cells of T13 chorionic villi (11 samples). For risk for cytogenetic abnormalities at early passages when compared to SeV each group, a comparable number of tissue-matched normal cell line samp- based reprogramming. In combination, our findings expand the knowledge les were used for comparison against reference expression profile. on acquired cytogenetic aberrations in iPSC after reprogramming and du- Comparative analysis of differentially expressed genes in T21, T18 and T13 ring culture. precipitated a subset of genes, differentially expressed in all three trisomies: PM13.22 WB P4
 and PRPF8, involved in the mRNA splicing and PPID involved in pro- A deletion at 4p15.2 and disruption of PITX2 gene due to pericentric tein folding. In addition, a co-expression network analyses demonstrated inversion in a patient with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and modular deregulation of gene clusters involved in cell division, RNA pro- developmental delay cessing and transcriptional factors shared between T18 and T21, but not Ž. Čiuladaitė, E. Preikšaitienė, A. Utkus, V. Kučinskas; with T13. Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Our data confirm that common trisomies induce transcriptome deregula- Vilnius, Lithuania. tion already in prenatal period. Moreover, we suggest that transcriptional alternations related to common trisomies reflect a genomic response asso- ciated with deregulation of genes involved in the cell cycle control, mRNA Balanced rearrangements in patients with abnormal phenotype are often processing and important cellular signaling pathways. Further studies are associated with cryptic microdeletion/microduplication or disruption of needed to address the question of common homeostatic genomic response gene at the breakpoint. We report on a 2-year-old patPieInTtX, 2a female, referred in common human trisomies. for genetic testing due to developmentPalI TdXe2lay and clinical features specific to Axenfeld–Rieger syndrome. It is long known that gene mutations, PM13.20 deletions or translocations involving or its surroundingd eg ennoovotypic Molecular characterization of a novel c.1092T>A splicing mutation in landscape cause Axenfeld–Rieger syndrome. the IDS gene T. Kovacova1, L. Grodecka1,2, S. Seneca3, O. Ticha4, K. Hrncirova1,2, P. Lockerova2, E. Conventional karyotype of the patient revealed the presence of pe- Buratti5, W. Lissens3, T. Freiberger1,2; ricentric inversion – inv(4)(p14q21~25). Array-CGH (1M) w as performed 1Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, and 2.4 Mb PinITteXr2stitial deletion at 4p15.2 was detected. FISH analysis using 2Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Transplantation, BAC FISH probes, R P11
-118N21 (4p15.2) and R P11
-313B13(which encom- Brno, Czech Republic, 3Center for Medical Genetics, and Research Group Reproduction passes the gene), coPnIfTirXm2ed the 4p15.2 deletion at the first break- and Genetics, UZ Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium, 4Institute of Clinical point andP IiTnXd2ic ated that the second chromosomal breakpoint at 4q25 was immunology and Allergology, St. Anne´s University Hospital, Masaryk University, Brno, within or very close tPoI TthXe2 locus. The breakpoint at 4q25 directly in- Czech Republic, 5International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Trieste, Italy. terrupts gene structure or its regulatorDy HelXe1m5ents and PpPrAesRuGm C1
pAtively causes alteration of expression leading to clinical features of Axen- feld–Rieger syndrome. Haploinsufficiency of and/or due Pre-mRNA splicing is a fundamental step of gene expression by which in- to deletion at 4p15.2 may have contributed to manifestation of additional trons are removed and exons are joined in pre-mRNAs to form the mature clinical features, as developmental delay, in the patient. To our knowledge, mRNIDAS. de novo this is the first report of Axenfeld–Rieger syndrome, caused by pericentric In this study, we have focused on the pathological c.1092T>A mutation in inversion. the gene. Besides creating a splice site, the mutation leads to the The work was funded by the Lithuanian-Swiss cooperation programme to utilisation of multiple upstream cryptic splice sites and to the production reduce economic and social disparities within the enlarged European Union of multiple aberrant transcripts in patient´s blood cells. This implies that under project agreement No. CH-3-ŠMM-01/04, UNIGENE project and the a mutation likely changes a splicing regulatory element as well. In si- World Federation of Scientists (Geneva, Switzerland) under the Lithuanian Ilinc oorder to elucidate the molecular mechanisms responsible for the altered National Scholarship Programme. splicing pattern we have used computational and minigene analyses. P S13
.23 predictions suggested that the mutation could lead to both disruption Unsuspected diagnosis of Jacobsen syndrome in a patient with and creation of an exon splicing silencer, as well as of an exon splicing en- craniosinostosis surgically treated hancer (ESE). Minigene analyses of the c.1092T>A mutation and of artificial P. Linares-Chavez1, J. Valdes-Miranda1, M. Rivera-Vega1, A. Perez-Cabrera1, L. Gonzalez- deletion mutants indicated, that the c.1092T>A mutation indeed leads to the Huerta1, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias2; 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, 2Hospital General de Mexico, creation of a new splicing regulatory element. This outcome was further spe- Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico. cified by results of an ESEdependent splicing assay that showed the creation of exon splicing silencer. Such silencer element might inhibit the use of the authentic splice site resulting in the observed complex splicing pattern. Our Partial deletions of the distal region of the long arm of chromosome 11 cau- study highlights the importance of splicing regulatory elements analyses se Jacobsen syndrome (JS). The breakpoints of deletion region occur around when examining splicing mutations. These sequences are relatively poorly 11q23.3 and generally range from 7 to 20Mb. Occurrence of JS is 1 in 100,000 defined and their alteration can lead to unexprected splicing patterns, with newborns with a female predominance. The cardinal clinical findings are a significant impact on resulting phenotype. growth retardation, intellectually disability, dysmorphism and thrombocy- Supported by the internal grant of the Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery topenia/pancytopenia. Sometimes, systemic anomalies are found to be pre- and Transplantation No. 201401. sent. In general, the spectrum of the clinical manifestations depends on the P S13
.21 size of the deleted region; however, a variable phenotype could be observed. Methods of reprogramming to iPSC associated with chromosomal Diagnosis is suspected on the basis of phenotype, but his must be confirmed integrity and delineation of a chromosome 5q candidate region for by cytogenetic analysis or aCGH. The aim of the present study is to describe growth advantage a patient with Jacobsen syndrome which underwent surgery to correct the M. Sobol, D. Raykova, L. Cavelier, A. Khalfallah, J. Schuster, N. Dahl; craniosinostosis and had a heavy bleeding due to unsuspected diagnosis. Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. Patient was a 18-months male, product of healthy, young and non-consan- guineous parents. At birth, he presented dolichocephaly. At 5 months of age ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 271 he underwent sagittal suturectomy presenting profuse bleeding. PhysicalABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index examination at 18 months of age revealed trigonocephaly, exotropia, re- 11/30 breakpoints-junctions; one breakpoint-junction had a 30 nucleotide verse epicanto, high and narrow palate, micrognathia, right cryptorchidism homology. These findings implicate non-homologous (NHEJ) or microhomo- and mild psychomotor retardation. Blood analysis reported normal plate- logy-mediated (MMEJ) end joining mechanisms in the formation of these let count with increased platelet volume. He again underwent surgery to BCRs. Financial support: FAPESP. correct craniosinostosis presenting hypovolemic shock. When the patient is PM13.26 referred to the Genetic Service it is detected a karyotype 46,XY,del(11)(q23) Deep sequencing detects very low-grade somatic mosaicism in the and an aCGH with a loss of 14.2 MB which corresponds to a Jacobsen syn- unaffected mother of siblings with nemaline myopathy drome. It is important to make an early diagnosis of patients with Jacobsen N. Matsumoto, E. Koshimizu, S. Miyatake; syndrome, in order to avoid complications during surgical procedures. Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan. PM13.24 Karyotype is not dead (yet)! L. Pasquier1, S. Odent1,2, M. Fradin1, H. Journel3, E. Cherot1, J. Lucas4, M. Belaud- When an expected mutation in a particular disease-causing gene is not Rotureau4, S. Jaillard4; identified in a suspected carrier, it is usually assumed to be due to germline 1Rennes University Hospital - CLAD Ouest, Rennes, France, 2CNRS UMR 6290 (IGDR), mosaicism. We first report very low-grade somatic mosaicism in ACTA1 de- Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 3Service de Génétique, CH Vannes - CLAD Ouest, tected only by deep resequencing using next-generation sequencer in an un- Vannes, France, 4Cytogenetics Unit - Rennes University Hospital, Rennes, France. affected mother of two siblings affected with nemaline myopathy of neona- tal form. We identified a novel heterozygous mutation in ACTA1, c.448A>G (p.Thr150Ala), in the affected siblings. 3D structural modeling suggested As array-comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH) and high-throughput this mutation may affect polymerization and/or actin’s interactions with sequencing (exome) technologies have swiftly spread throughout the medi- other proteins. Autosomal dominant inheritance with either parent being cal field, karyotype has gradually lost its leading role among genetic tests. either a germline or somatic mosaic was mostly expected. Sanger sequen- For example, in case of a child with intellectual disability (ID), without any cing identified no mutation. Further deep resequencing of this mutation by specific sign leading to a precise clinical diagnosis, several international gui- next-generation sequencer identified very low-grade somatic mosaicism in delines recommend to start with a-CGH screening then go on with exome the mother: 0.4%, 1.1%, and 8.3% in saliva, blood leukocytes, and nails, re- analysis. Generalized use of whole genome sequencing increases etiologic spectively. Our study demonstrates the possibility of very low-grade somatic diagnoses rate up to 30% in case of ID. These technologies are definitely mosaicism existing in suspected carriers, instead of germline mosaicism. major steps in the etiological process of ID. Drs. Yukiko K. Hayashi, Kazushi Miya, Masaaki Shiina, Kazuhiro Ogata, Ichizo However, physicians have to deal with the lack of qualitative information of Nishino are highly appreciated for their contribution to this work. the genome. Especially, exome and a-CGH analysis fail to reveal chromoso- P S13
.27 mal rearrangements because breakpoints are either located in introns or Non-identical twins: miR-96-5p and miR-96-3p expression during not associated with a gain or lost of genetic material. If theses quantitative mouse development technologies cannot easily identify chromosomal translocations or inversi- M. Robusto1,2, V. Massa3, C. Chiereghin1,2, E. Di Fede3, R. Asselta1,2, S. Duga1,2, G. Solda‘1,2; ons which sometimes split a gene in two, karyotype does. 1Humanitas University, Rozzano (Milan), Italy, 2Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Here, we show 3 cases whose karyotype swiftly provided us the right dia- Rozzano (Milan), Italy, 3Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, gnosis for a monogenic disease while gene molecular analysis had remained Milan, Italy. unsuccessful. When clinical diagnosis of a monogenic disease is suggested, the molecular analysis of the targeted gene may sometimes fail to identify the causal mutation. Then it could be very useful to carry out a karyotype in Introduction. We previously reported a deafness-causing mutation within order to reveal a chromosomal rearrangement involving the targeted gene. the MIR96 microRNA gene, miR-96(+57T>C), which alters the correct matu- If this gene is split in two confirmed by FISH, then the physician is not only ration of the miR-96 precursor and also affects the seed region of miR-96-3p able to confirm the causing disease but also to give the appropriate genetic (also called miR-96*). Although the function of miR-96-5p in the inner ear counselling. has been highly investigated, the biological role of its partner strand still P S13
.25 remains unclear. Investigating clinical impact and mechanism of formation of Methods and Results. We analyzed the expression pattern of both miR-96- karyotypically balanced chromosomal rearrangements: the power of 3p and -5p in the developing mouse embryo (from 10.5 days post coitum to combining breakpoint mapping by mate-pair sequencing and copy the end of gestation), using specific LNA probes for in-situ detection. Alt- number analysis by aCGH hough both mature miRNAs were co-expressed in several tissues (neural A. C. S. Fonseca1,2, A. Bonaldi1, M. Bak2, K. T. Abe3, N. Tommerup2, A. M. Vianna- tube, somites, and developing ear) a different spatio-temporal distribution Morgante1; between the -3p and -5p was found. To understand which factors may in- 1Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, fluence miRNA strand selection, we are currently combining miRNA in-situ Brazil, 2Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of hybridization and immunohistochemical staining for proteins involved eit- Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Sarah Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brasília, Brazil. her in miRNA biogenesis or in RNA interference (e.g. Ago1-4, TRBP). Finally, candidate miR-96-3p targets were predicted and are being functionally va- lidated by ex-vivo assays. Conclusions. For the first time, we report the highly specific and regulated About 7% of karyotypically balanced chromosomal rearrangements (BCRs) pattern of expression of miR-96-3p during mouse development, suggesting are associated with developmental disorders (DD) due to gene or regula- both distinct and common roles compared to its partner miRNA. tory element disruption, cryptic imbalances on rearranged chromosomes We thank the University of Milan Departmental funds for Young Researchers and position effect. In this study we illustrate the power of mate-pair se- (linea B), the Italian Telethon Foundation grant GG P11177
, and the Fonda- quencing (MPS) and aCGH to investigate the clinical impact and to disclose zione Cariplo, grant no 2013-0825 for financial support. the mechanisms of formation of BCRs in patients with DD. In our cohort of 43 BCRs (28 translocations, 10 inversions, five complex rearrangements), PM13.28 180K aCGH revealed 32 likely pathogenic imbalances (2.2kb-6.6Mb) on re- UNCOMMON NUMERICAL CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITY: MOSAICISM arranged chromosomes in 12 BCRs. Breakpoint mapping by MPS were per- 47, XY(+8)/ 47, XY (+21) Case report formed in 27/43 BCRs. MPS expanded the number of breakpoints detected C. M. Jurca1, K. Kozma1, M. Bembea1, O. Iuhas2, C. Cladovan1, A. Jurca1; 1University from Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, by karyotyping or aCGH from 114 to 162 (resolution <2kb). The 48 additio- 2Municipal Clinical Hospital „dr. Gavril Curteanu“, Oradea, Romania. nal breakpoincthsr owmeroeth froiupnsids . in nine BCRs. The number of brea kpoints/BCR ranged from 2-22; the five most complex BCRs (10-22 breaks) displayed hallmarks of Gene disruption was observed in25/27 BCRs: Introduction. Trisomy 8 is a rare numerical chromosomal abnormality cha- 10 BCRs disrupted known diseases genes or their regulatory region, and five racterized by the presence of additional chromosome 8. The complete form others disrupted candidate genes. Overall pathogenic imbalances on rear- is fatal resulting in early death. Life expectancy in trisomy 8 mosaicism, ranged chromosomes and/or disrupted known disease genes/regulatory in the absence of serious malformations is that of the general population. regions were identified in 19/44 BCRs, proving the effectiveness of aCGH/ The incidence of trisomy 8 mosaicism is 1:25000-1:50000, more common MPS for genotype-phenotype correlations. Among 30 Sanger-sequenced in boys (5:1) although the explanation for this does not exist. Objectives. breakpoint-junctions from 13 BCRs, five contained >45 nucleotide deleti- The authors present a case of numerical chromosomal abnormality. Method. ons; 19 breakpoint-junctions had <23 nucleotide insertions or deletions; s2ix7 h2ad no alterations. Micro-homology ofE 2S-7H nGuc 2le0ot1id5e s| wGeLreA dSeGtecOteWd i,n S COCaTsLe AreNpoDrt,. UReKsu |lt Ws. WWe Wpr.eEseSnHt tGhe.O caRseG of a 5-month-old infant who pre- sented at birth a plurimalformative syndrome characterized by craniofacialABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. dysmorphism, dermatoglyphic anomalies, bone abnormalities. Cytogenetic analysis revealed mosaicism 47, XY (8) / 47, XY (21). Conclusions. Very rare The autistic spectrum is comprised of the Asperger syndrome, Heller syn- anomaly. Mosaicism trisomy 21 with trisomy 8 is rarely reported in the lite- drome, Rett syndrome, atypical autism, disorganized schizophrenia, as well rature, only one case is reported. as, although somewhere marginally placed, schizoid personality disorder P S13
.29 and obsessive compulsive disorder. Characterization of type-1 NF1 deletions We present a case of a 21 years old female with a psychopathological pic- M. Hillmer1, V. Mautner2, D. N. Cooper3, H. Kehrer-Sawatzki1; ture that consisted of: psychomotor agitation, a suicide attempt by defene- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Department of stration, which was secondary to delusional ideation, auditory and visual Neurology, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 3Institute of hallucinations, anxiety, lack of insight, mixed insomnia. Our case, diagnosed Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. with schizophrenia, also presents manifestations that are characteristic for autistic spectrum disorders. Based on her academic performances, our pati- ent might have a superior than average intellect. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is caused by mutations in the NF1 gene. In The result of the arrayCGH analysis showed genomic imbalances including 5% of all NF1 patients large deletions encompassing the entire NF1 gene several genes. From the list of deleted/duplicated genes, one that was pre- and its flanking regions are detected. The majority of these deletions span viously reported in patients with psychotic disorders is the SHANK3 gene. 1.4-Mb (type-1 NF1 deletions) and are characterized by breakpoints located ArrayCGH analysis for our case identified an 82.3 Kb duplication of chro- within low-copy-repeats termed NF1-REPa and NF1-REPc. Previous studies mosome 22q from 51.055.575-51.137.968 bp; this region encompassed the have suggested that most type-1 NF1 deletion breakpoints cluster within SHANK3. The patient’s mother did not carry the duplication. The genetic hotspots of nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) termed PR S1
 and analysis for father was not possible because he is deceased. Several papers PR S2
, but a methodical analysis of breakpoint position in a large number of have reported SHANK3 gene variants in autistic spectrum consisting of both type-1 NF1 deletions has not so far been performed. The aim of our present copy number variants and point mutations. study is to determine the precise breakpoint positions in 67 patients with The presence of three copies of the SHANK3 gene was reported in associa- type-1 NF1 deletions initially identified by MLPA in order to identify their tion with autistic spectrum disorders in other papers. These findings led to breakpoints (sites of strand exchange) at the highest possible resolution. To the idea that both haploinsufficiency, as well as an over-expression of the do so, we performed SNP genotyping of paralog-specific PCR-products as SHANK3 gene are associated with manifestations of autistic spectrum dis- well sequence analysis of breakpoint-spanning PCR-products. Our analysis orders and other neurobehavioral abnormalities. indicates that 52 of the 67 type-1 NF1 deletions investigated harboured P S13
.33 breakpoints within the 2-kb PR S2
 hotspot. Only 12 deletions (18%) had Unbalanced translocation (X;13) as a cause of two diverse phenotypes breakpoints located within PR S1
 whereas 3 deletions exhibited breakpoints in siblings due to duplication versus haploinsuficiency of SHOX gene that were located outwith PR S1
 and PR S2
. Our findings indicate that PR S2
 and skewed inactivation pattern. is a very strong NAHR hotspot since it harbours 78% of all type-1 deletion K. Adamová1, V. Curtisová1, M. Godava1, D. Černá2, Z. Dobčáková3, D. Grochová3, P. breakpoints. The sequence analysis of the regions of strand exchange in all Čapková1, H. Filipová1; type-1 NF1 deletions promises to provide further information about recom- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital and Palacky University, Olomouc, bination initiation sites and the processing of the recombination intermedi- Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Ostrava, Czech ates of type-1 NF1 deletions. Republic, 3Cytogenetic Laboratory Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. PM13.30 Nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate: identification of a causal element at 13q31 We report a male patient with an unspecific facial stigmatization, develop- A. C. Böhmer1,2, B. Nagarajan3, M. Knapp4, E. Mangold1, J. Cotney5, B. Odermatt3, M. M. mental delay, microcephaly and a tall stature. His G - banded karyotype was Nöthen1,2, K. U. Ludwig1,2; normal. FISH of subtelomeric regions revealed deletion in subtelomeric part 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of of chromosome 13q and a duplication in Xpter. These findings were due to a Genomics, Life&Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Anatomy, balanced translocation (X;13) present in proband’s mother. University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Array CGH revealed that the Xp duplication spans 3.5 Mb and contains 27ge- Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Department of Genetics, Yale nes from OMIM database including SHOX gene. The deletion on 13q spans 5 University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States. Mb and contains 19 genes from OMIM database. We performed FISH examination of proband´s apparently healthy sister and revealed the deletion of SHOX gene region (Xp22.3) and a duplication Nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate (nsCLP) is one of the most common birth of 13qter. Haploinsuficiency of SHOX gene resulted in previously undia- defects and has a multifactorial etiology. In a recent meta-SaPnRaYly2sis we iden- gnosed Léri-Weill syndrome (short stature, mesomelia of upper limbs and tified a risk locus on chromosome 13q31, with the top-associated variant Madelung‘s deformity of the wrists). Because of the skewed inactivation pat- mapping to a non-coding region (~210 kb upstream of ). Here, we tern with silencing of the derived X chromosome there was no impact of the indented to follow-up this GWAS finding by (i) identifying the putative partial trisomy 13q. cauisna lv iSvNoP, (ii) functionally annotating the top-associated region and (iii) understanding the biologicPal relevance that explains the genetic associati- PM13.34 on . Based on imputation results, we- 1i1dentified rs1854110 to be the Chromosomal rearrangements in the 11p15 imprinted region: sixteen functional candidate SNP ( imputing=1.96×10 , relative risk=1.38 (95% con- new 11p15.5 duplications with associated phenotypes and putative fidence interval: 1.19-1.60). This marker was found to be located in a pu- functional consequences tative regulatory enhancer element relevant for craniofacial development. S. Heide1, S. Chantot-Bastaraud1, B. Keren2, F. Brioude3, S. Azzi3, S. Rossignol3, J. Siffroi1, Y. Lebouc3, I. Netchine3; We cloned this element, together with a conserved region shown to be an 1Cytogenetics, Armand Trousseau Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 2Cytogenetics, Pitié enhancer region in neural crest cells, into a Tol2-vector system. First results Salpêtrière Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 3Pediatric Endocrinology, Armand Trousseau revealed that zebrafish embryos injected with the enhancer element show Hospital, APHP, Paris, France. GFP expression in cephalic regions. In order to determine the exact nature of GFP-positive cells, further experiments using immunostaining with antibo- dies against neural crest cell-specific markers will be conducted. The 11p15.5 imprinted region contains two clusters of genes which play an Our study provides first hints towards a specific regulatory element at an important role in prenatal and postnatal growth and which are controlled nsCLP-associated risk locus detected by GWAS. Further studies are current- by two imprinting centers, ICR1 (Imprinting Control Region 1) and ICR2 ly ongoing to confirm and follow-up the initial findings, including a quan- (Imprinting Control Region 2). titative luciferase assay for the risk allele. Our studies will provide deeper Opposite genetic and epigenetic anomalies of this region result in two di- insights into the biological mechanism underlying nsCLP association on stinct syndromes with growth disturbance: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndro- chromosome 13q31. me (BWS, MIM #130650), characterized by overgrowth and Silver-Russell PM13.32 syndrome (SRS, MIM #180860), characterized by growth retardation. Duplication of SHANK3 gene in a case of schizophrenia associated Cytogenetic anomalies are rare in both syndromes and represent less than with autism 3% of SRS or BWS. Large duplications encompassing the two imprinting A. Belengeanu1, C. Giurgi-Oncu1, S. Farcas1, D. Misceo2; centers have already been described as associated with SRS or BWS, de- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania, 2Department pending on the parental origin of the duplication. However, smaller Copy Number Variants (CNV), encompassing totally or partially one or another ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 273 of the imprinting centers have only been recently reported. These CNV areABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. sometimes difficult to interpret and require the help of clinical features and methylation profile. We report here 16 new SRS or BWS patients with 11p15 microduplication The origins of somatic genome variations manifesting as structural chro- encompassing either both domains ICR1 and ICR2, either one of them or mosomal rearrangements remain largely unknown. However, it is generally only part of one of them, and discuss the possible functional consequences accepted that susceptibility to structural chromosome aberrations can be of the rearrangements after a review of the literature. produced by alterations to DNA sequences flanking the breakpoints or to P S13
.35 rearranged chromosomal regions (i.e. CNV). Addressing genome variations Mosaic patterns can be missed by SNP array because of absence of in children with intellectual disability, autism, epilepsy and/or congenital heterozygosity in the normal cells malformations (n=200) by high-resolution CNV analysis (molecular karyo- B. Leegte, P. Rump, B. Sikkema - Raddatz, M. Benjamins, T. Dijkhuizen, R. Sinke; typing; resolution: 1 kbp or higher), we have surprisingly found that somatic Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. structural chromosome abnormalities can co-occur with non-mosaic ones within the same loci. More precisely, we detected 8 cases (4%) (4 dupli- cations and 4 deletions) demonstrating small non-mosaic structural chro- Introduction: SNP array allows the integration of genotype and copy num- mosome rearrangements encompassed by larger mosaic ones. The dupli- ber information, which permits the simultaneous detection of (low-level cations were mosaic dup3p26.3p26.1 (5.8 Mb) vs. regular dup3p26.1 (2.9 mosaic) copy number variations, consanguinity and UPD in cases of isodi- Mb); mosaic dup14q32.13q32.2 (4.5 Mb) vs. regular dup14q32.2 (1.8 Mb); somy. We report on a case where a mosaic pattern was missed by SNP array mosaic dup17p13.1p11.2 (6.9 Mb) vs. regular dup17p12 (1.4 Mb); mosaic due to the absence of heterozygosity in the normal cells. dup18p11.32p11.31 (5.3 Mb) vs. regular dup18p11.32p11.31 (4.8 Mb). The Case presentation: Array analysis of non-consanguineous parents was per- deletions were mosaic del5q35.1q35.3 (9.2 Mb) vs. regular del5q35.2q35.3 formed because the array result of their child showed a terminal deletion of (2.3 Mb); mosaic del14q11.2 (2.2 Mb) vs. regular del14q11.2 (0.5 Mb); mo- at least 4.3 Mb in 6q27 (chr6: 166,863,544-qter). An Illumina Omni Express saic del15q13.1q14 (8.2 Mb) vs. regular del15q13.2q13.3 (2 Mb); mosaic 850K was used for the trio analysis and the mother showed the same deleti- delXp22.32p22.2 (4.7 Mb) vs. regular delXp22.31 (0.7 Mb). These findings on. While the mother is healthy, the child presented with moderate develop- allowed us to hypothesize small regular structural variations (CNV) to be mental delay, autism and delay of motor skills. Distal 6q deletions have been able to produce locus-specific constitutional chromosome instability resul- described in literature and the patients’ main characteristics are intellectual ting in larger somatic rearrangements. Our speculations are also suppor- disability, hypotonia, seizures, brain anomalies and specific dysmorphic fea- ted by previous communications reporting specific local genomic changes tures. At least part of the clinical features of the child can be explained by to underlie common microdeletions/microduplications at several of the this deletion. Because the mother has no phenotypic features we considered aforementioned loci. Supported by Russian Scientific Fund (Grant #14-15- a mosaic pattern for the deletion. Therefore we performed FISH resulting in 00411). detection of the deletion in 49 of the 100 analyzed metaphases indicating PM13.38 that the mother is indeed a mosaic carrier for the deletion. Utilising CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to validate novel genes Conclusion: The reason we missed the mosaic pattern and only detected associated with telomere length in humans the deletion must have been caused by the absence of heterozygosity of the N. F. Shamkhi, P. Jones, M. A. Kaiser, N. J. Samani, V. Codd, T. R. Webb; critical region. Therefore, we recommend FISH analysis in case a healthy University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. carrier has a deletion to detect a possible mosaic pattern. PM13.36 Non-sequential and multi-step splicing of the dystrophin transcript Introduction: Telomere length (TL) shortens with each round of cell divi- I. Gazzoli, I. Pulyakhina, N. Verwey, Y. Ariyurek, J. F. J. Laros, P. A. C. ’t Hoen, A. Aartsma- sion due to the inability of DNA polymerase to fully replicate the 3’ end of Rus; the DNA. TL is therefore regarded as a marker of cellular age and has been Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. proposed as a marker of biological ageing. Shorter mean leukocyte TL has been shown to be associated with several age-related diseases. GWA studies have identified seven loci that associate with telomere length in humans. Of The long (2.2Mb) human dystrophin transcript (DMD) takes 16 hours to be these loci, five contain genes with known roles in telomere biology (TERC, transcribed and is co-transcriptional spliced. The presence of long introns TERT, NAF1, OBF C1
, RTE L1
) but the remaining two do not, therefore poten- (24 over 10kb long, 5 over 100kb long) poses challenges to the splicing ma- tially identifying novel genes involved in telomere length determination in chinery. Additionally, the heterogeneity in intron size suggests that intron humans. In order to investigate this we have employed a CRISPR/Cas9 geno- removal not always takes place consecutively. Here, we explored the order me editing approach to explore the function of genes within one of these loci of intron removal and potential multi-step splicing for the DMD transcripts (ACY P2
/TSPY L6
) with respect to telomere length maintenance. in human skeletal muscle cell lines. A customized library of probes covering Materials and methods: We have used the CRISPR/Cas9 system to knockout all exons and introns, has been generated capturing pre-mRNA and tar- ACY P2
 and TSPY L6
 as well as telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) as a geting DMD, followed by Hiseq sequencing. We developed a new pipeline positive control in human induced pluripotent stem cells. Lines have under- (SplicePie) to analyze capture-pre-mRNA-sequencing data. Analysis showed gone multiple passages and TL is currently being measured by Q-FISH and that DMD introns can be removed non-sequentially generating exon blocks qPCR. - joined blocks of exons flanked by unspliced introns. Exon blocks were de- Results: We have successfully created knock-out lines for ACY P2
, TSPY L6
 tected by analysis of the coverage of paired-end reads and validated experi- and TERT individually as well as ACY P2
/TERT and TSPY L6
/TERT double mentally using PCR and Sanger sequencing. No correlation between intron knock outs. We will present preliminary data on telomere length mainte- length and speed of intron removal was observed. Computational analysis nance in these lines. and experimental validation revealed that intron removal takes place in se- Conclusions: We have utilised the CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing system as veral steps for the majority of dystrophin introns. We found two mechanis- a means of investigating the role of novel genes in the control of telomere ms of multi-step intron removal in DMD- recursive and nested splicing. Non- length in humans. sequential and multi-step splicing events were found throughout the DMD P S13
.39 gene across three cell lines. We believe that our findings of non-sequential Breakpoint analysis of the recurrent constitutional t(8;22) and multi-step splicing provide insight in the splicing mechanism and will (q24.13;q11.21) translocation be useful to optimize therapeutic strategies that interfere with the splicing H. KURAHASHI1, D. Mishra1, T. Kato1, H. Inagaki1, T. Kosho2, K. Wakui2, Y. Kido3, S. process. Sakazume3, M. Taniguchi-Ikeda4, N. Morisada4, K. Iijima4, Y. Fukushima2, B. S. Emanuel5,6; P S13
.37 1ICMS, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan, 2Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan, 3Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, Non-mosaic structural chromosome rearrangements predisposing Koshigaya, Saitama, Japan, 4Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo, to larger mosaic ones: evidences for the existence of locus-specific Japan, 5The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 6the constitutional chromosome instability Perelman School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United I. Y. Iourov1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,4, M. A. Zelenova1,2,4, A. D. Kolotii1,2, I. A. Demidova1,2,4, V. States. S. Kravets1,2, M. L. Gordeeva2, Y. B. Yurov1,2; 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Separated Structural Unit “Clinical Research Institute of Pediatrics”, Ministry of Health of Russia, The t(8;22)(q24.13;q11.2) has been identified as one of several recurrent Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Russian Medical constitutional translocations mediated by palindromic AT-rich repeats (PA- TRRs). Although the breakage on 22q11 utilizes the same PATRR as that of 274 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCO thT e L mA orN e D pr, e U vaK le n| t W coW nstW itu. tE ioS nH alG t(. 1O 1;R 22G )(q23;q11.2), the breakpoint regi-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index on on 8q24 has not been elucidated in detail since the analysis of palindro- showed a novel nonsense mutation on 3 exon of the STS gene producing a mic sequence is technically challenging. In this study, the entire 8q24 break- stop codon. This data enriches the mutational spectrum of the STS gene in point region has been resolved by next generation sequencing. Eight poly- XLI patients and remarks the variability in the phenotypic spectrum inde- morphic alleles were identified and compared with the junction sequences pendently of the molecular defect. of previous and two recently identified t(8;22) cases . All of the breakpoints P S14
.001 were found to be within the PATRRs on chromosomes 8 and 22 (PATRR8 Rapid and portable Lab-on-chip genotyping for Clopidogrel and PATRR22), but the locations were different among cases at the level metabolism at the point-of-care of nucleotide resolution. The translocations were always found to arise on V. Caporale1, C. Manzalini2, F. M. Notarangelo1, M. Cereda3, L. Coppini1, M. A. Demola1, A. symmetric PATRR8 alleles with breakpoints at the center of symmetry. The Guidorossi1, G. Mangé4, F. Pigazzani1, C. Tardio1, F. Orsini5, D. Pirola3, A. Crocamo1, F. del translocation junction is often accompanied by symmetric deletions at the Giudice1, F. Boffetti1, M. Bianchessi6, P. A. Merlini7, D. Ardissino1, N. Marziliano1; center of both PATRRs. Rejoining occurs with minimal homology between 1Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria di Parma, PARMA, Italy, 2University of Bologna, BOLOGNA, Italy, 3ST Microelectronics, AGRATE BRIANZA, Italy, 4Azienda Ospedaliero the translocation partners. Remarkably, comparison of der(8) to der(22) Sanitaria Locale di Parma, PARMA, Italy, 5University of Milan, MILANO, Italy, 6ST sequences shows identical breakpoint junctions between them, which like- Microelctronics, AGRATE BRIANZA, Italy, 7Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Niguarda Cà ly represent products of two independent events on the basis of a classical Granda, MILANO, Italy. model. Our data suggest the hypothesis that interactions between the two PATRRs prior to the translocation event might trigger illegitimate recombi- nation resulting in the recurrent palindrome-mediated translocation. Background. Effective platelet inhibition has become a cornerstone in the These studies were supported by a grant-in-aid for Scientific Research from management of patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS). The current the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Ja- standard of care includes dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, and one of pan. the three currently available ADP  P2
Y12 inhibitors: clopidogrel, prasugrel PM13.40 and ticagrelor. We used a novel point-of care lab-on-chip tool in order to Down syndrome caused by mirror duplication of chromosome 21 : genotype patients experiencing ACS to identify the carriers of the ABCB1 conventional cytogenetic, FISH and array CGH 3435, CY P2
C19 *2 and CYP
C2 C19
*17 alleles and so assessing a pharmacolo- T. Dery1, A. Receveur1, N. Chatron2, G. Morin3, M. Benkhalifa1, D. Sanlaville2, G. gical approach incorporating these genetic variants. Jedraszak1,3, F. Jobic1, H. Copin1; Methods and Results. Between October 2013 and January 2015, 800 patients 1Service de Médecine et Biologie de la Reproduction, Cytogénétique et CECOS de Picardie were enrolled into a two-armed, single blind, randomized controlled trial CHU d’Amiens & Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France, 2Laboratoire de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 3Centre d’Activité assessing the clinical usefulness of adding pharmacogenomic data on top de Génétique Clinique et Oncogénétique, CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, France. of clinical variables when choosing dual antiplatelet treatment. In the phar- macogenomic arm, genotyping was done at the patients’ point-of-care by means of a newly developed portable real-time PCR system (Q3) by scoring Down syndrome (DS) is a well-known syndrome; the frequency is about 1 the CY P2
C19 *2, CY
P2 C19
*17 and ABCB1 3435 alleles in a turnaround time in 2000 live births. The most common form (95%) is due to an extra copy of 70 min from DNA extraction to final genotype calls. When compared to of chromosome 21 in all cells, in 2% of the cases the trisomy is a mosaism, other gold-standard conventional laboratory genotyping techniques, the ne- and 2% present with robertsonian translocation. In the last 1%, it is due to wly developed system showed 100% concordance. a structural abnormality in the 21q22 region. Conclusions. The Q3 system proved to be as reliable as the current available However a rare variant is the duplication of the chromosome 21 with mirror techniques. Genotyping in the ACS setting should not be delegated to centra- duplication (reverse tandem). It is characterized by partial duplication and lised clinical laboratories for matter of time however the genotyping at the partial deletion of chromosome 21. patients’ bedside represents the opportunity to realise large, randomized Here, we report the case of a child with typical DS features. At birth, we per- trials in order to assess the clinical improvement of adding genotype data formed standard karyotype which showed that she carried mirror duplica- (gathered bed-side) to the classical clinical variables for the outcomes of tion of the chromosome 21. patients with ACS. An array comparative genomic hybridization was performed to define exact- PM14.002 ly the triplication and to highlight a possible monosomy. It showed a dupli- Fully automated Ion AmpliSeq™ library preparation using the Ion cation of 29,9 Mb of the region 21q11.2q22.3 and a deletion of 2,8Mb of the Chef System region 21q22.3. The couple has been through 3 miscarriages. M. D. Allen1, N. Kane2, D. Birr2, T. Biorac1, R. Jones3, M. Shenasa3, S. Do3, G. Liu3, D. After the birth of their third child, the analyses were completed in order to Marran2, K. Rhodes1, M. Andersen1; 1Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, United States, 2Thermo Fisher Scientific, highlight a paracentric inversion or other chromosomal rearrangement in Guilford, CT, United States, 3Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United chromosome 21 in the parents’ karyotype. States. After such a karyotype for the children and the antecedent of miscarriages for the couple, it is necessary to go further in the analysis, and to look for chromosomal rearrangement in the karyotypes of the parents. This can ex- As next generation sequencing evolves, the ability to create reproducible, plain that association of duplication deletion, and adjust the genetic coun- high quality libraries becomes increasingly important. The Ion AmpliSeq™ selling. method has proven useful to reliably generate quality libraries from as litt- Furthermore the description of those trisomies 21 with duplication deletion le as 10 ng of nucleic acid. We developed the Ion Chef system to offer an helps to refine a genotype-phenotype correlation. automated solution for templating and sequencing chip preparation. Here P S13
.41 we demonstrate the marriage of Ion AmpliSeq™ reagents with the Ion Chef X-linked ichthyosis in a patient with a novel nonsense mutation in the system to create a fully automated library preparation solution. This system STS gene. includes a new set of consumables and software to enable DNA to loaded M. Murillo1, J. Toral-Lopez2, L. Gonzalez-Huerta1, M. Rivera-Vega1, S. Cuevas- chip in less than 24 hours with only two touch points. Eight Ion AmpliSeq Covarrubias3; libraries can be prepared in less than 7 hours with less than 15 minutes of 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, 2Centro Médico Ecatepec, ISSEMYM, Ecatepec, Mexico, 3Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de hands on time. Using an 8000 amplicon targeted cancer panel we observe Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico. >95% uniformity for all 8 samples, which compares favorably to manually prepared libraries. Additionally, using Equalizer™ normalization we observe highly reproducible barcode balance with less than 10% CV between libra- X-linked recessive ichthyosis (XLI) is a genodermatosis due to steroid sulfa- ries. We have seen similar high performance with a variety of panels ranging tase deficiency. XLI is characterized by dark, adhesive, polygonal and regular from 50 to 25,000 amplicons from high quality genomic DNA as well as FFPE scales and presents a frequency of 1 in 2000-6000 males. Ninety percent of DNA. With the pushbutton automation of Ion AmpliSeq™ library prepara- XLI patients have deletions of the entire STS gene and flanking sequences; tion, we boast the first NGS system with a fully automated workflow from currently, 14 point mutations and seven partial deletions have been repor- sample to answer. ted worldwide. The aim of the present study is to describe the STS gene in P S14
.003 a patient with X-linked ichthyosis and a mild phenotype. XLI diagnosis was Next generation sequencing-based molecular diagnostics for confirmed through steroid sulfatase assay in leukocytes. Genomic DNA was Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease extracted through conventional methods. Exons 1-10 of the STS gene were R. Minardi1,2, C. P. Cristalli1,2, A. Aquilano1,2, C. Graziano3, E. Marasco1, O. Baraldi2, G. analyzed by polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing analysis. XLI Comai2, V. Cuna2, A. Wischmeijer3, A. Mattiaccio1,4, S. De Fanti4,5, D. Luiselli4,5, G. Montini6, proband had undetectable levels EofS SHTSG a c2ti0v1ity5. T |h Ge DLNAAS sGeqOuWenc, eS aCnOalyTsLisA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 275ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index M. Seri3, G. La Manna2, V. Mantovani1,3; 1Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine a QiaSymphony robot. For array CGH analysis samples were fluorescently (DIMES), Nephrology Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi University labeled using an Agilent commercial kit and a BRAVO robot. Samples are Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, combined with a reference DNA (pooled DNA from 500 male blood donors) Bologna, Italy, 4Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, and hybridized for 3 nights in batches of 24. The arrays were then washed in Laboratory of Molecular Anthropology, Bologna, Italy, 5Centre for Genome Biology (CGB), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric batches of 8 using a Little Dipper wash station. Arrays were scanned using Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy. an Agilent G2565CA scanner, and the data extracted using Feature Extrac- tion 10.5. Arrays were handled in a humidity, temperature and ozone con- trolled environment. 95 patient samples were processed within 10 days. An Introduction: Autosomal recessive polycystic kiPdKnHeyD 1d isease is characteri- in house LIMS tracked samples through the pipeline. zed by cysts development in the collecting ducts often associated with hepa- We have analysed over 1000 normal control samples, generating a control tic involvement and it is caused by mutations in gene. Due to the lar- data set to aid interpretation of patient data. We have now processed ~7,700 ge size of this gene the conventional mutation screening PisK tHimD1e -consuming DDD patient samples. Patient DNA samples typically produce a median DLRs and expensive, so that a molecular diagnosis is often missed. value of 0.17. Copy number changes are detected using an in house analysis Materials and Methods: A NGS method for screening of gene basPeKd- pipeline and the inheritance status evaluated by comparison with exome HonD 1Io n Tor rent platform was developed and validated in this study. 26 sub- CNV data. Variants identified were assessed in attempt to identify the cause jects were submitted to our NGS protocol, 14 with known mutations in of the child’s developmental disorder. geneand 12 without a molecular characterization. Health Innovation Challenge Fund (HICF-1009-003), a funding partner- Results: Our NGS method allowed to detect all the mutations previously ship between the Wellcome Trust (WT090851) and the UK Department of identified by conventional sequencing. Additional mutations were also iden- Health. tified, providing more information about the carrier status or completing PM14.006 the molecular characterization in probands. All additional or newly detected An efficient NGS tool for cascade genetic screening of Familial variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Our NGS approach allowed Hypercholesterolaemia to identify the mutations also in all the not yPeKtH tDes1ted subjects. During our P. Couvert1,2,3, A. Coiffard1, A. Rotthier4, S. Larrreur1, L. Heyrman4, J. Lacorte1,2,3, J. Del- analysis 17 previously undescribed variants were detected, contributing to Favero4, A. Carrié1,2,3; extend the spectrum of known mutations in gene. 1Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service de Biochimie Endocrinienne et Oncologique, APHP, Paris, France, 2Institute of Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Paris, France, 3Université Conclusions: This method resulted accurate, robust and more sensitive than Pierre et Marie Curie 06, Unité Mixte de Recherche_S 1166, Paris, France, 4Multiplicom the conventional sequencing, with a considerable reduction of work times N.V, Niel, Belgium. and costs. Although it will be necessary to test more patients, our study is a proof of concept showing the feasibility of our NGS protocol for diagnostic purpose, improving and accelerating molecular diagnosis and genetic coun- Introduction Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common autosomal- seling for families. dominant disorder caused by mutations in known genes (LDLR, APOB or PM14.004 PCSK9). In addition, APOE may be considered as the 4th locus of autosomal- Revisiting previously classified Copy Number Variants - Is it worthy dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) and the main modifier-gene of FH for management of clinical strategy? and cardiovascular risk. Cascade screening of FH using genetic testing for J. B. Melo, P. Cruz, S. I. Ferreira, L. M. Pires, N. Lavoura, A. Mascarenhas, A. Jardim, I. M. ADH has been suggested by international guidelines but a proportion of pa- Carreira; tients may have a polygenic cause which could compromise the efficiency of Cytogenetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. cascade testing. Recently Talmud et al. described a polygenic score that helps identifying the polygenic contribution in FH. We have developed a NGS tool combining the detection of monogenic as well as polygenic forms of FH. Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) allows Materials and Methods Complete coding regions of LDLR, PCSK9 and APOE, the possibility to screen the whole genome at once and with high resolution, and a specific region (c.10200 to c.11100) of APOB are amplified, genera- allowing the detection of Copy Number Variants (CNVs). Taking into account ting 65 amplicons in 4 multiplex PCR reactions (ADHMASTR kit developed the existence of known syndromes, relevant genes for the phenotype and in collaboration with Multiplicom). Ten control fragments are added for the CNVs in healthy population, we have proposed the classification of CNVs into detection of Copy Number Variations (CNV). A fifth plex was added corre- different classes: Class I are deletions/duplications in regions associated sponding to fragments containing the 12 SNPs used for the polygenic score. with a syndrome; Class II are deletions/duplications not reported in normal Results Multiplexed PCR products of 96 patients are sequenced in each Mi- subjects and involving known coding genes; Class III are /duplications re- Seq run (V3 chemistry). Bioinformatic analysis allowed us to detect point ported in low frequency in normal subjects or not involving genes; Class IV mutations in the 4 genes analyzed as well as CNV. In FH patients without are deletions/duplications reported in healthy subjects -common variants. identified mutation, the polygenic score was calculated to classify them as We have revisited 250 cases with intellectual disability and/or Autism spec- of polygenic origin. trum disorders, analyzed by oligonucleotide array-CGH (Agilent 4x180K Conclusions We have developed an efficient and cost-effective NGS tool allo- platform) from 2011 and 2012 in order to evaluate if the observed CNVs wing the detection of monogenic and polygenic forms of FH. This kit is well would be reclassified according to the update of databases. adapted to high-throughput cascade screening of ADH. In~70% of the reviewed cases there were no changes in the CNVs’ classi- P S14
.007 fication. In the other ~30% of cases: 1 classification changed from Class II to Diagnostic value of methylation analysis by pyrosequencing in I, 10 from II to IIIA, 5 from II to IV, 17 from IIIA to IV, 3 from IIIB to IIIA, 45 Beckwith-Wiedemann and Silver-Russell syndromes from IIIB to IV. About 95% of the classification changes made reduced the A. Koparır, M. Seven, E. Fenercioglu, H. Ulucan; probability of the imbalance being responsible for the phenotype. Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey. Although progress and knowledge have improved the content of databases, the findings of this revision have not changed the clinical strategy neither the management of patients. We can conclude that our CNV classification Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) system is robust. are characterized by opposite clinical findings. Main features of BWS are P S14
.005 pre-postnatal macrosomia, macrogglossia, ear crease and/or pits, visce- High-resolution array CGH analysis of patient samples in the romegaly, abdominal wall defects, hemihyperplasia and increased risk for Deciphering Developmental Disorders study. embryonic tumors. In contrast to these findings, SRS is characterized by pre- E. Prigmore, D. Rajan, N. Krishnappa, D. Barrett, L. Mason, S. Gribble, K. Ambridge, T. post natal growth retardation. Bayzetinova, A. Tivey, S. Clayton, T. Fitzgerald, P. Jones, R. Miller, C. Wright, M. Hurles; BWS and SRS are associated with epigenetic alterations of chromosome The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, cambridge, United Kingdom. 11p15.5. Cytogenetical methods can identify alterations of chromosome 11p15.5 in fewer than 1% BWS patients. The rate to detect epigenetic al- terations of chromosome 11p15.5 in BWS patients by molecular methods One of the aims of the DDD project was to perform array CGH analysis on is 75-80%. 50% of SRS patients can be diagnosed genetically by demon- a large cohort of child patient samples using a 2x 1 million feature Agilent strating epigenetic alterations of chromosome 11 and 7. Methylation-spe- microarray. A high-throughput pipeline was established to carry out this sific Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) is being analysis. used efficiently in a few laboratories to detect epigenetic alterations. In Patient DNA was derived from blood or extracted in house from saliva. Sali- recent studies, methylation specific pyrosequencing (MS-pyrosequencing) v2a7 s6amples were collected using Oragene EkiStsH aGnd 2D0N1A 5w a| sG eLxtAraSctGedO uWsin,g S COTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG was performed to confirm clinical diagnosis of BWS and SRS patients andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index it was suggested to be more powerful than MS-MLPA. The purpose of our kit (Diagenode). The DMRs were confirmed to be hypermethylated in the study is to demonstrate the diagnostic value of MS-pyrosequencing in our CVS and hypomethylated in whole blood. Finally, we showed that bisulfite BWS and SRS patients. amplicon sequencing is a suitable approach for methylation analysis of tar- PM14.008 geted regions. Validation of the Beta-Thal Modifier StripAssay: A novel test predicting disease severity of beta-thalassemia PM14.010 H. Puehringer1, S. Pissard2, P. Joly3, B. Rauscher1, C. Oberkanins1, C. Badens4; Molecular inversion probe based BRCA1/2 re-sequencing in a clinical 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Département de Génétique, GHU Henri setting Mondor, Créteil, France, 3Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital M. Nelen*1, A. Mensenkamp1, M. Kwint1, M. Tychon1, H. Ouchene1, E. Boyle2, B. Martin2, B. Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital d’Enfants O‘Roak2, K. Neveling1, J. Shendure2, A. Hoischen*1, M. Ligtenberg*1; de la Timone, Marseille, France. 1Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University of Washington, Seatle, OR, United Background: States. The clinical phenotype of patients with beta-hemoglobinopa- thies is extremely heterogenous, ranging from nearly asymptomatic forms Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 confer high risks of hereditary breast and of thalassemia intermedia to severe transfusion dependent thalassemia ovarian cancer. Over the years capillary Sanger sequencing and MLPA were major. The wide phenotypical variability is associated with the type of beta- used to detect causal variants in breast cancer families. Next generation globin mutation, the coinheritance of alpha-thalassemia and the ability for sequencing technologies allowed implementing new strategies thereby persistent production of fetal haemoglobin (HbF) in adult life. Three major reducing costs without losing sensitivity. Today sequencing costs of tar- quantitative traitH lBoGci2, accountiBnCgL f1o1rA 20-50% of HHBbSF1 Lv-aMriYaBtion, have been geted NGS-based sequencing strategies are largely determined by enrich- identified by now. Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the gamma-globin ment procedures. Molecular inversion probes (MIPs) have shown to be a gene promoter ( ), in the gene and intergenic re- cost-effective enrichment used in multiplex, particularly if used in large gion contribute to the calcula tion of the Thalassemia Severity Score (TSS), cohorts. Here we present a workflow of re-sequencing BRCA1 and BRCA2 aM efrteheo wdse:b-based tool (http://tss.unica.it/home/#.VNNSC S7
CT2c) for the using single molecule molecular inversion probes (smMIP) in combination prediction of clinical severity. Xmn with NexSeq500 sequencing. The strategy involves the analysis of all coding We developed a tHesBtGst2rip-based reverse-hybridisation aBssCaLy1 1foAr exons and their flanking intronic sequences. We designed 402 overlapping the simultaneous detection of polymorpHhBisSm1Ls- iMn YqBuantitative HbF loci: I smMIPs on both strands avoiding known SNPs in probe binding sites. Every (g.-158 C>T, rs7482144)in , rs1427407 and rs10189857 in , base was targeted by at least two independent smMIPs. This yielded 100% and rs28384513 and rs9399137 in the region. A total of 75 pre- coverage of all targeted bases. Next all BRCA1 and BRCA2 positive cases in tRyepseudl tssa:mples were retested in three different French thalassemia centers our laboratory from 01/2010 till 07/2014 were sequenced for both genes, for assay validation. these were 103 BRCA1 and 71 BRCA2 disease causing mutations. All disease StripAssay results were 100% concordant with genotypes pre- causing mutations and all known polymorphisms in both genes were detec- viously obtained by reference methods in the three participating labora- ted, including one SNP that was missed using capillary sequencing due to tories. The Beta-Thal Modifier StripAssay quickly and correctly identifies allelic dropout. No false positives were reported. dCiosnecalsues mioondsi:fying alleles and thus supports the use of TSS for the prediction In conclusion, targeted BRCA1 and BRCA2 re-sequencing using smMIPs of patients likely to display less severe phenotypes. shows high sensitivity and specificity and can replace sequencing work- Testing for genetic modifiers allows a more specific and effec- flows in a clinical setting. smMIPs allow low enrichment costs per sample tive treatment and may also support clinical decisions regarding the onset and highly scalable workflows. of transfusion therapy in beta-thalassemia patients. Furthermore, the know- * Authors contributed equally ledge about prognostic markers could find an implication in the future, in P S14
.011 genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis. Next-generation sequencing of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes for the P S14
.009 genetic diagnostics of hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer Bisulfite conversion of DNA: performance comparison of different kits D. Trujillano, M. Weiss, J. Schneider, J. Köster, E. Papachristos, V. Saviouk, T. Zakharkina, and methylation quantitation of epigenetic biomarkers used in Non- N. Nahavandi, L. Kovacevic, A. Rolfs; invasive Prenatal Testing Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. C. A. Leontiou1, M. D. Hadjidaniel1, P. Mina1, P. Antoniou2, M. Neophytou1, A. Keravnou1, K. Tsangaras1, S. Stylianou1, M. Ioannides1, P. C. Patsalis1,3; 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2NIPD Genetics Ltd, Genetic testing for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer (HBOC) mostly Nicosia, Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3The Ministry of Health, NIcosia, Cyprus. relies on laborious molecular tools that use Sanger sequencing to scan for mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. We have explored a more effici- ent strategy based on next-generation sequencing (NGS) of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 210 (HBOC) patients. We first validated this approach in a cohort of 115 samples with previously known BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Epigenetic alterations, including DNA methylation, play an important role in and polymorphisms. Genomic DNA was amplified using the Ion AmpliSeq™ the regulation of gene expression. Several methods exist for evaluating DNA BRCA1 and BRCA2 panel. The DNA Libraries were pooled, barcoded and se- methylation but bisulfite sequencing is the gold standard. The challenge of quenced using an Ion Torrent PGM sequencer. The combination of robust the method is that the desired outcome (conversion of unmethylated cytosi- bioinformatics tools allowed us to detect all previously known pathogenic nes) positively correlates with the undesired side effects (DNA degradation mutations and polymorphisms in the 115 samples, without detecting spu- and inappropriate conversion), thus several commercial kits try to adjust a rious pathogenic calls. The assay achieved a sensitivity of 100% (95% CI: balance between the two. Here, we compared the performance of four bi- 99.71% to 100%), with a specificity of detecting non-variant sites from the sulfite conversion kits [Premium Bisulfite kit (Diagenode), EpiTect Bisulfite reference sequence of 99.99% (95% CI: 99.99% to 100%), a positive pre- kit (Qiagen), MethylEdge™ Bisulfite Conversion System (Promega) and Bi- dictive value of 91.17% (95% CI: 89.72% to 92.62%), and a negative pre- sulFlash DNA Modification kit (Epigentek)] regarding conversion efficiency, dictive value of 100% (95% CI: 100% to 100%). We then used the same DNA degradation and conversion specificity. assay in a discovery cohort of 95 uncharacterized HBOC patients for BRCA1 and BRCA2. In addition, we describe the allelic frequencies across 210 HBOC Performance was tested by combining fully methylated and unmethylated patients of 74 unique definitely and likely pathogenic, and uncertain BRCA1 λ-DNA controls in a series of spikes and we assessed them by Sanger se- and BRCA2 variants, some of them not previously annotated in the public quencing (0%, 25%, 50% and 100% methylated) and Next-Generation Se- databases. Targeted NGS is ready to substitute classical molecular methods quencing (0%, 3%, 5%, 7%, 10%, 25%, 50% and 100% methylated). to perform genetic testing on the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, and provides a greater opportunity for more comprehensive testing for at-risk patients. We also studied the methylation status of two of our previously published PM14.012 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) at base resolution by using spikes A comparative study of BRCA1/2 mutation screening methods in use of CVS in whole blood. The kits showed different but comparable results in European clinical diagnostics laboratories. regarding DNA degradation, conversion efficiency and conversion specifi- G. Ellison1, A. J. Wallace2, A. Kohlmann3, S. J. Patton4; city. However, the best performance was observed with the MethylEdge™ 1AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, United Kingdom, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Bisulfite Conversion System (ProEmSeHgaG) f2ol0lo1w5ed | bGy LthAeS PGreOmWium, S BCisOulTfitLeA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 277ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Manchester NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4European Molecular Quality Network, Manchester, United Kingdom. BRCA1/2 ning for complex disease. Services based on simultaneous investigation of large gene panels result in faster, more cost-effective tests. In 2014 we intro- mutation screening is offered by a large number of clinical labo- duced an 82 gene hereditary cancer panel, based on local clinical demand. ratories in Europe. Practice is changing rapidly due to increased demand The gene list is fully customisable; therefore the panel is ideally suited for for testing, the advent of treatBmReCnAt1 f/o2cussed genetic testing and the rapid patients with complex personal and/or family histories of cancer. uptake of next-generation sequencing technologies. Samples are tested using Agilent SureSelect chemistry and Illumina sequen- Following a survey of current mutation screening methods circu- cing. To date, we have tested over 250 patients, achieving 100% coverage lated to ~1500 members of the European Molecular Genetics Quality Net- at 50x and a diagnostic yield (likely pathogenic and pathogenic variants) work, 20 laboratories were selected to participate covering a representative of 12%. As clinicians typically opt for a relatively small phenotype-focused range of standard (Sanger sequencing and mutation scanning) and NGS me- subset of genes, the discovery of variants of uncertain clinical significance is thodologies including different platforms and library preparation methods. minimised (13% reports). In the event of a negative result, additional genes The selected laboratories reported a signifBicRaCnAt 1c/li2nical caseload per an- may be analysed if appropriate without the need to perform further labo- num. ratory work. Eight cell line DNA samples with a range of mutation types and 2 A recent major development in our service is the adaptation of the NGS pipe- samples with no mutations were distributed to participating laboratories. line for the detection of large duplications and deletions using comparati- Laboratories were given two months to complete their analyses and asked ve depth of coverage analysis. Validation studies confirmed 325 individual to report significant findings (would be include in a clinical report) and all gene results, including 38 dosage abnormalities. This method enables com- differences from a reference sequence. prehensive dosage analysis on a larger scale and at a lower cost compared There was no significant trend ideBnRtiCfAie1d/ w2ith respect to the genotyping ac- to using a stand-alone method e.g. MLPA. curacy of the different methodologies. Seventeen (85%) study laboratories As laboratory and analysis pipelines become increasingly automated, we identified all clinically significant variants- no false-positive muta- aim to meet a turnaround time of 40 working days for all cancer referrals tion calls were made. Four genotyping errors (false-negatives) were made and anticipate a significantly reduced test cost, ultimately leading to impro- by three laboratories: A comparison of the variant calls across samples sho- ved patient care pathways. wed 84% concordance of the different coding variants detected across all P S14
.015 samples. For these variants, there was a mean score of 99% concordance of Evaluation of NRF2 Gene Expression in CD133+ Stem Cells Derived variant calling betweBeRnC tAh1e/ l2aboratories. from Umbilical Cord Blood of New Born Minor Beta Thalassemia All methods used by experienced clinical laboratories performed well on a Treated with Thalidomide and Sodium Butyrate challenging range of mutations. The errors identified are likely due E. Mahmoudi1, S. Abroun2, M. Noruzinia1, A. Dehghanifard1, S. Samadpoor1; to problems with downstream analyses processes rather than the wet-lab 1Sarem Cell Research Centre-SCRC, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Tarbiat Modares methodology. University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. P S14
.013 Sensitive detection of whole exon deletion/duplications using the Efficient induction of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) considers as an important and TruSight Cancer panel A. Fowler1, E. Ruark2, S. Mahamdallie2,3, V. Cloke3, S. Seal2,3, G. Lunter1, N. Rahman2,4, proper therapeutic approach in patients with beta thalassemia and sickle Mainstreaming Cancer Genetics Programme; cell anemia. 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Thalidomide and sodium butyrate are both considered as active HbF indu- Kingdom, 2Division of Genetics & Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, cer medication with p38 MAPK activation potential for gamma globin gene United Kingdom, 3TGLclinical, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom, induction. NRF2 as key molecule of p38MAPK signaling pathway upregu- 4Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom. lates following stress oxidation status and cause over-expression of gam- ma globin gene.Studying the importance of this molecule in the induction of HbF by thalidomide and sodium butyrate can cause more precise unde- Targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) panels are increasingly being restanding about molecular mechanisms interfering in HbF induction. used in clinical genomics to increase volume, throughput and affordability Therefore, in this study the effect of thalidomide and sodium butyrate on of gene testing. Identifying whole exon deletions/duplications in NGS pa- erythroid progenitors derived form CD133+ cells with minor beta thalasse- nels that only target coding regions has proved challenging, particularly for mia mutation was evaluated in invitro. Flowcytometry analysis shows about single exon variants. Many labs currently use a separate method for their 96% purity of extracted CD133+ cells. Afterwards, this cells were cultured detection, adding to the test cost and turnaround. in erythroid differentiation medium. We are using the Illumina TruSight Cancer Panel (TSCP) to test for mutati- In day 6 drug treatment was done and erythroid progenitors were analysed ons in cancer predisposition genes in a clinical testing laboratory, TGLcli- after 12 day of differentiation. Real-time PCR analysis showed significant nical. We process 48 samples at a time, and sequence using a HiSeq2500 increased expression of the NRF2 transcript in cell culture groups contai- (2x48), generating median coverage of 500X across the panel. ning thalidomide and sodium butyrate as compared to control. Moreover, After evaluation of multiple tools we selected and optimised ExomeDepth Real-time PCR analysis did not show significant increasing the expression for use with exon targeted NGS panels. We evaluated its performance using of the NF E2
 transcript in cell culture groups containing thalidomide and so- 96 samples with independently validated data, including 36 samples with dium butyrate as compared to control (P<0.05). With regard to the specific large variants, primarily in BRCA1 or BRCA2. The optimised ExomeDepth role of both drugs given in the induction of fetal hemoglobin expression, it achieved 100% sensitivity for BRCA1 and BRCA2 large variant detection, seems that regulation of NRF2 can play an important role in the expression identifying all 21 mutations including 9 single exon deletion/duplications, of gammaglobin gene. while retaining a low false discovery rate of 0.09. We performed extensive PM14.016 simulations to confirm a high sensitivity for detection of single exon variants Benefits from applying an extended CFTR screening protocol to a under a range of experimental parameters, and to establish robust criteria heterogeneous population for a negative result. Finally, we implemented ExomeDepth in a clinical pipe- M. Poulou, M. Tzetis, I. Fylaktou, E. Kanavakis, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli; line in 2,064 samples with validation by MLPA identifying 16 single exon Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece. deletion/duplications whilst maintaining a low false positive rate. This work was undertaken by the MCG programme (www.mcgprogramme. com) funded by the Wellcome Trust Grant 098518/Z/12/Z. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) (MIM#219700) is the second most com- PM14.014 mon autosomal recessive disorder in Greece after thalassemias. The carrier Multi-gene panel testing in hereditary cancer: a diagnostic service frequency is estimated approximately at 3-4% of general population with an review and recent developments incidence of about 1 in 2500-3500 live births. The frequency and distributi- H. Lindsay1, R. Robinson1, N. Camm1, C. Watson2, L. Crinnion2, A. Kraus3, J. Adlard3, R. on of mutations show clear ethnic and geographical distribution and Greece, Charlton1; due to its geographic position, presents high mutational heterogeneity. 1Leeds Genetics Laboratory, St James‘s University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, Materials and methods: The extended screening protocol included scree- 2Translational Genomics, St James‘s University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 3Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom. ning of the whole coding sequence, intron-exon boundaries, as well as scree- ning for abnormal copy numbers (deletions and duplications) using MLPA® (SALSA MLPA  P091
 CFTR probemix). Screening was performed by High Re- solution Melting Analysis (HRM) using LightScanner® (Idaho Technologies, The rapid expansion of NGS within diagnostic laboratories has led to the i2nt7ro8duction of multi-gene services offerinEgS cHomGp r2eh0e1n5si v|e G mLuAtaStioGnO scWree, -SCOUtTaLh,A UNSAD) a, nUdK al l| p WosWitivWe f.iEndSiHngGs w.OerRe Gconfirmed by bi-directional SangerABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index sequencing. allows detecting 1 leukemic blast in 10000 normal cells. Using the approach Results: This approach was applied to 94 patients selected due to having 100 clinical samples were screened for the presence of translocations. The one or both undetermined causative mutations and we were able to identify detected fusion genes were validated with RT-PCR. Our data suggested that both causative mutations in 59 of them. The protocol was also applied to the RT-PCR-biochip approach could screen 22 fusion genes with high ac- 2300 individuals from risk groups (partners of CF carriers/patients, couples curacy and sensitivity. The work is supported by Federal Target Program presenting with echogenic bowel at the second trimester of pregnancy, ma- of Ministry of Education and Science of Russia (grant №14.604.21.0117, les with CBAVD) and 50 carriers were identified, that with other screening RFMEFI60414X0012). protocols would have been missed. PM14.020 Conclusions: The extended protocol described herein proves to be neces- Efficient diagnostic routing using clinical exome sequencing results sary when screening an extremely heterogeneous population such as the in a high diagnostic yield of 28 %, limiting the need for whole genome Greek population. The necessity for identifying both causative mutations sequencing. in a patient is especially important nowadays that innovative therapeutic M. M. Weiss, D. van Beek, I. Bakker, P. Zwijnenburg, H. Meijers-Heijboer, E. Sistermans, agents available aim at specific genotypes. Q. Waisfisz; VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. P S14
.017 Rapid detection method for the 4 most common CHEK2 mutations based on melting profile analysis P. Borun1, K. Salanowski1, D. Godlewski2, J. Walkowiak3, A. Plawski1; Clinical exome sequencing (CES) can provide a molecular diagnosis in fami- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Cancer Prevention and Epidemiology lies with an unexplained phenotype. When using this technique in a diagno- Center, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Metabolic stic setting it is important to follow a well documented diagnostic routing. Diseases, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Here we present an effective routing and the results of the first 129 families. Furthermore, we compare the diagnostic yield of our exome pipeline with the yield of Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS). CHEK2 is a suppressor gene, encoding a protein kinase, involved in the re- In a multidisciplinary team, candidate families are discussed and selected. gulation and control of the cell cycle. Changes in the structure of CHEK2 af- The diagnostic routing prior to WES is defined: exclusion of other genes in fecting the functionality of the expression product are associated with an differential diagnosis and deletions/duplications (array), revealing the regi- increased cancer risk in various organs. The elevated risk, in a significant ons of homozygosity (SNP array), and determination of the primary filtering percentage of cases, is determined by the presence of 4 most common mu- strategy according to the expected inheritance model. Prioritization of va- tations in the gene CHEK2, including three point mutations c.470T> C, IV S2
 riants is performed with Cartagenia Bench Lab NGS using validated variant + 1G> A, c.1100delC, and one large rearrangement del5395. The substantial filtering trees (de novo, recessive, X-linked, multiple affected AD/AR). role of these variants in increasing the risk of various cancers leads to the The diagnostic WES procedure was evaluated for the first 129 families. A need of development of methods for their detection. conclusive diagnosis was made in 36/129 patients (28%), including intel- Here we present a rapid and effective method for the detection of 4 most lectual disability (ID, n=90, yield 24%) and phenotypes without ID (n=39, common CHEK2 gene mutations based on high-resolution melting (HRM) yield 39%). Nine incidental findings were detected, two clinical diagnoses analysis, and its modification (C-HRM) enabling simultaneous detection of and seven carrierships. CNVs. The analysis is performed in two multiplex PCR reactions followed by Furthermore, we performed an in silico analysis of how well our strategy melting analysis, without any additional reagents or handling beside that would have performed compared to WGS, by determining the number of used in a standard HRM. mutations that we would have missed based on a large WGS study (Gilissen, Validation of the method was conducted on a group of 103 patients with Nature 2014). Our strategy would have identified 17/21 mutations, at much diagnosed breast cancer, a group of 176 members from families with cancer lower costs. cases in organs associated with the CHEK2 gene mutations, and a control In conclusion, we have implemented an efficient strategy for CES. The dia- group consisting of 100 unrelated, healthy individuals from polish popula- gnostic yield is high (28%), and this yield is close to that of WGS. tion. PM14.022 The developed methodology enables to improve the genetic diagnostics of Establishing a clinical genetic testing laboratory to rapidly implement patients. Moreover, it reduces the cost of such analysis, and facilitates their research advancements into clinical practice implementation. Therefore, it will be possible to cover a larger group of pati- A. Strydom1,2, V. Cloke2, S. Seal1,2, F. Smith2, L. Steedman2, S. Mahamdallie1,2, R. Linger2, A. ents, and at the same time, increase the efficiency of identification of people Elliott1,2, E. Ruark1,2, N. Rahman1,2,3; at risk. 1Division of Genetics & Epidemilogy, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom, 2TGLclinical, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom, 3Cancer PM14.018 Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Sensitive multiplex diagnostics of fusion genes in childhood leukemia using biochip T. V. Nasedkina1,2, A. Y. Ikonnikova1, D. O. Fesenko1, Y. I. Ammour1,2, Y. N. Zhukova2, A. V. Chudinov1, A. S. Zasedatelev1; TGLclinical laboratory was established in Oct 2012 as a clinical testing labo- 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal ratory operating to ISO 151589:2012 medical laboratory standards. TGLcli- Scientific Clinical Centre of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology named nical is embedded within a long established research laboratory and clinical after Dmitry Rogachev, Moscow, Russian Federation. unit and was formed with the specific objective of translating sequencing technologies and analytical pipelines developed through research into im- mediate benefit for clinical services. We outline the timeline and processes Chromosomal rearrangements and fusion genes play key role in leukemoge- involved in achieving this, including the pathway to achieving accreditation nesis and contribute to different leukemic subtypes. It is practical and hel- to ISO 15189 standards. pful to detect the fusion genes in diagnostics of leukemia using inexpensive TGLclinical is now delivering testing for cancer predisposition genes to the high-throughput methods. Standard reverse transcription polymerase chain Royal Marsden Hospital using next-generation sequencing with the Illumi- reaction (RT-PCR) approach to detect the fusion transcripts is effective, but na TruSight Cancer Panel. This has increased throughput at greatly reduced time-, labor- and patient material consuming. To simplify and accelarate costs and turn-around times. TGLclinical interpretation services are fully parallel analysis of multiple targets, we established a method whish com- integrated with local clinical and research expertise and provide a standard bined multiplex RT-PCR and microarray (biochip). The system allows de- of clinical interpretation that can be used effectively by both oncology clini- tecting 22 most clinically important chromosomal rearrangements in acu- cians during the routine care of patients with cancer and by genetic clini- te leukemia generating more than 70 fusion gene variants (ETV6-RUNX1; cians in standard genetic services. BCR-AB L1
 p190 and p210; MLL-AFF1; PML-RARA; RUNX1-RUNX1T1; The establishment of TGLclinBicRaCl Ah1as enaBbRleCdA 2significant changes and im- TCF3-PBX1; MLL-MLLT3; CBFB-MYH11; MLL-MLLT10; MLL-MLLT1; SIL- provements over the past 3 years to the genetic services available at the TA L1
; MLL-MLLT4; NPM1-ALK; TCF3-HLF; MLL-ELL; MLL-EP S15
; PICALM- Royal Marsden Hospital. For and gene tests as an example, MLLT10; MLL-MLLT11; DEK-NU P214
; RBM15-MK L1
; FUS-ERG). Reverse the charge per test has reduced by ~75%, the number of patients being te- transcription was performed using a set of specific primers and was follo- sted has increased 3.5 fold and the average turn-around time for results has wed by PCR with primers containing gene-specific sequences and universal reduced from 8 weeks to less than 4 weeks. The establishment of TGLclini- adapters. The target was labeled during PCR by incorporation of fluorescent cal was made possible through start-up funding from The Royal Marsden triphosphate analogs. The fluorescently labelled PCR products were hybri- Cancer Charity. dized with a biochip containing immobilized probes. To increase sensitivity of the approach new near-infrarE eS d H laG be l2 s 0 ( C1
 y5 7) | wG eL reA tS esG teO d.W Th, eS mC eO thT oL dA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 279ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S14
.023 Improving CNV detection from next generation exome sequence data (multiple algorithms and dynamic segment ranking) maintain high detection rates but reduce the number of cases referred for D. H. de Vries, T. W. Fitzgerald, P. Jones, C. F. Wright, M. E. Hurles; DNA analysis and the incidental detection of carriers Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton Cambridge, United Kingdom. Methods PAP was measured prospectively by ELISA (Dynabio,France) in dried blood spots in 29 CF cases, 32 CF carriers, 314 uthnaffected infants with elevated IRT The Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) is a project at the Wellco- and 2,886 infants with IRT values <99.5 centile. IRT and PAP results were me Trust Sanger Institute focussing on identifying rare genetic variants in a log transformed to give overlapping Gaussian distributions for the control cohort of approximately 12,000 patients with undiagnosed developmental and CF cases, from which likelihood ratios were derived for each individual disorders. Next Generation Exome sequencing and array comparative geno- IRT and PAP result. mic hybridization (aCGH) are used to scan patient genomes for a wide range Results of genomic variation, including copy number variation (CNV). The product of the likelihood ratios can therefore be calculated thus combi- Here we introduce a pipeline to perform CNV detection on large numbers of ning the information from two markers. Setting a threshold LR of 30 as the Next Generation Exome Sequencing datasets. Within this pipeline the follo- action point for DNA testing would result in a 40% reduction in DNA testing wing detection algorithms have been implemented: ADM3, CANOES, CoNI- and a 50% reduction in the number of CF carriers identified. One CF case FER, CoNVex, ExomeDepth, GADA and XHMM. A new method has been deve- would be missed. loped for the combining and ranking of CNV detections, called: split segment Discussion ranking. This is a dynamic ranking system that converts confidence scores Selecting cases for DNA analysis based on subsequent measurement of PAP from existing algorithms into a new comparable ranked score. in infants with elevated IRT offers a cost effective method for reducing the We show that by combining the CNV detections of multiple algorithms we number of DNA tests and incidental detection of carriers without the need can improve call specificity, while retaining a solid number of detections. to measure PAP in all infants. Using 500 samples from the DDD project we assessed the CNV calling ra- Grant reference tes across all algorithms in terms of sensitivity and specificity. By using the Saudi Arabia government proportion of common CNV detections made as an estimate for specifici- P S14
.027 ty we show that by using multiple algorithms we achieved a common CNV Droplet digital PCR using a single primer tailed universal detection rate of approximately 90% which is in line with previous studies hybridisation probe system to confirm array CGH imbalances into rare CNV. However, by implementing the split segment ranking method A. R. Thompson1, Y. Patel1, K. Laing2, J. Short1, R. Taylor1; we can potentially achieve a similar specificity while retaining more CNV 1SW Thames Regional Genetics Laboratory, London, United Kingdom, 2Infection and detections overall. Immunity Research Institute, St George‘s University of London, London, United Kingdom. PM14.024 External assessment of competency to authorise diagnostic genetic Small imbalances identified by array comparative genomic hybridisation reports Z. Deans1, F. Khawaja1, S. Abbs2, R. Mountford3; (aCGH) require follow-up investigations to verify the finding and determine 1UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2East Anglian Medical inheritance. FISH is the gold standard method used; however, this technique Genetics Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Merseyside & Cheshire Regional Genetics cannot be applied to identify small deletions and duplications. Droplet digi- Service, Liverpool, United Kingdom. tal PCR (ddPCR) is a third generation PCR technology that allows sensitive and precise absolute quantification of copy number variations, without the need for standard curves. These qualities make this technology desirab- The ISO 15189 standard requires laboratories to train and continually com- le over traditional dosage detection techniques such as quantitative PCR petency assess all levels of staff for a range of activities to ensure a high (qPCR). standard of testing is delivered. This includes demonstrating individual pro- Droplet dPCR, using Bio-Rad QX100 technology, was used to investigate the ficiency of staff authorising genetic test results. Laboratories often find it suitability of a single primer tailed universal hybridisation probe system, difficult to assess and provide evidence of the expertise of the process of developed in-house, to investigate aCGH imbalances. This system can be ap- report authorisation. Due to participant demand the UK National External plied to any genomic region in question, and therefore negates the need to Quality Assessment Service (UK NEQAS) for Molecular Genetics delivered a use expensive custom Taqman probes for each region of interest, making the pilot external quality assessment (EQA) during 2014 to assess if EQA could system versatile and affordable in a diagnostic laboratory. help evidence this competency. All ddPCR results were consistent with the aCGH findings, and this techni- Twenty eight genetic laboratories participated in this pilot run and were que was successfully applied in follow up family investigations. Furthermo- supplied with three clinical case scenarios for patients referred for cystic re, we have shown that ddPCR is sensitive to identify mosaic imbalances. To fibrosis molecular testing. Details of the test performed, the genotyping further increase affordability and to broaden the potential applications of results obtained and the draft report were supplied and participants were this technique, multiplexing was also investigated, and this has been shown required to review the reports according to the referral information and re- in principle to work using our detection method. Case studies are presented, sults provided, and state whether or not each report should be authorised. If along with cost evaluation. Future applications of ddPCR in a diagnostic la- the report was deemed not fit to be authorised then reasons were required. boratory are also discussed. Two reports were considered to be suitable for issuing and the majority of PM14.028 laboratories stated that these reports would be authorised. One report had The EMQN scheme for early onset hearing loss (DFNB1): Facts and two major errors plus two minor clerical errors and all laboratories would figures for the first six schemes. have not issued this report. However many comments were received regar- L. H. Hoefsloot1, M. Bitner-Glindzicz2, H. J. Bolz3,4, A. Roux5,6; ding the format and content of the EQA reports which highlighted the chan- 1Dept Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2UCL Institute ging requirements of the content of reports and the differences between of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 3Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, laboratory reporting styles. Ingelheim, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, PM14.026 France, 6Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France. Newborn screening for cystic fibrosis (CF) using likelihood ratios derived from bloodspot Immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) and DFNB1 DFNB1 Pancreatitis Associated Protein (PAP)measurements Early onset hearing GloJsBs2 is a vGeJrBy6 heterogeneous condition. HowDeFvNeBr,1 muta- S. A. Alghamdi1, M. Fitch2; tions at the locus can explain up to 20% of cases. The locus 1Taif University, Taif, Saudi Arabia, 2Biochemical Genetics Department, Institute of Medical Genetics, Glasgow, United Kingdom. contains two genes, and . Testing for mutations at the locus has been implemented in many diagnostic laboratories because it is the first line genetic test requested by clinicians dealing with children with (prelin- gual) hearing loss. An external quality control scheme instigated by the Eu- Background ropean Molecular Quality Network (EMQN) started with a pilot scheme in In Scotland around 350-400 DNA tests per year are required to detect 2008, and continued as a yearly full scheme in the following years. Here, we around 30 cases and 35 carriers of CF. Recently, a second marker, PAP has report on the results of the first 6 schemes. been reported to be elevated in newborns with cystic fibrosis and a combi- In the annual quality control schemes, three validated DNA samples with nation of IRT and PAP may provide improved specificity. mock clinical case descriptions were distributed to participating labs. We Objective retrospectively analyzed the final results of each year. The number of labs T 2o 8 d 0evelop an algorithm based on univeErsSaHl IGRT 2 m0e1as5u r|e GmLenAtsS aGnOd Wsub, -SCO paT rL ticA ipN atD in, g U inK t h| eW laW st W fiv. eE yS eH arG s . wO aR s G on average 70. The diagnostic er- sequent PAP measurements in infants with elevated IRT levels which willABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S14
.031 Determining the Limit of Detection of Rare Targets Using Digital PCR ror rate (incorrect genotype possibly leading to a misdiagnosis) declined N. Majumdar, T. Wessel, M. Laig, B. Ho, L. Lac, T. Straub, Y. Wu, D. Keys, F. Chan, I. Russell, over the years, being the highest in 2011 (7.3%) and lowest in 2014 (1.3 P. Cifuentes; %). The average genotyping score (maximum 2.00) increased from 1.76 to Thermo Fisher Scientific, SAN BRUNO, CA, United States. 1.96. However, the interpretation score varied, probably related to the per- ceived difficulty of the clinical questions. Overall, we have seen a general improvement in both the completeness of testing and in the reporting. This Detection and quantification of mutant alleles in tumor tissue allow for external quality control scheme is therefore a successful tool to improve the disease monitoring, the evaluation of drug efficacy and guide decisions on performance of participating labs and has demonstrated an improvement future treatment plans. Testing for the presence of mutations in circulating on reporting practice and decreasing diagnostic error rates. free DNA (cfDNA) is one of the less invasive research methods available at P S14
.029 this time. Digital PCR presents a research tool for mutation detection in cfD- Dissecting the diagnostic yield in clinical genomic testing NA at a sensitivity level of 1% and below. D. M. Church, G. Chandratillake, S. Chervitz, G. Bartha, J. Harris, S. Luo, A. Patwardhan, Challenges associated with digital PCR experiments for rare allele detection J. Tirch, J. Yen, S. Garcia, J. West, R. Chen; include understanding the limit of detection of the assay and platform. This Personalis, Inc., Menlo Park, CA, United States. work compares false positive assessment strategies using the signal levels of the no-amplification cluster. Once the false call rate is established, the paper outlines a method to determine the limit of detection of the assay and plat- Genomic testing has been a part of diagnosing genetic disorders since the form, at a given level of confidence. The tradeoffs between sample load and detection of aneuploidies using cytogenetic techniques. Technological ad- sensitivity, given the number of partitions, the interrogated volume and the vances in high throughput, low cost DNA sequencing coupled with the false call rate are also discussed. availability of a high quality reference assembly have allowed us to inter- The mathematics outlined to calculate the theoretical limit of detection is rogate the genome with greater precision than ever before. Together with applied on a set of assays from Thermo Fisher Scientific covering the KRAS increased understanding of the genetic underpinnings of disease, these ad- codons 12 and 13 mutations commonly found in tumor tissues. Experimen- vances mean our success rate in diagnosing genetic disease is higher than tal results showing a detection of at least 0.1% mutation rate are presen- it has ever been, however the diagnostic yield of WGS/WES is only 25-50%. ted as examples. Test samples were created using both mutant plasmid and Improving this yield requires reexamination of the entire process, including mutant genomic DNA mixed with wild-type genomic DNA at a predefined assay development, bioinformatics analysis approaches as well as processes percentage. for robustly associating variants with disease. Assay development is critical For Research Use Only. as no single sequencing method can identify the spectrum of variant types PM14.032 nor can they access all regions of the genome equally. This becomes even Dystrophinopathies: An NGS approach for the molecular analysis of more critical when testing for diseases that deviate from Mendelian expec- DMD gene tations, such as cancer or diseases arising from somatic mosaicism. We are L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, A. Lasa1, M. Baena2, M. Rodriguez2, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1; also beginning to learn that the reference assembly itself can have an impact 1Genetics Dept. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, U-705 CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, on variant identification and interpretation. Our early, simplistic assembly 2Genetics Dept. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. models are insufficient for robust genome analysis and we must develop new models and analysis paradigms. Lastly, processes for understanding how detected variants may contribute to a particular disorder must be ex- OBJECTIVES: DMD gene, located on Xp21, comprises 79 exons along 2400Kb, amined. Every person carries approximately 100 seemingly damaging vari- whose mutations originates Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/ ants, most of which do not contribute to rare disease. Identifying the vari- BMD). 70% of DMD/BMD patients show deletions/duplications of one or ants contributing to specific phenotypes requires the integration of diverse more exons. The remaining 30% present a nonsense, missense, frameshift biological knowledge. or splicing mutations, distributed along the entire gene. Detection of point PM14.030 mutations is an expensive task in terms of technical and economic issues. TaqMan® Rare Mutation Assays for QuantStudio® 3D Digital PCR The introduction of next-generation sequencing technology (NGS) in our la- System boratory has allowed exponentially increase sequencing throughput. K. Varma, B. Ho, N. Majumdar, L. Lac, T. Straub, P. Cifuentes, I. Russell, D. Keys, F. Chan, R. MATERIALS AND METHODS. We studied DNA samples from 60 patients Saathiya, M. Laig; with clinical suspicion of DMD/BMD who had previously ruled out the pres- Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States. ence of an exon deletion or duplication in the DMD gene. The generation of amplicon libraries was performed using the kit DMD MASTR of Multiplicom and they were sequenced using the MiSeq platform Detection and quantification of mutant alleles in tumor tissue allow for re- from Illumina. Sequencing data were analysed using Variant Studio and search disease monitoring and the research of drug efficacy. Detection of DNA Nexus softwares. The pathogenic changes were confirmed by Sanger emerging secondary mutations in the same tumor tissue causing resistance sequencing and were compared with the LOVD database and Alamut and to potential treatment will help guide decisions on future treatment plans. Polyphen-2 softwares. A less invasive research method than using tumor tissue is testing for the RESULTS: We have identified 31 mutations, which have been confirmed as presence of mutations in circulating free DNA (cfDNA). the cause of the pathology. We created a research tool for mutation detection at a sensitivity level of 1% CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of point mutations in DMD gene by NGS is a and below. This allows researchers to find correlation between mutation ty- breakthrough in molecular analysis time and cost, compared to Sanger tech- pes and tumor types and determination of potential secondary mutations. nique. Thus, targeted NGS can contribute to alleviate the diagnosis delay and The tool combines TaqMan® SNP Genotyping Assays with digital PCR. A set to overtake the genetic counseling. of assays was optimized for use in digital PCR with the QuantStudio® 3D In those patients in whom no mutation was identified in gDNA, the DMD/ Digital PCR System. In digital PCR, partitioning the sample into many indi- BMD clinical diagnosis should be confirmed by immunohistochemistry in vidual reaction wells facilitates detection and quantification of rare mutant muscular biopsies and afterwards the mRNA sequencing. alleles. TaqMan® SNP Genotyping Assays ensure reliable discrimination of P S14
.033 mutant and wild-type allele. Northern Lights Assay: A versatile method for comprehensive Our initial set of 38 assays covers mutations commonly found in tumor tis- detection of DNA damage sues: BRAF V600E, mutations in EGFR exons 19, 20 and 21, KRAS codons 12 B. Gudmundsson1,2,3, H. G. Thormar1,3, S. Thongthip4, A. Sigurdsson1, W. Dankers1, M. and 13, PIK3CA exons 9 and 20, and the JAK2 V617F mutations. Steinarsdottir2, A. M. Halldorsdottir2, A. Smogorzewska4, J. J. Jonsson1,2; All assays were wet-lab tested at a 10% mutation rate and a 1% mutation 1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Landspitali - National University Hospital of rate using mutant plasmid spiked into wild-type genomic DNA. Additionally, Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Lifeind ehf., Reykjavik, Iceland, 4Rockefeller University, New York, NY, United States. selected assays were tested at the 0.1% mutation rate using mutant cell li- nes spiked into wild-type genomic DNA. Wet-lab results confirm that all assays showed superior performance discri- Introduction: Detction of DNA damage has many applications including minating mutant and wild-type alleles. Mutant alleles were successfully de- testing quality of DNA samples in biobanks, monitoring complex molecu- tected as low as 0.1%. lar procedures, genotoxicity testing, diagnosing genome instability, and in cancer theragnostics. We tested the suitability of the Northern Lights Assay (NLA) for these applications. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAN MD a, t eU riK al s| AW ndW MW et. hE oS dsH : NG L. AO iR s G based on Two-Dimensional Strandnes2s-8D1e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index pendent Electrophoresis (2D-SDE), a technique of nucleic acid separation tively. Moreover, DNA concentration of AF from QIAamp DNA blood mini and based on size, standness, and conformation changes induced by damage. EZ1 advanced XL were 7.5 to 19.2 ng/µl and 2.9 to 5.2 ng/µl, respectively. Each specimen is analyzed in sample pairs of non-digested DNA to detect Analytical performance of both DNA extraction methods were concordance single- and double-stranded breaks and MboI-digested DNA to detect other in all types of samples and all assay. lesions. NLA has been adapted to a microgel platform to improve sensitivity Conclusions: DNA concentration and quality from QIAamp DNA blood mini and speed of analysis. We tested NLA on various samples including DNA in kit and EZ1 Advanced XL is not significantly difference. The incorporation solution, intermediate products of complex procedures, various cell cultures of the automated DNA extraction into the routine DNA analysis process may treated with genotoxic agents, and body fluid samples from patients. reduce the need for labor-intensive, time-consuming using the spin-column Results: NLA could detect single-stranded breaks, double-stranded breaks, DNA extractions. interstrand and intrastrand DNA crosslinks, single-stranded DNA, bulky le- PM14.036 sions and mismatches in all types of samples. The sensitivity of the method Efficiency of Computer-Aided Facial Dysmorphology Analysis in the was comparable to other methods for DNA damage detection. The main Medical Genetics Clinic advantage of NLA compared to the comet assay was detection of both in- I. Akalin, S. Yilmaz; trastrand and interstrand crosslinks and other abnormal DNA in a direct Istanbul Medeniyet University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, manner. Istanbul, Turkey. Conclusions: NLA is a versatile method for comprehensive and simulta- neous analysis of various types of DNA damage both in purified DNA and in biological samples from cells and body fluids. NLA is useful in biomedical Computer-aided facial dysmorphology analysis program has recently been research and diagnostics including Omics technologies. introduced to clinicians. It has been shown (Basel et al., ASHG 2014) that the Grants: Icelandic Centre for Research. University of Iceland Research Fund, accuracy of computer-aided dysmorphology analysis is comparable to that Landspitali University Hospital Research Fund and investments in Lífeind of human experts in dysmorphology. Here, we evaluated the performance of ehf. such technology by comparing computer-aided analysis of a set of 2D facial PM14.034 images of patients with molecularly confirmed diagnoses. Comparison of two different methods for brain DNA extraction Of a total sample of 280 frontal facial images of patients who were refer- A. Sönmez1,2, A. H. Schapira1, C. Proukakis1; red to our department processed with Face2Gene. The following criteria 1UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 2University of Heidelberg, for selection were applied for this present study: images of patients with a Heidelberg, Germany. molecularly confirmed diagnosis; cases with syndromes currently suppor- ted by the technology cases, with well documented dysmorphic features and proper consent. Recent appreciation of the extent of mosaicism in human tissues, including The resulting sample for this study is a test group of 12 patients affected by the brain, implies that analysis of peripheral blood lymphocyte DNA may 8 syndromes (Table). be insufficient. For correct assessment of CNVs, particularly mosaicism, an A match was considered positive where the diagnosed syndrome was listed even genome extraction is crucial. To determine if the extraction method among the top ten syndromes under the “Gestalt Matches” list in Face2Ge- influences brain DNA quality and quantity, two widely used kits, DNeasy and ne. Puregene by Qiagen, were compared. In 10/12(83%) patients there was a positive match between the confirmed DNA was extracted from the cerebella of three Parkinson’s patients and diagnoses and matching syndromes detected by Face2Gene. The average three controls with both methods, using different starting amounts on the rank of match was 3.8 (1 being the most similar and 10 being the least). DNeasy for four of these. DNA was compared using Nanodrop, Qubit and We believe that routine use of computer-aided dysmorphology analysis in electrophoresis. the clinic will assist to clinicians, particularly to medical geneticists, in re- DNA purity was comparable. Electrophoresis revealed a smaller main band aching a more accurate differential diagnosis and shorten the time and the and more smeary appearance with DNeasy. Increasing the amount of brain cost for achieving molecular confirmation of rare disease patients. tissue (5, 25 and 50 mg) used with DNeasy led to a lower yield per mg brain, Common Diseases enrolled in the study. Prader-Willi Syndrome; PWS and a more smeary appearance. Puregene yielded up to three times more Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome; WHS DNA per mg brain compared to the best DNeasy extractions, with yields clo- Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome se to the expected value based on cerebellar cell density. Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome Down Syndrome Therefore DNeasy yields less DNA of worse quality per mg tissue than Pure- Achondroplasia; ACH gene, and increasing starting tissue leads to lower amount and worse qua- Williams-Beuren Syndrome; WBS lity with DNeasy. Excess protein may prevent all DNA from passing through Trichorhinophalangeal Syndrome the filter, and we are concerned this might lead to different relative amounts of parts of the genome, resulting in inaccurate copy number calls. We recom- P S14
.037 mend Puregene for brain DNA extractions, although we have not compared Use of an augmented exome for disorders with high genetic phenol chloroform, which should also be considered. heterogeneity Funding: Michael J. Fox foundation G. Chandratillake1, S. Garcia1, J. Tirch1, E. Chen2, P. Suwannarat3, C. Kobelka2, S. Strom4, A. Martinez5, M. B. Gorin6, J. West1, R. Chen1; P S14
.035 1Personalis, Inc., Menlo Park, CA, United States, 2The Permanente Medical Group, Inc., Assessment of automated DNA extraction for peripheral blood, bone San Francisco, CA, United States, 3Mid-Atlantic Permanente Medical Group, Rockville, marrow and amniotic fluid specimens MD, United States, 4University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States, N. Ngaoburanawit, J. Thanakitgosate, T. Chareonsirisuthigul, B. Rerkamnuaychoke; 5Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 6Jules Stein Eye Institute, Human Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States. Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. As exome sequencing enters clinical care, a dilemma in testing for disorders Introduction: Reliable of DNA extraction is a key step in molecular assay. with high genetic heterogeneity arises: to order a gene panel test, or exome DNA extraction using phenol-chloroform or spin-column remains the labor- sequencing? Core to this diledmiamgan oiss ttihca t the sensitivity of each approach is intensive and time-consuming. Therefore, the automated DNA extraction is compromised, albeit differently. While the analytical sensitivity for genes on urgently needed for the routine diagnostic laboratory. The aim of this study a panel tends to be high, the sensitivity of such tests can be com- was to evaluate the automated DNA extraction for peripheral blood, bone promised through failure to include some genes associated with the condi- marrow and amniotic fluid specimens. tion. In contrast, while conventional exome sequencing assays more genes, Materials and Methods: DNA from peripheral blood (PB), bone marrow (BM) it suffers from issues of analytical sensitivity, e.g. poor coverage of known and amniotic fluid (AF) specimens were extracted using the spin-column; disease genes, which in turn compromise diagnostic sensitivity. QIAamp DNA blood mini kit and the automated DNA extraction; EZ1 Ad- To address this dilemma, an augmented exome sequencing assay, the ACE vanced XL. DNA concentration was quantitated by NanoDrop Spectropho- Clinical Exome Test, was developed. Coverage of >8000 biomedically rele- tometers. For comparison of analytical performance, DNA from PB and BM vant genes is enhanced, with >6000 considered “finished” (>99% of bases were detected for mutation analysis of hematologic malignancy markers. In covered at 20x). To further improve sensitivity, the test includes coverage of addition, DNA from AF was evaluated for molecular prenatal diagnosis using interpretable non-exonic regions and genome-wide detection of structural QF-PCR and Bacs-on-Beads technology. variants. R 2e 8su 2lts: DNA concentration of PB and BM EfrSomH QGIA 2a0m1p 5D N| AG bLloAoSd GmiOniW an,d S COInT cLasAeNs iDnv,o UlvKin g| dWisWordWer.sE wSiHthG h.igOhR gGenetic heterogeneity, current gene EZ1 advanced XL were 11.1 to 299.9 ng/µl and 19.1 to 108.2 ng/µl, respec-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index panel tests were examined to determine if they included the disease-asso- lutionise laboratory diagnosis in the genomic era. ciated genes identified through augmented exome sequencing. This revealed PM14.040 that the genetic diagnoses of several individuals would have been missed The clinical utility of exome analysis in the routine clinic. through gene-panel testing. Examples including cases of Charcot-Marie- J. M. Taylor1, T. Lester1, K. Thomson1, J. Williams1, J. Taylor2, S. Y. Patel3, A. H. Nemeth4, U. Tooth disease and Leber congenital amaurosis are presented. Kini4, A. Seller1, E. Blair4, H. Watkins5; For disorders with high genetic heterogeneity, an augmented exome test that 1Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratory,, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Oxford Biomedical addresses the issues of analytical sensitivity associated with conventional Research Centre, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Department of exome sequencing, can provide diagnoses that may be missed through gene Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford University NHS Hospitals Trust, Oxford, panel testing, and simplify the panel vs. exome test-selection dilemma. United Kingdom, 5Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, PM14.038 United Kingdom. Coverage Analysis of Lists of Genes involved in Heterogeneous Genetic Diseases following Benchtop Exome Sequencing using the Ion Proton M. Krahn1,2, C. Lacoste1,2, J. P. Desvignes1, D. Salgado1, C. Pécheux2, L. Villard1,2, M. Introduction: The Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratory and the Oxford Bio- Bartoli1,2, C. Béroud1,2, N. Lévy1,2, C. Badens1,2; medical Research Centre are working in collaboration to translate whole 1Aix Marseille Université, INSERM UMR_S 910, GMGF, Marseille, France, 2APHM, exome sequencing (WES) into routine practice. This project has three main Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Timone Enfants, Marseille, France. objectives: first, to reaffirm the clinical utility of exome sequencing and de- velop pathways for data analysis, and clinical reporting; Second, to establish an ethically approved framework for patient referral, analysis and results Exome sequencing has been proven efficient for clinical applications in he- reporting; and third, to transition WES into a diagnostic service. terogeneous genetic diseases, including exome sequencing associated with Materials and Methods: To date >190 exomes (28 Trios, 14 affected sibs, data filtering for selected genes. However, previous reports have been based and 78 probands) have been reviewed and approved for WES by a Genomic mainly on the use of large-scale Next-Generation-Sequencing platforms, Medicine MDT. The initial data analysis focused on known causative genes, difficult to implement in medium-scale genetic diagnosis laboratories. In followed by whole exome analysis with appropriate consent. this context, the Ion Proton™ (Life Technologies, CA, USA) allows for faci- Results: Molecular confirmation of a highly likely or likely pathogenic vari- litated implementation of exome sequencing in medium-scale laboratories, ant was reported in ~29% of cases. ~4% of cases had a variant of unknown through an easy set-up in 6 hour runs on a benchtop apparatus producing significance reported in a clinically relevant gene. A number of these cases high quality exome data. highlight a short fall in previous analysis methods. We present four cases il- As a requirement for diagnostic mutation screening using Ion Proton™ lustrating the clinical efficacy of WES across four different disorders: prima- exome sequencing, we precisely evaluated sequence coverage data for six ry immune deficiency, neonatal cardiomyopathy, ectodermal dysplasia, and groups of genetically heterogeneous diseases, of interest for genetic dia- a neonatal dysmorphic disorder. These cases demonstrate how virtual gene gnostic laboratories: myopathies (82 genes), hereditary motor and sensory panels allow the rapid integration of recently discovered disease-causing neuropathies (55 genes), early onset epileptic encephalopathies (30 genes), genes, which can have a profound impact of patient management. In additi- isolated and combined dystonia (12 genes), non syndromic deafness and on, three of these cases demonstrate how WES influenced or outperformed hereditary hearing loss (60 genes), and intellectual disability (107 genes established diagnostic services. for X-linked transmission; 39 genes for autosomal recessive transmission, Conclusion: Our data support a focused exome in the first instance; however, 37 genes for autosomal dominant transmission). In addition, we evaluated WES can provide greater clinical sensitivity and influence existing clinical sequence coverage for a list of 57 genes for which the ACMG recommends to practice. report incidental findings. The simple workflow of Ion AmpliSeq™ exome enrichment combined with P S14
.041 Ion Proton™ simplex-sample sequencing allows for >90% mean sequence Exome Triage: Strategies for computational rescue when analysis in coverage at ≥20X for approximately two-third of the genes of interest analy- the clinical search space fails zed for the disease-groups myopathies, hereditary motor and sensory neu- B. N. Pusey, C. Du, T. C. Markello, W. A. Gahl, D. R. Adams; NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office of the Director, NIH, and ropathies, early onset epileptic encephalopathies, non syndromic deafness National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA, Bethesda, and hereditary hearing loss, and intellectual disability (X-linked, autosomal MD, United States. recessive, and autosomal dominant forms), and the list of genes for which the ACMG recommends to report incidental findings. P S14
.039 In 2008, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) began the NIH Undiagnosed The translation of exome sequencing into diagnostic genomics Diseases Program (UDP), whose purpose is to find diagnoses and conduct I. R. Berry1, C. M. Watson2, L. Crinnion2, N. Camm1, I. Carr2, R. Charlton1, A. Dobbie3; research for study participants who remain undiagnosed despite an exten- 1Leeds Genetics Laboratory, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2University of Leeds, Leeds, United sive medical workup. Approximately 150 patients are admitted to the UDP Kingdom, 3Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Leeds, United Kingdom. per year, at which point they undergo a robust clinical evaluation and, when warranted, an in-depth genomic analysis. Since clinical exome sequencing has become incorporated into the standard armamentarium for evaluating Introduction: Until recently, the sequencing of whole exomes for the diagno- complex patients, the UDP has increasingly needed to focus on detecting di- sis of genetic disease remained largely in the realm of the research com- sease-causing DNA variations in regions that are missed using standard exo- munity. We investigated the efficacy and application of such techniques in me techniques. To this end we have created an analytic pipeline that com- clinical practice. bines standard methodology with enhancements designed to detect and/or Materials and Methods: Whole or focussed exome sequencing was perfor- recover variants in where standard pipelines may generate false negative med on a cohort of 93 mixed referrals using the Sureselect (Agilent) capture results. The enhancements include such strategies as parent-aware diploid reagent and Illumina HiSeq sequencing platform. Two different in-house alignment, aggressive use of high-density SNP array data, and standardized- analysis pipelines were applied (dependent upon genetic heterogeneity of phenotype-based variant prioritization. Over time, our aim is to refine our diagnosis), designed to maximise sensitivity and diagnostic efficiency, re- protocols for automated and manual analysis to create a suite of “second spectively. Filtering of variants was performed based on phenotypic gene pass” strategies for cases where standard clinical exome and genome stu- lists, coding sequence location and predicted effect, and minor allele fre- dies have not yielded actionable results. quency. This research is supported by the Intramural Research Program of NHGRI Results: An overall diagnostic yield (definitely- or likely-pathogenic variants) and the Common Fund of the National Institutes of Health. of 42% was achieved across a range of referrals, including large sub-groups PM14.042 of ciliopathy and aortopathy patients, and a further 12% of cases had poten- Is exome sequencing of single patients with intellectual disability an tially-pathogenic variants warranting further follow-up. Horizontal and ver- effective diagnostic strategy? tical coverage were superior on focussed versus full exomes, however, full C. A. L. Ruivenkamp, M. J. V. Hoffer, A. C. J. Gijsbers, S. Bollen, W. Arindrarto, M. exome analysis was used to identify a presumptive new gene (for primary Laurense-Bik, I. Fokkema, S. Smit, M. van der Wielen, E. Aten, E. Bijlsma, M. Breuning, ciliary dyskinesia), and facilitated re-analysis of data in heterogeneous con- Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee, N. den Hollander, S. Kant, A. van Haeringen, M. Kriek, J. Laros, B. ditions with rapidly-expanding lists of genetic causes. Exonic copy-number Bakker, C. van Asperen, G. Santen; analysis using NGS data was validated, and two causative large deletions Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. were detected. No significant incidental findings were identified. Conclusions: Exome sequencing is a flexible and highly efficient method for ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 283 mutation detection in a range of diagnostic scenarios, and promises to revo- Trio-sequencing can be used in all disorders, and has proven its value inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index finding causes of intellectual disability (ID). We investigated whether se- Whole exome sequencing (WES) has now entered the medical practice with quencing only the affected patient without parents is sufficient to find the powerful application in the diagnosis of rare mendelian disorders. Although causative mutation, leading to a considerable reduce in costs. In this study, the usefulness and cost-effectiveness of this diagnostic test is widely de- we enrolled 36 patients with unexplained ID, and sequenced the exome. The monstrated, there is a critical need for reducing the results turnaround time exome sequences were analysed with a stringent post-sequencing annota- to make WES a clinical reality. Since 2011, automation of laboratory proce- tion pipeline including an ID gene panel of ~500 genes for filtering of the dures and advances in sequencing chemistry made possible a ~50-hours data. All remaining variants with a potential clinical consequence were vali- diagnostic whole genome sequencing from the blood sample to molecular dated by Sanger sequencing and tested in the parents for inheritance. diagnosis of suspected genetic disorders. Taking advantages of these advan- After variant filtering we noticed an average of 13 variants per patient (ran- ces, the main objective of the study was to improve the sequencing results ge 2 to 27) requiring further clinical interpretation. The majority of these turnaround times. WES was proposed to 18 patients with severe undia- variants were inherited from one of the parents. Hitherto, we identified 5 gnosed disorders with developmental anomalies, facing a medical situation de novo mutations and 1 homozygous mutation in 33 patients (18%). For requiring urgent diagnosis. Each family gave consent and new specimens the remaining 27 patients both parents have been sequenced and further were gathered. The extracted DNA was sequenced on NextSeq500 (Illumi- analysis is being performed. na) instrument. Data analysis was performed following standard procedu- Without exome sequencing the parents, a relatively high amount of poten- res. Variants interpretation was performed using in-house software. Each tially pathogenic variants remain. All these variants require clinical inter- rare variant affecting protein sequence with clinical relevance was tested for pretation which is very time-consuming, while most of these variants were familial segregation. Overall, 4.4 gigabase of sequence were produced per likely benign because they are inherited from one of the parents. With trio- individual, resulting in a mean coverage of 93 folds, with 93% of the RefSeq analysis inherited variants can be filtered out suggesting that this strategy, exons covered by at least 10 reads. Diagnostic rate was of 39% (7/18), with at this moment, is more efficient in identifying the causative variant. In the a maximum turnaround time of 8 weeks from specimen arrival to results. future when databases are filled with more and more exome data and con- Direct impact of a rapid diagnostic for positive families included two pre- sequently with more rare benign variants, exome sequencing single patients natal testing proposals, two clinical trials inclusions. Finally, this pilot study will become a more realistic diagnostic approach. demonstrates the feasibility of reducing the turnaround times for diagnostic P S14
.043 WES in our primary genetic center. Reshaping genetic diagnostics of rare diseases with transition to P S14
.045 genome-wide sequencing approaches - experience of Slovenian centre What does exome sequencing miss? An exploration of the false- for Mendelian genomics negative space in current exome sequencing A. Maver, K. Writzl, H. Jaklič, G. Rudolf, M. Volk, A. Blatnik, B. Dolničar, L. Lovrečić, A. C. Du, B. N. Pusey, T. C. Markello, W. A. Gahl, D. R. Adams; Hodžić, B. Peterlin; NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. States. Establishment of diagnosis in patients with suspected genetic disorder Exome sequencing has advanced to clinical practice and has proven to be presents a challenging task, mainly due to extensive diversity and rarity of useful in the molecular diagnosis of rare genetic diseases. At the NIH Un- genetic conditions. Aiming to improve the accessibility to genetic testing, diagnosed Diseases Program we routinely apply exome sequencing in the enhance the diagnostic yield and rationalize genetic testing in Slovenia, we pursuit of disease causing variants in patients that have not been able to re- implemented clinical exome sequencing as routine mode of genetic testing ceive a diagnosis despite extensive medical workup. An increasing number for a wide variety of genetic disorders. Our experience offers unique insight of our new patients present with prior, negative clinical exome testing. In into clinical effectiveness of such strategy in daily clinical practice. these cases, given the hypothesis of a genetic condition, the disease-causing We performed a comprehensive analysis of patients referred since 2013, variant may be hidden beyond the search space defined by current exome including data on referral diagnosis, disease classification, ontological phe- sequencing practice. Such false negatives may be caused by a number of fac- notype characterization and other clinical parameters. For each patient, we tors including specific decisions made during data analysis and limitations evaluated the outcome in light of initial diagnosis, distinguishing cases whe- in the basic technology. We present data from a literature review, plus ex- re the result either recapitulated initial diagnosis, established diagnosis in amples from our owdne ndoavtaosets where possible, to describe and quantitate undiagnosed cases, or resulted in diagnosis reclassification. We additionally the false-negative space associated with current practice. Examples include monitored added value of extended exome analyses, including detection of allele skewing, false calls caused by incorrectly called parental geno- CNVs, mitochondrial variants and exome-based linkage analysis. types, mis-alignment, mapable but low coverage regions, non-mapable tar- Overall, sequencing in 347 diverse patients revealed convincingly causative geted regions, misalignment and indel errors. Understanding the false-ne- genetic variants in 139 (40.1%), with substantial variability across different gative space associated with clinical exome sequencing provides a rational disease categories. Causative variants were found in referred gene panels basis for future work on methods for improving detection in systematically in 30.1%, while establishment of new diagnosis was reached in 6.9% and under-assayed genomic regions. reclassification in 1.7% of cases. In 9 cases, causative variant was identified This research is supported by the Intramural Research Program of the Na- utilizing extended methods of exome data analysis. tional Human Genome Research Institute and the Common Fund of the Na- In conclusion, we demonstrate the multifaceted efficacy of clinical exome se- tional Institutes of Health. quencing in diagnostics of genetically and phenotypically diverse diseases. PM14.046 Furthermore, we show its implications in widening national accessibility of Genetic diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolaemia in the UK and genetic testing to thousands diseases, consequentially reducing the need for Ireland using the Randox FH Biochip array cross-border genetic testing. R. J. L. Martin1, P. J. Hart1, M. J. Latten2, H. A. Murray2, M. A. Crockard2, J. V. Lamont2, S. P. PM14.044 Fitzgerald2, C. A. Graham1; 1Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Centre, Belfast, United Kingdom, 2Randox Reducing diagnostic turnaround times of exome sequencing for Laboratories Limited, Crumlin, United Kingdom. families requiring time effective diagnostics A. Bourchany1,2, L. Faivre2,3, C. Thauvin-Robinet2,3, A. Masurel-Paulet2,3, M. Willems4, L. Lambert5, S. El Chehadeh-Djebbar6, E. Schaefer6, A. Jaquette7, C. Cabret2, J. Saint-Onge2, Y. Duffourd2, B. Aral2,8, P. Callier2,9, J. Rivière2,8, J. Thevenon2,3; Introduction: Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a genetic disorder 1Service de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d‘Enfants, CHU, Dijon, France, 2Equipe d‘Accueil 4271, characterized by high levels of low density lipoprotein in the cardiovascu- Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, lar system and early onset of cardiovascular disease. FH is most commonly 3Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes caused by mutations ApoB, LDLR, and PCSK9 genes. FH can be treated quite Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon et Université de Bourgogne, effectively with lipid-lowering drugs and lifestyle changes. Genetic testing Dijon, France, 4Département de Génétique Clinique, CHRU de Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 5Unité Fonctionnelle de Génétique Clinique, and cascade screening have been recommended by the National Institute for Service de Médecine Néonatale, Maternité Régionale Universitaire, Nancy, France, Health and Clinical Excellence (2008). We have developed an assay, based 6Service de Génétique Médicale, CMCO-SIHCUS, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, on a combination of multiplex PCR and biochip array hybridization, which France, 7Centre de Génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 8Laboratoire enables the rapid simultaneous detection of 40 mutational targets within de Génétique moléculaire, FHU-TRANSLAD, Plateau technique de Biologie, CHU, Dijon, ApoB, LDLR and PCSK9. The assay detects 71% of all point mutations in FH France, 9Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Plateau technique de Biologie, patients within the United Kingdom (based on 465 families from a variety of CHU, Dijon, France. ethnic backgrounds with identified FH mutations). Materials and Methods: A total of 500 patients which met the Simon Broome 284 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG criteria for possible FH were referred from across the UK for genetic scree-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Lithuania. ning. Testing was carried out using the FH Array biochips and the Randox Evidence Investigator analyzer. Results were processed automatically, with Survey and interview studies conducted over a three year period revealed analysis completed within 3 hours from template DNA. that researchers are not satisfied with their current reverse transcriptase Results: Mutations were detected in 6.4% (32/500) patients tested. These and are performing reactions with increasingly difficult samples, such as consisted of 29 heterozygous LDLR mutations, 2 familial defective ApoB mu- poorly purified RNA that contains inhibitors and unpurified RNA (direct tations and a patient who was compound heterozygous for ApoB R3527Q RT). To meet this performance gap, the Thermo Fisher Life Sciences Solution and LDLR R350X. group combined technologies from the former Thermo Fisher Scientific and Conclusion: The FH array successfully identifies the most prevalent muta- Life Technologies to produce a new reverse transcriptase. SuperScript® IV tions in the UK and Ireland. It will aid confirmation of suspected FH cases is the first reverse transcriptase enzyme launched from joint efforts and ex- and in cascade screening, hence reducing FH associated morbidity and mor- perimental evidence shows that it is the most robust reverse transcriptase tality. compared to other enzymes. SuperScript® IV characterization was perfor- P S14
.047 med in the context of “real world” situations where users do not have per- Development of a novel targeted panel sequencing assay to identify fect RNA samples. Using a variety of stringent assays, we demonstrate that patients with Familial Hypercholesterolemia SuperScript® IV possesses superior performance in a variety of inhibitors, A. M. Medeiros1,2, C. Silva1, L. Vieira1, M. Bourbon1,2; such as alcohols, salts, detergents, phenol, heparin, hematin, bile salts, and 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2BioISI – formalin typically found in sample preparation reagents, cell lines, blood, Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute, Lisboa, Portugal. feces, and FFPE samples. This enzyme can even detect RNA targets in unpu- rified RNA samples (directly lysed cells) and whole blood without sacrificing sensitivity and yield. The introduction of SuperScript® IV enables resear- Introduction: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common autosomal chers to obtain more consistent results independent of sample quality and dominant disorder of lipid metabolism. Genetic diagnosis of FH currently simplify and speed up workflows by eliminating RNA purification. includes the study of LDLR, APOB (2 fragments of exons 26 and 29) and PM14.050 PCSK9, by PCR plus Sanger sequencing. We present the development of a Data sharing and interpretation amongst Dutch genome diagnostic novel targeted panel sequencing (TPS) approach for the genetic diagnosis laboratories of FH. K. J. van der Velde1, M. de Haan1, B. Miedema1, B. Charbon1, D. van Enckevort1, P. Material & Methods: A TPS panel (LDLR, APOB, PCSK9, LDLRA P1
, APOE) Neerincx1, A. J. Brookes2, R. H. Sijmons1, T. J. de Koning1, R. C. Niessen1, J. D. H. Jongbloed1, was developed using an Ilumina MiSeq platform. Design experiment uses members of the VKGL data sharing group and MOLGENIS team, M. E. van Gijn3, R. J. Long Range PCR to amplify 14 different fragments: LDLR (45.66kb), APOB Sinke1, M. A. Swertz1; (43.85kb), PCSK9 (26.51kb), LDLRA P1
 (26.51kb), APOE (4.84kb). Library 1UMC Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Leicester, Leicester, United preparation was conducted using Nextera®XT DNA Sample Preparation Kit Kingdom, 3UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. (Illumina). Libraries were pooled and sequenced using paired-end 2x250bp reads in a single sequencing run. Results: To test this novel approach 16 samples have been sequenced. A The interpretation of the vast amount of DNA variants NGS produces is a total of ~1.28M reads were obtained with 40.000-155.000 reads/sample. huge challenge. Sharing of detected variants between laboratories would The total percentage of bases with >=Q30 was 85.5%. Variants identified be of great assistance to differentiate pathogenic and benign DNA variants. by TPS will be presented and compared with those obtained by Sanger se- Moreover, dozens of annotation tools and databases, including tissue/cell/ quencing. allele specific gene expression, QTL and GWAS associations, drug targets, Discussion: Due to the recently reports of novel APOB functional mutations pathogenicity prediction toolss, model organism studies, metabolic/signal- outside the currently studied regions and APOE deletions causing FH, it is ling pathways, clinical actionability, are emerging to aid variant classificati- imperative to change the FH genetic diagnosis. This TPS assay includes flan- on,. What are the best practice protocols and tools? king intronic regions, may be easily expanded to include additional genes To address these challenges, the Dutch Society for Clinical Genetic Labora- and offers a faster delivery of results compared to the traditional sequen- tory Diagnostics (VKGL) has started the NGS data sharing working group. cing approach. The 424 FH mutation negative (by current genetic diagnosis) Clinical diagnostics labs can easily upload individual VCF files to the national index patients, in our FH cohort, will be analysed using this novel TPS ap- data sharing server that are then aggregated for anonymous public queries. proach for patient identification improvement. In addition, we have built the MOLGENIS.org system so that bioinformati- National Institute of Health Doutor Ricardo Jorge research grant [BRJ- cians can now plug-in new annotation scripts, optimal data storage soluti- DPS/2012] ons (e.g. VCF, local databases, search indexes) and visualizations for rapid community evaluation. PM14.048 Clinical labs can now easily interrogate patient mutations observed in other Accurate quantification and qualification of FFPE samples increases labs. We expect this effort to develop into a valuable NGS data exploration success rate of NGS library prep and sequencing app as well as a sharing platform for best practice data and pipelines, inte- B. Arezi, B. Rogers, K. Chen, B. Hsue, H. Hogrefe; Agilent Technologies, La Jolla, CA, United States. gration with international sharing platforms such as GA4GH and Cafe Va- riome (for which pilots are underway), well-curated reference knowledge- bases, and optimal user interfaces, results of which can disseminate into FFPE tissue archiving is the most widely used method for clinical sample research institutes, clinical software companies and individual labs. preservation, and provides a valuable source of diverse genetic information P S14
.051 for cancer biomarker discovery. DNA recovered from FFPE tissues exhibits Streamlining NGS workflows by the application of the DNA Integrity varying degrees of fragmentation, cross-linking, deamination, depurinati- Number (DIN) from the Genomic DNA ScreenTape Assay on and other lesions due to formalin fixation, paraffinization, and storage E. Schmidt1, I. Pechtl1, M. Gassmann1, B. McHoull2; conditions; and as a result, NGS library preparation is often challenging. 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2Agilent Technologies, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. To increase success with FFPE-derived DNA, we developed a qPCR-based method to determine quantity of amplifiable DNA and extent of degrada- tion. SureSelect XT libraries were prepared from multiple FFPE samples of varying integrity, and enriched using the ClearSeq Comprehensive Cancer The results of numerous molecular screening and assay methods often rely Panel which targets 151 genes frequently mutated in solid and hematolo- on the overall quality of the genomic DNA (gDNA) input material. However gical cancers. As we will show, qPCR integrity scores are highly correlated extraction of genetic material can be challenging and often results in low with pre-capture PCR yield and sequencing metrics (library complexity and amounts or variable quality of gDNA samples, which are further subjected to coverage), and can be used as a guide to determine appropriate sequencing time and cost intensive downstream applications. For example, array com- depth for optimal coverage. parative genome hybridization (aCGH) and Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) can require intact, high quality gDNA to ensure high quality, unam- P S14
.049 biguous results. It is therefore widely recommended to perform an initial SuperScript® IV Reverse Transcriptase: A New Reverse Transcriptase quality control (QC) of the input material. Especially as only the final step of for RNA Analysis these workflows reveals if meaningful results have been achieved. In order B. Lam1, K. Zhang1, J. Guo1, L. Li1, K. W. Garcia1, A. Jokubauskaite2, M. Kaniusaite2, T. Radzvilavicius2, A. Lagunavicius2; to provide an automated measure for gDNA integrity assessment, a software 1Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, United States, 2Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vilnius, algorithm has been developed. This functionality of the 2200 TapeStation sy- stem provides a numerical determination of gDNA integrity and is referred ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 285 to as the DNA Integrity Number (DIN). The data presented here demonstra-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Medical genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Dept. Medical, Surgical and Neurological tes how the standardization of sample integrity assessment using the DIN Sciences, Siena, Italy, 4UOC Neurologia e Neurofisiologia Clinica, Azienda Ospedaliera, allows the establishment of workflow specific thresholds for the upfront QC Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 5UOC Neurologia e Malattie Neurometaboliche, Siena, Italy. of gDNA on the Agilent Genomic DNA ScreenTape assay. In this study the ob- jective determination of the sample integrity resulted in significant saving of sequencing and sample preparation overhead in NGS workflows. Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies (HMSN) are genetically he- PM14.052 terogeneous disorders affecting peripheral motor and sensory functions. Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance: evaluating a whole of system Many different mutations in several HMSN causing genes involved in the de- approach to implementation of genomics into clinical practice myelinating, the axonal and the intermediate form have been identified, for C. Gaff1, W. J. Wilson2, I. Macciocca1, N. Thorne1, M. Martyn1, G. Brett1, E. Wilkins1, S. Metcalfe3,4, E. Forbes1, E. Creed1, T. Bakkar1; which all inheritance patterns have been described. The mutation screening 1Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Parkville, Australia, 2CSIRO, North Ryde, currently available is based on Sanger sequencing and is time-consuming Australia, 3University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 4Murdoch Childrens Research and relatively expensive due to the high number of genes involved and to Institute, Parkville, Australia. the absence of mutational hot spots. To overcome these limitations, we have designed a custom AmpliseqTM panel for simultaneous sequencing of the coding DNA sequence (CDS) of 28 HMSN-related genes. We have applied this To optimise the use of genomics as part of routine practice, whole of system panel to three representative patients with variable HMSN phenotype and change is needed. Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance is clinically driven, uncertain diagnostic classification because of an uninformative family histo- addressing change in health, diagnostic, workforce and information ma- ry and electrophysiological findings suggestive but not fully conclusive for nagement across seven healthcare, research and academic organisations. In axonal, demyelinating or intermediate form. Using our NGS platform we ra- the demonstration phase, barriers are identified and resolved. Adults and pidly identified three already described pathogenic heterozygous mutations children (n = 250) with one of five germline or somatic conditions are being in MNF2, MPZ and DMN2 as disease-causative mutations in the three cases, offered whole exome sequencing with targeted analysis. Importantly, this is respectively. Here we show that, while utilization of traditional molecular in parallel with standard investigations. Evaluation is being performed on techniques would be time-consuming and expensive, our pre-custom plat- the process and outcomes of counselling, diagnostic testing, multidisciplina- form allows a fast, specific and low-cost diagnosis in sporadic HMSN cases. ry review, reporting, data linkage, patient entry of lifestyle data and ease of This prompt diagnosis is extremely useful for providing a well-timed treat- access to (raw) data by researchers. Data collected includes feedback from ment, establishing a recurrence risk and preventing further investigations clinicians and participants. Initial results (n=144) demonstrate a 30% dia- poorly tolerated by patients and expensive for the health system. Important- gnosis rate overall; performance relative to standard care is variable across ly, our study illustrates the utility and successful application of NGS to muta- conditions. A key feature of the project has been demonstrating that com- tion screening of a Mendelian disorder with extreme locus heterogeneity. mon standards for exome sequencing, curation and interpretation can be P S14
.055 agreed and applied across different diagnostic laboratories. The common, Towards a uniform nomenclature to improve the patient reports and highly-automated bioinformatics pipeline and linked database for curation databases: results from two pilot EGFR External Quality Assessment of filtered variants have been well received by those performing curation. schemes Multidisciplinary meetings to interpret results have proven a highly effecti- V. Tack, L. Tembuyser, E. Dequeker; ve means for engagement and education. Participant expectations differed KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. between adult participants and parents of a child participant. Data linkage Introduction has expanded the information available for research and clinical care and laid the foundation for data sharing to organisations outside the Alliance. . Uniform reporting of mutations in an electronic database is Detailed results of the outcome and process evaluation will be presented. essential. Laboratory databases as well as electronic medical records will be P S14
.053 contacted in the future, to create large reference databases for health benefit Clinical genome analysis: delivering the right diagnosis research. The Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS) nomenclature gui- S. Raza, A. Hall, H. Burton, M. Kroese, L. Luheshi; dMealitneersia alrse a tnhde gMoeldtheno dsstandard for an unambiguous and uniform reporting PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom. system for mutations.EGFR . Diagnostic reports of two ESP external quality as- sReesssumltesnt scheEmGFeRs for mutation analysis were analyzed in detail regar- Whole genome sequencing and analysis (WGA) presents an unpreceden- ding the nomenclature. ted opportunity to transform clinical genetic services for patients with rare . The mutation was correctly identified and reported in 81 re- diseases. Yet converting whole genome data into clinically useful results is ports in 2012 and 137 reports in 2014. The number of reports with nomen- not an uncomplicated procedure. This unique project set out to influence clature according to the most recent guidelines of HGVS were, respectively policy, by informing policy-makers of the challenges of embedding genome for 2012 and 2014, 32.1% and 28.5%. The most used error, was the use sequencing in health services for patient benefit. Through consultation with of traditional nomenclature (e.g. G719S), respectively 38.3% in 2012 and a group of experts including clinical geneticists, clinical scientists and mole- 54.7% in 2014. Reporting on both DNA and protein level was done by 67.9% cular scientists, we examined different aspects of the genome analysis pro- in 2012 and only 59.1% in 2014. The number of labs reporting a three-letter cess in the context of rare disease diagnosis to (i) explain the barriers that code for each amino acid has decreased from 39.5% in 2012 to 31.4% in need addressing in order to use genome sequence data for clinical purposes, 2 C0
o1n4cl, uosf iwonhich respectively 8.6% and 13.9% also report the one-letter code and (ii) present the changes in policy required to enable the safe and effec- in parallel. tive application of genome sequencing in healthcare. Our examination has . The results show the need for improvement of mutation re- highlighted the following challenges when applying genome analysis within porting according to HGVS guidelines. From 2014, points are deducted for a clinical diagnostic pathway: the integration of bioinformaticians within non- or incorrect HGVS nomenclature in order to increase the attention of the healthcare workforce; the development and application of standards laboratories for a correct and unambiguous reporting of mutations. Further and best practice guidelines to WGA; improving the evidence base on which research will be performed with nomenclature results from different EQA data analysis and interpretation depends; and optimising the mechanisms providers. for phenotyping patients and capturing this information to support efficient PM14.056 WGA. These challenges to achieving accurate and effective WGA are not in- Full length HLA genotyping using Pacific Biosciences SMRT surmountable, but overcoming them will take resources, commitment from sequencing stakeholders, and a methodical yet proportionate approach. Realising the N. Cahill1, A. Ameur1, C. Knutsson2, U. Orebrand3, U. Gyllensten1, M. Bengtsson4; benefits of WGA will require: establishing best practices in bioinformatics; 1SciLife Lab, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala determining analytic standards; improving data and knowledge exchange; University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Rudbeck establishing adequate computational infrastructure to perform genome Laboratry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. analysis and interpretation and transfer of data. PM14.054 HLA genotyping through sequence-based typing (SBT) is subjected to phase Sporadic hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies: advances in the ambiguity and genotyping uncertainties, leading to delays in patient/donor diagnosis using Next Generation Sequencing technology C. Fallerini1, G. Carignani1,2, G. Capoccitti3,4, A. Federico3,5, A. Rufa3,5, A. Pinto1, C. Lo typing. Herein, we summarise our experiences in setting up a high-through- Rizzo1,2, F. Mari1,2, M. Mencarelli1,2, F. Giannini3,4, A. Renieri1,2; put genotyping approach using Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) SMRT-sequen- cing as a means to provide full length HLA sequences for adequate phasing 286 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG and identification of novel alleles within a clinical setting.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Locus-specific amplification of HLA Class I and II loci produced full-length were required to extract DNA and test according to their usual procedures. amplicons encompassing the enhancer/promoter region to the 3’UTR. Fol- The results were to be interpreted with respect to the scenario provided and lowing PacBio SMRT-sequencing, single-molecule sequences were analysed to determine the likelihood that the multiple tissue samples supplied were via the long amplicon analysis pipeline and genotyped using third-party from the same patient. To ensure the tissue samples were appropriate for genotyping software (n=12). Initial results revealed full concordance with testing by molecular fingerprinting assays all EQA samples were validated the anticipated SBT results. Both alleles from both heterozygous and homo- by two independent laboratories using different assays. The results were as zygous individuals were completely resolved and formerly ambiguous alle- expected and gave high quality reportable molecular test results. Fourteen les were readily determined. A number of novel intronic sequence variants laboratories participated in the pilot EQA and the reported genotyping re- were also discovered. sults, interpretation of the data and the methodologies used in the EQA run Given the quality of the data generated, it was clear the sequencing of full- will be presented. length HLA genes using PacBio approach could accommodate a high degree P S14
.059 of multiplexing. Consequently, we are conducting a pilot study (n=50) in as- The clinical utility of QF-PCR microsatellite analysis in sample sociation with the Fred Hutchinson Centre to develop a streamlined pipeline identification and patient management from sample collection to genotype acquisition. Within this pilot we are eva- C. J. Anderson1, S. Gable2, R. Butler1; luating optimal primer sets, level of multiplexing, automation of laboratory 1Laboratory Genetics Service for Wales, Institute of Medical Genetics, UHW, Cardiff, and data analyses steps and the use of third-party genotyping software. Pre- United Kingdom, 2Department of Cell Pathology, UHW, Cardiff, United Kingdom. liminary results reveal that PacBio sequencing will allow for high-resolution and high-throughput sequencing of full-length HLA loci with a fast turn- around time. However, further optimisation of the pipeline is needed. An in-house QF-PCR microsatellite assay, used routinely for the prenatal dia- P S14
.057 gnosis of chromosomal aneuploidy, has been re-optimised and applied in Genotyping of alpha thalassaemia mutations by high-resolution DNA the identification and quantification of contributing genotypes within FFPE melting analysis tissues. Microsatellite analysis has been used successfully to answer clinical C. Chassanidis, E. Boutou, A. Balassopoulou; questions arising from suspected clinical incidents; preventing patient mis- Thalassaemia Center, Laiko General Hospital, Athens, Greece. diagnoses and mismanagement. Here we present 2 cases where the results of microsatellite analysis played a crucial role in patient management. Case ONE details how microsatellite Alpha-thalassaemia is an inherited globin gene disorder commonly found analysis of FFPE tissue and reference peripheral blood samples was not only among the Greek population, composed of both non-deletional and deletio- used to prove that a patient panel of prostate core biopsies, as suspected, nal alpha-globin gene mutations. In Greece, 7% of the general popul0ation is had been wrongly labelled, but also that of the batch of 4 patients’ samples carrier of α-thalassaemia (deletion 3.7 kb-α3.7) wThile 1% carries α deleti- processed along-side the mislabelled sample, 2 further samples had been ons or rare point mutations an (non-deletional, α). mislabelled. Comparison of patient prostate and reference genotypes fa- The high prevalence (8%) and heterogeneity in molecular level, makes ne- cilitated the correct identification and assignment of all patients’ prostate cessary the development of a reliable, cost effective and rapid scanning me- core biopsy samples. Case TWO details how microsatellite analysis of FFPE thod for alpha globin gene analysis, easily adapted to a routine laboratory. material was used to confirm the clinical suspicion that histologically mali- Here we describe the development of an alpha thalassaemia specific High gnant and normal tissues samples from 2 individuals had become embed- Resolution Melting Analysis (HRMA) approach. Specific sets of primers ded in a single resection block. Microsatellite analysis of macro-dissected were designed to cover eight regions of the HBA genes containing the mAgroinsiot FFPE material from different areas of a resection slide showing a ‘mix’ of freHqpuhent IchariiathertCoS repPAo1rtedP Am2 utations of the Greek population [α2 , tissues and comparison to a reference patient sample genotype confirmed α2 , α2 , α2 , α2 , α2 , α2 cd115(+CC)]. PCR conditions were desi- the presence of 2 genotypes, consistent with sample mixing, preventing in- gned identical for all amplicons, permitting thus multiplexing. Furthermo- appropriate clinical management. re, Real-Time GAP-PCR was performed in order to identify deletions (-α3.7, Tumour identification services are now being offered by the Laboratory Ge- --med, -20.5, -α4.2). netics Service for Wales, Cardiff. Initially, 75 previously genotyped samples (heterozygotes or homozygo- PM14.060 tes) were analysed. Different mutations produced distinct derivative plots Targeted next generation sequencing a powerful tool to improve the when subtracted from the reference curve of a wild type control, resulting care of blind infants. in 100% accurate mutation identification. In addition, HRMA analysis of 125 J. Rozet1, S. Hanein2, C. Bole3, P. Nitschke4, N. Delphin5, O. Xerri1, A. Munnich5, J. Kaplan1, undefined samples totally matched subsequent diagnosis by either Sanger I. Perrault1; sequencing or ARMS analysis. 1INSERMU1163 Institut IMAGINE Lab Genetics in Ophthalmology, PARIS, France, 2INSERMU1163 Institut IMAGINE NGS Molecular Diagnosis, PARIS, France, HRM curve analysis is rapidly becoming the prominent mutation scanning 3INSERMU1163 Institut IMAGINE Genomics Platform, PARIS, France, 4INSERMU1163 methodology representing a rapid, simple, cost-effective and highly feasib- Institut IMAGINE Bioinformatic Platform, PARIS, France, 5INSERMU1163 Institut le strategy for identifying effectively underlying mutations. We successful- IMAGINE Genetics, PARIS, France. ly performed HRMA for alpha-thalassaemia in order to identify frequent α-thalassaemia mutations in terms of carrier screening and prenatal dia- gnosis. Introduction: Leber congenital amaurosis is the earliest and most severe PM14.058 retinal dystrophy, and a leading cause of blindness in children. The visual Correct result, but was the correct sample tested? Introducing the UK outcome of affected infants is variable, ranging from light perception, to low NEQAS for Molecular Genetics Tissue Identification EQA Scheme. but measurable visual acuity in the first two decades of life. Blind infants J. A. Fairley1, C. Anderson2, Z. Deans1; with LCA are at risk of developing skeletal, neurologic and renal dysfunc- 1UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2UHW, Cardiff, United tions. Both the visual and extraocular outcomes strongly correlate with the Kingdom. disease-gene. The study presented here aimed at assessing targeted NGS (T- NGS) as a tool to improve patient care by allowing efficient and early mole- cular diagnosis in infants with severe visual deficiency. Objectives Methods: 260 index LCA cases were sequenced using a T-NGS array compri- To provide an EQA for the molecular testing of FFPE specimens to determine sing 45 genes causing isolated or syndromic LCA and 10 genes of differenti- identity. al diagnoses. Mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and familial Incidents occur in laboratories which result in doubt over the origin of tis- segregation analysis. sue samples. Therefore it is necessary for laboratories to test samples for Results: We identified causative mutations, including 6 copy number varia- confirmation of the origin of the tissue, detect sample switches or identify tions, in 158/260 index cases, 130/158 of whom had mutations in genes for sample mislabelling. This often aids in the delivery of a patient result and isolated LCA/EOSRD and 15/158 in genes for syndromic forms. In addition, minimises the need for re-sampling. we identified convincing mutations in genes for differential diagnoses in Laboratories test formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue samples 13/260 individuals. using molecular fingerprinting assays. To provide laboratories with assuran- Conclusions: T-NGS molecular diagnosis proved powerful to improve the ce of the quality of this testing and accuracy of data analysis, a pilot external care of infant with severe visual dysfunction by allowing i) early identificati- quality assessment (EQA) was offered to laboratories during 2015. on of children with differential diagnosis which outcome is highly favorable Laboratories were supplied with three EQA scenarios with accompanying compared to LCA (13/260; 5%) and, ii) early discrimination of children at rolled sections of FFPE tissue (1E Sx H10GµM 2 0cu1r5le d| GseLctAioSn GpeOr Wsa,m SpCleO) aTnLdA NnDo ,r UiskK o |f WbeiWngW af.feEcSteHd Gw.iOth RsyGndromic LCA (130/158; 82%) from t2ho8s7e,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Lyon, France, 3Department of Genetics, Lyon, France, 4CNRL, CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, Lyon, France, 5Claude Bernard Lyon I University, Lyon, France, 6Service de far fewer, at risk of developing extraocular symptoms (15/158; 9%) who Biostatistique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 7CNRS, UMR 5558, Laboratoire require extraocular explorations. de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive, Equipe Biostatistique-Santé, Villeurbanne, France, 8CNRS, UMR 5558, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive, Equipe Biostatistique- Grants : Retina France, INSERM Santé, Lyon, France, 9Service d‘hormonologie, d‘endocrinologie moleculaire et des P S14
.061 maladies rares, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France. Identification of rarehemoglobinopathy by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF/ TOF) Although coverage is critical for assessing the quality and accuracy of results P. Jittorntam; from massive parallel sequencing (MPS), it is often a difficult parameter to Ramathibodhi hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. display in practice. We developed DeCovA (Depth and Coverage Analysis), a simple and easy homemade tool that combines the sequencing depth of each base and the coverage of target genes. Thalassemia and hemoglobinopathy is the public health problem in Sou- To illustrate DeCovA‘s usefulness, MPS sequencing was performed on DNA theast Asian population. Rare hemoglobinopathy is occasionally found from samples from 24 patients using an Ion Torrent PGM sequencer (Life Techno- routine screening using High-Liquid Performance Chromatography (HPLC) logies). Forty-one genes that cause monogenic forms of epileptic disorders or suspected in people with low mean corpuscular volume (MCV) and low were studied in parallel. mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) of red blood cells with no obvious DeCovA first determines the genomic target regions from either a bed file or identified peak from HPLC. Here we develop MALDI-TOF/TOF method to a list of genes, then launches the coverageBed tool from the bedtools suite detect silent hemoglobinopathy, which cannot be detected by HPLC. In ad- to compute the depth of sequencing on each base of these regions, for each dition, we also use this technology to detect the mass of rare unidentified alignment bam files to be analysed. DeCovA uses these outputs to produce hemoglobin (Hb). DNA sequencing of alpha and beta globin chains was done graphs that show, above each gene or transcript, the stretches of DNA not in parallel to establish molecular diagnosis.In 2013-2014, our Genetics covered at different thresholds set by the user. DeCovaA can also draw the Service received several referrals for families carrying unidentified Hb. We sum of the samples covered at different thresholds, which is useful to iden- can identify Hb Cheverly[beta 45(CD4) Phe>Ser] and Hb La Desirade[beta tify the stretches that escape repeatedly the enrichment/sequencing me- 129(H7) Ala>Val] in families with unknown causes of low peripheral oxy- thods. Bar plots can be displayed for a group of samples, allowing group or gen saturation and normal HPLC. HbDhonburi[beta 126(H4) Val>Gly]was method comparisons. discovered in a family with slight increased Hb A2 suggestive of beta tha- DeCovA allows a fast and reliable coverage analysis. Gaps per gene are high- lassemia carrier. Hb New York [beta 113(G15) Val>Glu], Hb Louisville [beta lighted and a warning can be set in order to return correct results according 42(CD1) Phe>Leu]and Hb J-Buda [alpha1 61( E10
) Lys>Asn]were identified to the rating level of the test (Type A, B, C of Eurogentest Guidelines). in families with unknown peak of hemoglobin performed by HPLC. However, PM14.064 MALDI-TOF/TOF failed to identify the mass of some Hb such as Hb E[beta Integration of Next-Generation Sequencing as a Methylation-Based 26(B8) Glu>Lys]and Hb Zurich-Langstrasse[beta 50(D1) Thr>Ser]. In con- Routine Diagnostic Test in Colon Cancer Tissue Screening clusion, MALDI-TOF/TOF is the potential high-throughput analytic method S. Kühner1, T. Hinrichsen1, O. Wachter1, B. Dockhorn-Dworniczak2, H. Klein1, I. Rost1; to identify abnormal globin chain with mass difference approximately 20 1Zentrum für Humangenetik und Laboratoriumsdiagnostik (MVZ) Dr. Klein, Dr. Rost und Da mass. Kollegen, Martinsried, Germany, 2Zentrum für Pathologie Kempten-Allgäu, Kempten, PM14.062 Germany. Method for fast screening of Y chromosome microdeletions by multiplex real-time touchdown PCR coupled with melting curve analysis Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is an autosomal inhe- F. Raicu1,2, R. Cocos1,2; rited tumor predisposition syndrome generally caused by germline muta- 1Chair of Medical Genetics, “Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, tions in one of the mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PM S2
) that Bucharest, Romania, 2Genome Life Research Centre, Bucharest, Romania. are responsible for repairing mismatches generated during DNA synthesis. Impaired function of these MMR proteins leads to a high risk for colorectal cancer and for other HNPCC-related tumors. One of the main aim in HNP- Male infertility accounts for 40-50% of couple infertility and represents a CC diagnostics is the discrimination of sporadic carcinomas from the less complex reproductive health problem with a substantial genetic basis and frequent HNPCC-associated tumors. DNA promotor methylation is typically various environmental risk factors. Microdeletions in the AZF regions of the associated with transcriptional silencing of the affected gene. Inactivation Y chromosome represent the most frequent molecular genetic cause of se- of MLH1 due to promoter hypermethylation strongly suggests a sporadic vere infertility accounting for 15% of cases of non-obstructive azoospermia origin of the tumor. Hypermethylation of the MLH1 promoter occurs in 40% or severe hypospermatogenesis. of the tumors with known negative MMR mutation status and is very rare The aim of this work was to further develop a fast and accurate screening in HNPCC patients [1]. Moreover, only methylation of CpG sites in one small method based on multiplex real-time touchdown PCR followed by melting region of the MLH1 promoter, the C-region, invariably correlates with silen- curve analysis to scan AZF loci looking for microdeletions. cing of MLH1 [2]. We established an assay for methylation screening of the The European 2014 best practice guideline for molecular diagnosis of C-region of the MLH1 promoter in colorectal cancer tissue by combining bi- Y-chromosomal microdeletions were used as a basis for designing five sulfite conversion with Next Generation Sequencing (NGS). To validate this real-time multiplex PCR systems, in which the selected combinations of approach, we analysed the C-region of the MLH1 promoter of colorectal can- 24 STS amplicons can strikingly be identified by their melting points with cer tissue using NGS and MS-MLPA . We obtained consistent and reproducib- EvaGreen™ as the high-performing DNA intercalating dye. le results. NGS is a highly sensitive tool allowing an exact quantification of In order to validate our testing method we analysed 120 azoospermic and methylation of all CpG sites in the relevant promotor region and can easily oligozoospermic males previously tested by independent singleplex PCRs. be integrated as a methylation-based routine diagnostic test in colon cancer A group of 130 healthy men as positive controls and 10 women as negative tissue screening. controls were also included in this study. We precisely detected the absence/ [1] Parsons et al., Med Genet, 49(3):151-7, 2012 presence of STS in our patient group of infertile men based on our method. [2] Deng et al., Cancer Res, 59(9):2029-33, 1999 No deletions were detected in the group of healthy men and no amplificati- PM14.066 on for any of the STS tested were observed in the negative control group. A systematic approach to mitochondrial DNA diagnostics through Our method allows a fast, simple and low-cost screening for Y chromosome sequencing microdeletions in patients with genetic infertility. The study was supported R. Berutti1, T. Wieland1, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, U. Ahting1,2, M. Radivojkov-Blagojevic1, P. by POS-CCE-0 2.3.1 grant 1485/SMIS-CSNR 4296. Lichtner1, T. Meitinger1,2, H. Prokisch1,2, T. M. Strom1,2; P S14
.063 1Institute of Human Genetics - Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, DeCovA: A user-friendly tool for displaying gene coverage from 2Institute of Human Genetics - Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. Massive Parallel Sequencing data. Application to a panel of 41 genes causing epileptic disorders T. Simonet1,2, A. Labalme3, S. Dimassi3,4,5, A. Campan-Fournier3, R. Lamy3, C. Bardel6,5,7, Mitochondrial DNA is widely investigated for diagnostics: we recently deve- M. Elsensohn6,5,8, F. Roucher Boulez5,8,9, L. Schaeffer2,1,5, P. Roy5,8,6, D. Sanlaville3,5,4, G. loped a pipeline to help switching mtDNA sequencing at our Institute from LESCA3,4,5; Sanger to next-generation techniques. 1Department of Cell Biotechnology, Lyon, France, 2Ecole Normale Superieure de Lyon, Our pipeline addresses three different mtDNA sources, genomic (with an 288 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOapTpLroAxNimDat,e UcoKv e|r WageW ofW 1.0E,0 S0
H0XG),. OexRomGe (50-200X) and long-range PCRABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (~10,000X). Reads are aligned with BWA to the revised Cambridge Refe- ~30X) achieved in whole genome sequencing, add to the challenge. Exome rence Sequence, now included in hg38 genome release. Using a linear re- sequencing can be much deeper, but standard exome coverage is variable, ference for a plasmid may cause border effects, which are removed by incomplete within genes, and excludes medically interpretable content out- building a secondary sequence overlapping the junction, aligning on it and side the coding regions. merging the results at a latter stage. Nuclear DNA contamination is stripped In order to detect clinically relevant mosaicism, sequencing coverage must by adding the genomic reference in the alignment step. Variant calling is be consistently deep over all medically interpretable content, and variant- performed using GATK and Pindel, while we used for the annotation step calling algorithms appropriately adjusted. We present cases of both somatic Mitomap (for known polymorphisms and known associations of mutations and germline mosaicism demonstrating that the use of augmented exome with diseases and somatic effects on tissues), Phylotree (for gene definitions sequencing with modification for mosaic detection allows for the sensiti- plus tRNA definitions from the University of Leipzig), GenBank (for haplo- ve detection of mosaicism. We demonstrate that this approach has proven group definition and frequencies). more sensitive to mosaic detection than both clinical testing and some who- The pipeline needs approximately 15 minutes to analyze a sample, perfor- le genome-based approaches. ming SNV and indel calling, heteroplasmy detection, functional annotation, P S14
.069 haplogroup estimation, and disease annotation. Variants are stored into a Efficiency of a NGS panel for diagnosis of Nucleotide Excision Repair database and are accessible through a Web front-end. defects, and identification of a POLH founder XP mutation in Northern We created a tool focusing on diagnostics, which allows to analyze mtDNA Spain sequences from different NGS sources, to identify disease causing variants N. Calmels1, J. Muller1,2,3, C. Gasnier1, J. Tarabeux1, C. Depienne4, B. Keren4, G. Greff1, N. and to provide data-quality feedback to the wet lab. The variant database Kempf1, C. Obringer5, M. Miguet1, B. Gener Querol6, I. Llano-Rivas6, J. Gardeazabal7, D. will also support future phylogenetic and population based studies. Bessis8, A. Mazur9, J. Mandel1,3, V. Laugel10,5; 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Genetique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, P S14
.067 Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire ICUBE, UMR CNRS 7357, LBGI, Université de Roadblocks to reaching a final diagnosis with next-generation Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et sequencing Cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS UMR 7104/INSERM U964/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, J. P. Casey1, E. Crushell2, S. Lynch1; France, 4Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Centre de génétique moléculaire 1Temple Street Children‘s University Hospital, Dublin 1, Ireland, 2National Centre for et Chromosomique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Laboratoire Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Temple Stree Children‘s University Hospital, Dublin 1, de Génétique Médicale - EA 3949, Faculté de médecine de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, Ireland. France, 6Department of Genetics. Cruces University Hospital. BioCruces Health Research Institute, Baracaldo, Vizcaya, Spain, 7Department of Dermatology. Cruces University Hospital. BioCruces Health Research Institute, Baracaldo, Vizcaya, Spain, 8Service When does a research finding become a diagnosis? Having sufficient evi- de Dermatologie, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 9Medical Faculty, University of Rzeszow, Rzeszow, Pakistan, 10Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de dence to convert a potentially-relevant Next-Generation sequencing (NGS) Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. finding to a concrete molecular diagnosis can be a lengthy process. This is particularly true for potentially novel disorders affecting just one family. Through our NGS-based research, we encountered a number of issues that Introduction: Compromised nucleotide excision repair (NER) activity causes complicated diagnosis including (i) important DNA samples unavailable for a variety of autosomal recessive diseases including the skin-cancer predis- segregation analysis, (ii) only partial clinical overlap with a newly-described position disorder, xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and the severe premature syndrome and (iii) novel candidate genes which require extensive functio- ageing condition, Cockayne syndrome (CS). Considering the clinical overlap nal studies. In the face of these challenges, we have had to use alternative of NER-related disorders and the several genes involved, we have develo- genetic methods to determine pathogenicity. ped a new diagnostic approach based on the enrichment of 16 NER-related In two studies, one X-linked recessive and one autosomal dominant, pater- genes by multiplex amplification coupled with next-generation sequencing nal DNA was not available to confirm whether the identified candidate mu- (NGS). tations were de novo (likely pathogenic) or paternally-inherited (likely be- Materials and Methods: The strategy was first evaluated on a validation nign). Sanger sequencing and SNP haplotype analysis of unaffected siblings cohort of 11 known patients and then applied to a prospective cohort of was necessary to determine pathogenicity. For X-linked recessive disorders, 30 patients. Multiplex amplification and sequencing were performed using showing that the mutation is not present in any of the sisters of the patient/ AmpliSeq protocol on Ion Torrent PGM (Life Technologies). carrier mother can help support pathogenicity. For autosomal dominant dis- Results: We detected clearly pathogenic biallelic mutations in 14 out of 30 orders, showing that the haplotype on which the mutation is present in the cases (47%). Five new mutations were described in both ERC C6
/CSB and patient is shared by an unaffected sibling who does not carry the mutation ERC C8
/CSA Cockayne genes. We also identified two XP patients linked to adds weight to the likelihood that it’s de novo. For some consanguineous fa- the very rarely involved ERC C3
/XPB gene (only 9 patients from 6 families milies we have identified causal compound heterozygous variants highligh- already published). Finally, the study of a small cohort of 4 unrelated XP ting that we cannot always assume homozygosity despite consanguinity. patients from the Basque country (Northern Spain) retrieved a common NGS has eased the identification of candidate variants. However, down- splicing mutation in POLH (XP-variant), demonstrating a new founder effect stream analyses are vital to generate sufficient evidence to support causality in this population. and ensure families receive the correct molecular diagnosis. Conclusions: Despite the small number of NER-defective patients, NGS Grant:Health Research Board&Children‘s Fund For Health strategy has shown to be particularly relevant, especially for patients with PM14.068 atypical or incomplete clinical phenotypes. NGS is an efficient alternative to Detection of mosaicism by augmented exome sequencing sequential Sanger approach and is the essential molecular complement of G. Chandratillake1, S. Garcia1, J. Priest2, D. M. Church1, J. Tirch1, J. Yen1, J. Anderson1, M. cellular tests measuring DNA repair activity. Morra1, M. S. Williams3, J. West1, E. Ashley2, R. Chen1; This study was supported by a grant from Agence de Biomedecine. 1Personalis, Inc., Menlo Park, CA, United States, 2Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 3Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health PM14.070 System, Danville, PA, United States. Development of a Target Region Capture Paralleled Next Generation Sequencing Platform on Monogenic Disorders of the Newborn G. Rui1, P. Jiang1, B. Wu2, Z. Huang1, C. Liu1, W. Zheng1, Z. Lan1, Q. Wang1, W. Zhou2, X. Yi1; The importance of mosaicism in Mendelian disorders is being increasingly 1BGI, Shenzhen, China, 2Children’s Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China. recognized. Since many proteins form multi-unit homo-oligomers (repor- tedly over half), a small percentage of abnormal copies can affect a much larger fraction of these assemblies. Thus variants in less than 10% of cells It was estimated that one quarter of the patients in the new-borns and pa- can lead to serious clinical consequences. For some conditions, mosaicism ediatric population are actually related to genetic disorders. In new-borns explains the previously low yield of clinical genedtei cn toevsoting. Other conditions whose phenotypic evidence might not be clinically manifest in early days, are obligate mosaic disorders. Furthermore, low-level parental mosaicism is a definitive diagnosis may be difficult to be provided for timely treatment increasingly recognized underlying apparently cases of disease. Mo- or prevention. Comparing with traditional methods, NGS based second-tier saicism is often undetectable through Sanger sequencing and so has been testing has the potential to assist in the diagnosis and management of new- underappreciated in clinical genetic testing. born diseases by accelerating the process and reducing false positives. Detection of mosaicism in whole genome and exome sequencing is ham- A customized genetic panel was designed including 88 genes and a couple pered by multiple factors. Variant calling and filtration strategies often miss of special regions related to 51 new-born disorders. To facilitate the clinical or exclude variants at mosaic allele percentages. False positives can be ram- application, we have optimized the pipeline in terms of accelerated turn- pant, especially over paralogousE sS eqH uG en c2 e0 r1 eg5 io | n G s. L ReA aS d G deO ptW hs, (S tyC pO icaT lL lyA NaDro,u UndK t i|m We Wto ~W7.0E hSoHurGs .aOndR eGasy-assessed sample as dried blood s2p8ot9s.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The pipeline is automated to generate variation calls for SNP, Indel and large Detect all gene-fusions in genes of interest and characterize fusions at bre- size deletions. And an in-house validated variation database was introduced akpoint resolution in leukemia and other cancer types. to assist the interpretation of mutations. P S14
.073 In the assay, we first assess the performance of the pipeline using reference Strategy for validating the ever-changing face of next generations materials. The coverage of the interested regions is above 95% at 30X. Then sequencing 53 previously identified specimens with 65 different mutations were ap- K. Brugger, H. Martin, S. Abbs; plied to validate the detection ability. All mutations were correctly identified Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom. except one large transposal insertion. And among 33 patients with clinically suspected symptoms, 22 patients were identified with known or suspected mutations. We thereby demonstrated that the platform is reliable to detect Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) has seen a revolution in the last few causal mutations and might help facilitate clinical evaluation and early in- years with the price of sequencing constantly decreasing whilst sequencing tervention in newborn screening or in NICU. platform throughput and the range of experimental assays that can be per- P S14
.071 formed, has increased. This is the result of a constant stream of NGS impro- Implementation of an NGS-based workflow for BRCA1 and BRCA2 vements in the form of new sequencers, new chemistry, improved protocols mutation screening and new or improved software. This constant flux puts a large burden on L. Artuso1, V. Medici1, I. Bernardis1, E. Tenedini1, V. Artusi1, M. L. Simone1, C. Priore Oliva1, laboratories performing clinical grade NGS, working to accreditation stan- P. Tarugi1, R. Manfredini2, L. Cortesi3, E. Tagliafico1; dards, and having to constantly re-validate these aspects before changes are 1Centre for Genome Research, Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and implemented. Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, 2Centre for Regenerative Medicine “Stefano Ferrari”, We describe the process we have introduced to clinically validate our NGS Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, assays that range from stratified HIV sequencing to clinical exome sequen- 3Department of Oncology, Hematology and Respiratory Diseases, University of Modena cing, and encompasses all aspects from DNA sample to final report. Further- and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, Modena, Italy. more we discuss our long term strategy for verifying new NGS equipment and chemistry, and changes to protocol and software, to ensure they remain fit for purpose. Finally we outline and show the output of software we have Positivity for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations was associated with increased created for quickly re-validating these changes at minimal cost and requi- probability to develop familiar breast cancer. To detect BRCA1/2 germline ring minimal additional laboratory work. mutations we developed a next-generation sequencing (NGS) routine dia- gnostic workflow, based on the Ion Torrent PGM™ System platform. The Ion PM14.074 AmpliSeq™ BRCA1 and BRCA2 Community Panel was handled with a semi- A standardized validation workflow for clinical Next Generation automatized procedure for multiplex PCR-based library preparation and se- Sequencing (NGS) analysis quencing. Data analysis required the implementation of a custom designed L. Laner, A. M. Nissen, A. Benet-Pages, C. Rapp, E. Holinski-Feder; Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum München, München, Germany. bioinformatic pipeline for sequences alignment and for the identification, annotation and filtration of genetic variants. Sanger sequencing was perfor- med to validate candidate mutations, and to re-sequence amplicons having low NGS coverage (<50 reads per amplicon). Negative samples were ana- The emerging use of NGS approaches in clinical laboratories has rushed the lyzed using the BRCA HP Kit (Multiplicom) for an effective homopolymeric development of guidelines to ensure adherence of the same rigorous stan- stretches detection. This workflow together with the potentiality of our bio- dards as in other clinical tests for direct patient care. However, a gap re- informatic pipeline was blindly tested and validated onto a small cohort of mains between the general published requirements and the detailed infor- patients previously Sanger sequenced, fine-tuning the parameter settings mation regarding how these should be satisfied in routine practice. Hence, and resulting in a sensitivity of 100% in variant detection. Subsequently, we developed a standardized validation process which can be applied to 244 patients were analyzed thus confirming the need of a double check for NGS workflows designed to detect sequence variation within a targeted set the homopolymeric stretches with both NGS sequencing and BRCA HP Kit. of genes. We defined key parameters and quality criteria to assess perfor- The NGS-based workflow here proposed was able to decrease the overall mance and limitations within NGS-processes (platform, pipeline, test). Plat- cost of the conventional genetic test and make the diagnostic process faster form precision was evaluated by testing reproducibility and repeatability than compared to Sanger sequencing alone. of three independent samples during the laboratory process (DNA quality, Grant references: Ministero della Salute, Ricerca Finalizzata 2009 fragmentation, library/pool quantification, sequencing quality, error rate). ( E35
J11000190001). A correlation of >95% was defined as satisfying. Pipeline accuracy was as- sessed through analytic sensitivity and specificity of variant calling. Two PM14.072 HapMap specimens were sequenced and variants detected by our bioin- Targeted Locus Amplification for hypothesis neutral and complete formatics pipeline were compared to variation data of these specimens ac- Next Generation Sequencing and haplotyping of genes of interest. cessible via the 1000Genomes Project. Discordant calls were confirmed by M. J. van Min; Sanger. Moreover, variants called at low allele fractions, base quality (Q<30) Cergentis, Utrecht, Netherlands. and coverage (<30X) were also validated to assess the limits of detection. Test validation includes mapping statistics (raw, mapped, duplicate reads) and calculation of coverage distribution (>30X) to determine the analyzab- Current methodologies in genetic diagnostics and research are limited in le region of each clinical target. Further, evaluation of repetitive sequences, their ability to uncover all genetic variation in genes of interest. Clinical pseudogenes, homologous regions and GC content to state which parts of genetic tests often only focus on exons and therefore miss variants in the the clinical target may not be sequenced reliably. This validation process non-coding regulatory sequences of genes. In addition, structural variants, was designed to meet the currently published guidelines. i.e. deletions/duplications (CNVs), translocations, insertions and inversions, are difficult to uncover. Their robust detection is hampered by the hypo- P S14
.075 thesis-driven nature of current targeted sequencing methodologies: the Multi-Pronged Approach for Somatic Variant Detection using collection of probes (in hybridization-based capture methods) or primers HaloPlexHS with Molecular Barcodes (in polymerase or ligase-based re-sequencing approaches) determines the K. Zobeck, C. Le Cocq, L. Forsmark, J. Chi, J. Ghosh, M. Isaksson, H. Johansson; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States. sequences that will be analyzed. None of these methods provide haploty- ping information, ultimately needed to get complete sequence information. Here we present targeted locus amplification (TLA), a strategy to selectively HS amplify and sequence entire genes. TLA is based on crosslinking, fragmen- Agilent’s HaloPlex is a next generation PCR target enrichment method that ting and religation steps such as performed in chromatin capture techno- enables enrichment of thousands of targets in a single tube. The protocol logies. We show that, unlike other targeted re-sequencing methods, TLA utilizes specificity gained from restriction enzyme digestion, hybridization works without detailed prior locus information as one or a few TLA primer and DNA ligation to capture the target region. Standard amplicon-based pairs are sufficient to amplify and sequence tens to hundreds of kilobases target enrichment methods are limited in sensitivity because mapping start of surrounding sequences. This, we demonstrate, enables robust detection points of paired end reads cannot be used to identify unique molecules and of single nucleotide variants, structural variants and gene fusions in clini- improve confidence in variant calling. Therefore, we have added molecular cally relevant genes. Data will be presented showing the ability of the TLA barcodes to thHSe primer cassettes allowing detection of unique molecules. Technology to: 1) Sequence & haplotype a.o. the complete BRCA1 & BRCA2 The HaloPlex workflow has been optimized to take <6 hours to complete genes for the detection of germline and somatic variation in (xenograft) tu- and requires only 50 ng input. Using molecular barcodes, we demonstrate m2o9r0 samples. 2) Haplotype the Human LeE uS koH cyG te 2 A0 nt1 ig5 e n| (G HL LA A)S rG egO ionW . 3, )S COinTcrLeAasNedD co, nUfiKde |n Wce aWndW de.EteSctHioGn .oOf vRarGiants down to <1% allelic fraction.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Furthermore, an improved probe design in Agilent’s SureDesign results in part of genome, it had no difficulty to processing NGS results. increased coverage for custom designs. We demonstrate for 31 designs, PM14.078 >85% specificity and >90% of target regions covered at 10% of average NGS sounds really good! But, what kind of NGS-based test might I offer depth when sequenced at >100X. to my patient? Finally, Agilent’s SureCall 3.0 utilizes the molecular barcodes in a novel algo- M. Garcia-Hoyos, L. Rausell, M. Molero, M. Lazaro, C. Ruiz, M. Bermejo, J. Valero, M. Perez- rithm for removing duplicate PCR fragments. It assigns reads to amplicons Alonso, J. Garcia-Planells; by probe sequence matching, then uses the barcodes to merge duplicate Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna (Valencia), Spain. reads while providing correction for sequencing and PCR errors and impro- ving variant calling. SureCall can accurately call variants at 2.5% allelic frac- tion. We demonstrate the speed and accuracy of this method, especially for Introduction: NGS is being established as a new alternative for the diagno- reads with non-unique mapping. With this multi-pronged approach, fromHS sis of genetic diseases in the clinical practice. The great advantages of this probe design, to library prep, to analysis, we demonstrate that HaloPlex promising technology have been duly demonstrated in research. But some provides more accurate variant calls with higher sensitivity and better co- considerations need to be taken into account before being implemented as verage of custom designs. a clinical routine. NGS is a great technology, or better said, a set of techno- PM14.076 logies and different applications, but more important than the technology The comprehensive analysis of a cohort of Polish patients with itself is the use that is made of it. the suspicion of neurofibromatosis type 1 using Next Generation Material and Methods: We have developed different NGS based strategies for Sequencing the analysis of genetic conditions. An accurate and highly sensitive approach A. Wasowska1,2, M. Krawczyk1, T. Janiszewska3, M. Jurkowska1, R. Szymanczak1, M. based on a PCR specific design, which we have called NextGeneDx®. This Zagulski1; approach was extensively validated to be used for diagnostic applications. 1Genomed SA, Warsaw, Poland, 2Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology, An exome analysis focused only to the genes associated to clinical pheno- Warsaw, Poland, 3Genetic Counselling Unit, University Hospital No 1, Bydgoszcz, Poland. types according to OMIM (Clinical Exome). And a targeted or Ad Hoc Exome focused to the genes associated to a specific condition or phenotype. Sspecific bioinformatics pipelines and interpretation algorithms were im- Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant disorder plemented for all these strategies. affecting approximately 1 in 2000 to 3500 people. It appears to be a single Conclusions: NextGeneDx® is a diagnostic and accurate NGS alternative to gene-determined diNsoFr1der characterized by complex cognitive symptoms, Sanger for genetically heterogeneous diseases or phenotypes associated to including cutaneous neurofibromas, cafe-au-lait spots, Lisch nodules and a limited number of genes. Ad Hoc Exome provides a high sensitivity and optic gliomas. The gene has one of the highest rates of mutations in specificity and allows the exhaustive analysis of a high number of genes as- the human genome, with almost equal split between spontaneous and in- sociated to a specific condition. Clinical exome provides the analysis of all herited mutations. Identifying the disease-causing change is complex due to the genes associated to a OMIM phenotype making easier the clinical inter- the large size of gene, the presence of pseudogenNesF a1nd the lack of mutation pretation of the results. This approach is very useful for unspecific conditi- hotspots. ons or phenotypes. The present study describes screening for the mutations in 90 pati- P S14
.079 ents from 76 unrelated families with phenotype fulfilling diagnostic crite- NextGeneDX®: An accurate and cost-effective NGS Application for ria or with suspicion of neurofibromatosis type 1. The analysis included genetic diagnosis amplification of 58 coding regions and flanking splice sites (according to M. Garcia-Hoyos, L. Rausell, M. Molero, M. Lazaro, C. Ruiz, M. Bermejo, A. Gomez, J. NM_001042492.2), library preparation and next-generation sequencing Valero, J. Garcia-Planells; (NGS). Sanger sequencing was used for mutation confirmation or when the Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna, Spain. average coverage per region was lower than 50x. To the date of submission, 49 unique mutations were identified within 76 families, including 7 mis- sense substitutions, 16 stopgain mutations, 19 small deletions or insertions NGS is a very promising technology that allows to analyse millions of se- and 7 splice site changes. Twenty one out of these mutations are registered quences by using a single assay, reducing costs and time significantly com- in the Human Gene Mutation Database, four variations concern the location pared to Sanger sequencing. However, the use of NGS in routine clinical prac- where a different mutation has been previouslyN dFi1scovered and the rest are tice is still under discussion because, inter alia, variations in the specificity newly detected mutations with a probable pathogenicity. and sensibility associated, mainly, to the capture systems. NextGeneDX® is This is the first comprehensive analysis of the mutational spectrum in a NGS-based procedure validated for diagnostic applications in the clinical Polish patients with the neurofibromatosis type 1 suspicion. practice. This PCR-based targeted capture system has been developed, va- Supported by UDA-POIG.01.04.00-14-246/11 and UDA-POKL-04.01.01-00- lidated and implemented for a wide range of genetic diagnosis in the last 014/10-00 (INTERKADRA) projects. two years. P S14
.077 Last years, 233 genes were analysed in 1670 patients with phenotypes asso- New methodology for NGS analysis of Dushenne Muscular Dystrophy. ciated to 73 different genetic diseases. O. P. Ryzhkova, A. Polyakov; Capture of the regions of interest (ROIs) has been performed by specific PCR. Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Specificity and analytical accuracy of the PCR design have been checked by Sanger analysis. Libraries were prepared according to NexteraXT protocol and sequenced on a MiSeq. The analysis and interpretation of the results Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a new group of methods, which widely have been performed according to our own algorithms. used in DNA-diagnostics lately. Whole genome sequencing, exome sequen- All pathological or probably pathological changes were confirmed by Sanger cing and different panels of causes genes are applied in clinical medicine. sequencing. Advantages include: relative cost-effectiveness, analysis all potential genes Our NGS-based procedure for diagnosis allowed the identification of the at once and rapidity of diagnostic. But these methods still have problems disease-causing change in 403 patients (24%). To date, false positives have like low/no coverage some regions and no information about it, too much not been detected using NextGeneDX® strategy. information and difficulty of it processing, absence certificate for medicine. NextGeneDx® approach has the same sensitivity and specificity than Sanger This work purpose was development of methods Dushenne Muscular Dys- sequencing, with a 100% of representativity of the ROIs and a minimum trophy (DMD) diagnostic by NGS, which can use in medical practice. depth of 100X. It is a diagnostic alternative to Sanger sequencing for ana- The basis of our methods was AmpliSeq technology but we added one stage lyzing large genes or several genes, associated to multigenic or genetically more. We designed own primers for all exons and adjacent intron regions heterogeneous diseases, simultaneously reducing, significantly, times and of DMD, EMD, FHL and LMNA A/C genes which had used at the first stage. costs without compromising the diagnostic accuracy and quality. After PCR we have multiplex of 105 amplicons. Then we had made fragmen- PM14.080 tary analysis after second PCR with fluorescently labeled universal primer. Next-generation errors in medical practice: A topic for clinical and Therefore, it becomes possible to assess quality and quantity of each ampli- laboratory geneticists to address in collaboration. con. This added stage saved us the trouble of low/no or different coverage G. W. E. Santen1, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, M. J. V. Hoffer1, M. Kriek1, R. C. M. Hennekam2, J. between some regions. Then we had been convinced that all fragments were Cobben2; in the same concentration we made PCR with sequencing primers. 1dpt of clinical genetics LUMC University Hospital, Leiden, Netherlands, 2dpt of Pediatrics Ten DMD patients have been analyzed by the claimed method on Junior AMC University Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands. (Rosh) equipment. All exons wEerSeH aGna l2yz0e1d,5 c o| vGerLaAgeS dGifOfeWren, tS wCaOs T7Lx.A ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 291 Three of patients had mutation in DMD gene. Because we sequenced limitedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The introduction of next generation sequencing (NGS) techniques,although workflow. To solve this common problem in the NGS field, we established generally meeting its high expectations, causes new problems in clinical ge- a test system where a mixture of high-GC and low-GC bacteria genomes is netics. When testing a single gene, the prior probability of causality is high used to optimize library amplification conditions and used this system to for suspicious variants, which led to the erroneous perception that any ab- develop a novel NGS library amplification mix that amplifies the genomes normal DNA test result is 100% specific. The prior probability of causality with widely different GC contents with minimal bias and high fidelity. is dramatically lower when large gene panels or whole exome sequencing P S14
.083 (WES) is performed. This demands a sceptic attitude and a higher burden of Is exome sequencing a reproducible technique under routine proof for causality. Rigorous assessment of the genotype-phenotype relati- conditions ? on (deep phenotyping) is essential, and should be jointly assessed with the A. Trimouille1, S. De Diego2, C. Hubert2, M. Vuillaume1,3, F. Salin4, E. Guichoux4, B. pathogenicity of the variant on molecular basis alone. Arveiler1,3, D. Lacombe1,3, C. Rooryck1,3, P. Fergelot1,3,2; We have collected a series of cases illustrating these issues and have extrac- 1Service de Génétique Médicale CHU de Bordeaux, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, ted several apparently common causes for mistakes: 2Plateforme Génome-Transcriptome, CGFB, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 3Laboratoire Maladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme (MRGM), EA 4576, Talence, A. France, 4UMR 1202 Biogeco - INRA-Université de Bordeaux, Cestas, France. Genotype interpretation mistakes: (1) unfamiliarity with a gene; (2) over- interpretation of variant significance; (3) bio-informatic mistakes (4) mis- judging what is detectable with NGS. Exome sequencing is commonly used for research or diagnosis purposes, B. sometimes without notion of robustness or reproducibility of the chosen Fenotype interpretation mistakes: (1) superficial phenotyping; (2) subopti- techniques. However these criteria must be considered to validate NGS data. mal utilization of phenotypic data; Here we present the results of an exhaustive comparison of the quality data Based on these errors from practice, we recommend that (I) Laboratory in a series of exomes performed at the Genome Transcriptome platform of and clinical geneticists share responsibility for final test results; (II) DNA the Functional Genomics Center of Bordeaux. laboratories remain specialized on (groups of) genes; (III) Large gene panel Comparisons of the quality data have been performed in three steps, from analyses and WES should only be requested in collaboration with clinical raw data (FASTQ), aligned reads (BAM), and detected variants (VCF), as de- geneticists. scribed in Guo and al.1. We compared 2 different libraries (SureSelect and We recognize that these recommendations need refinement. However, the Nextera) sequenced on a MiSeq system. In a first set, 2 exomes were perfor- misconception that NGS is the panacea of genetic diagnostics should be med from the same DNA sample and in a second set 4 exomes were perfor- challenged, to prevent possibly serious errors. Close collaboration between med from 2 different DNA extractions. clinical and laboratory specialists to optimize patient care and safety is nee- These biological replicates allowed us to evaluate the loss of information ded. throughout the bioinformatic pipeline, because of low quality raw data, and P S14
.081 its impact on the number of relevant variants detected. Thus, by comparing Exome-wide SNP genotyping as a tool for validation of a large the concordance of variants detected in the 4 exomes set, we were able to diagnostic next-generation sequencing panel show which technique of library preparation gives the most reproducible J. M. Polke1, M. Athanasopoulou1, J. Hayward1, A. Pittman2, H. Houlden1, M. G. Sweeney1; results, and which types of patient’s mutations are most likely undetected 1National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, United Kingdom, 2UCL by each kit. Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom. This work allowed us to accurately assess the quality of exome datasets ob- tained by NGS sequencing in routine conditions, with two different library kits. This validation procedure could help in the future to make more rele- Validating the sensitivity of next-generation sequencing (NGS) for diagno- vant choices among the available NGS techniques. stic testing is essential. This involves confirming the detection of a number 1 Three-stage quality control strategies for DNA re-sequencing data. Guo et of positive control variants (60 to confirm >95% sensitivity, 300 for >99% al. Brief Bioinform. 2014 Nov;15(6):879-89 sensitivity at the 95% confidence interval (CI)). Samples with known va- riants from previous Sanger sequencing tests can be resequenced, though PM14.084 this can prove costly, necessitating the NGS of many samples. We present Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of Cystic fibrosis (CF): an the validation of a Neurogenetics-specific Illumina Nextera Rapid Capture optimized protocol using multiplex fluorescent PCR to detect the Custom NGS panel of 153 genes using the Illumina Human Infinium Exome- p.Phe508del mutation wide BeadChip array v1.2, which includes over 240,000 exonic variants. Ten F. Trau Mau Them1, V. Debant1, C. Guissart1,2, A. Girardet1,2, C. Raynal1,2, C. Rouzier3, E. control samples were SNP-genotyped (one in triplicate, giving identical calls Haquet4, P. Khau Van Kien5, E. Bieth6, M. P. Brechard7, M. Koenig1,2, M. Claustres1,2, M. C. Vincent1,2; between the replicates). A total of 134 unique single-nucleotide variations 1CHU Montpellier_Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire_IURC, Montpellier cedex 5, were detected in the targeted genes, with a grand total of 311 heterozygous France, 2Equipe Accueil_Université Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 3CHU Nice, Service and 152 homozygous. All were correctly identified by NGS. There were dis- de génétique Médicale, Nice, France, 4CHU Montpellier_Service de Génétique Médicale, cordant genotype calls for 2 variants, Sanger sequencing verified that the Montpellier, France, 5CHU Nîmes, Laboratoire de Cytologie clinique et Cytogénétique, NGS was correct for both. Six samples with indels from 1-40 bp in length Nîmes, France, 6CHU Toulouse, Service de Génétique Médicale, Toulouse, France, 7Hôpital were also tested, all were detected. This is a total of 140 unique variants, Saint Joseph, Service de Diagnostic Prenatal, Marseille, France. from which a sensitivity of >97.9% at the 95% CI can be derived. Our va- lidation also included the repeat sequencing of two samples on different runs and downsampling to establish the lowest read-depth required to call Analysis of cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) in maternal plasma is very promising a variant. The 10 SNP-genotyped samples will provide a valuable resource for early diagnosis of monogenic diseases. However, NIPD of single-gene dis- for periodic verification of the performance of our panel, and validation of orders has been limited by the availability of suitable technical platforms future NGS tests. and the need to set up patient or disease specific custom-made approaches. To make clinical applications more readily accessible, we propose a simple PM14.082 test based on multiplex fluorescent PCR and size fragment analysis to deter- Optimization of Library Amplification For Next Generation mine the paternally inherited fetal allele. Cystic fibrosis (CF) has been taken Sequencing as a model to evaluate this approach, in couples with high risk of transmit- K. Heitz; QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany. ting the disease. ThCisF tTeRst combines the detection of p.Phe508del (the most frequent mutation in CF patients worldwide), nine intragenic and extragenic STR markers of the locus and a specific SRY sequence. All primers were Uniform coverage of all genomic regions during Next Generation Sequencing designed regarding the size of cffDNA (i.e. to amplify short fragments). (NGS) is critical for efficiently utilizing sequencing capacity and preventing This multiplex PCR protocol was successfully applied to 5 couples where loss of important sequence information due to drop-out or under-represen- fathers carried the p.Phe508del and mothers were carrying a different mu- tation of certain regions. The coverage uniformity is especially important tation. Our simple test provided clear results on the maternal plasma from in applications such as microbiome-sequencing, where different microbial the pregnant women. We confirmed the presence of cffDNA in the studied strains could have significantly different GC contents. GC content -related se- samples by the identification of a tri-allelic DNA profile using a miniSTR kit. quencing bias could potentially lead to under-representation or even com- All results were correlated with chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis plete loss of the genomic regions or microbial strains with very low or very analyses. high percentage of GC bases. The PCR step of the NGS library construction This NIPD test, focused on both direct and indirect diagnosis of CF, offers p2r9oc2edure has been shown to be the maEjoSr HsoGu r2ce0 o1f5 G C| GbiLasA iSn GthOe WNG,S S COm Tan Ly A a Ndv Dan , t Uag Kes |o Wver W cu Wrr .e En St m He Gth .Ood Rs: G simple, rapid and cost-effective. It opens up possibilities to test a large number of couples with high risk of CFABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S14
.087 This work was supported by the ‘ Agence de Biomedecine ’ (AOR2012-U9039). Ten Years of EMQN Phenylketonuria EQA scheme for offspring. M. Witsch-Baumgartner1, C. Aulehla-Scholz2, J. Zschocke1; 1Division Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institut für Klinische Genetik, Klinikum Stuttgart Olgahospital, Stuttgart, Germany. P S14
.085 Karyotype level non-invasive prenatal testing by sequencing of circulating cell-free DNA from maternal plasma A. R. Mazloom1, T. Liu1, R. Lefkowitz1, G. Hogg1, J. A. Tynan1, T. Burcham2, D. van den Objective Boom2, M. Ehrich2; Analysis of the last ten EMQN-EQA (European Molecular Quality Network- 1Sequenom Laboratories, San Diego, CA, United States, 2Sequenom, Inc., San Diego, CA, European Quality Assessment) schemes regarding molecular diagnosis of United States. Phenylketonuria (PKU) Basics PKU (OMIM # 261600) is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder due to Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) has become an accepted method for mutations in the PAH gene. Deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase in PKU the detection of trisomy 21, 18 and 13 in patients at high risk to carry a causes excess of phenylalanine which affects brain development and func- fetus with one of these chromosomal abnormalities. NIPT can also be used tion. Over 600 pathogenic PAH variants are known. Depending on mutations to detect other aneuploidies and sub-chromosomal copy number varia- the phenotype severity varies from mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP) to tions. With the inevitable progress of sequencing technologies, it is likely mild and severe PKU. Early molecular diagnosis of PKU and correct interpre- that sequencing-based NIPT will offer greater diagnostic capabilities in the tation is important for treatment planning including possible tetrahydrobi- same way that karyotyping-level resolution was eventually superseded by opterin cofactor responsiveness. microarray analysis of invasively acquired fetal cells or tissue. We present Method studies that support the concept of NIPT delivering genome-wide unbalan- Each year this EQA scheme consisted of three simulated cases. Over the 10 ced copy number results, analogous to what can be detected by cytogenetic years 23 different variants and 26 different genotypes were distributed for G-band karyotyping. analysis. Nearly 550 mock reports were quantitatively and qualitatively ana- We analyizne-sdi laic oset of maternal plasma samples for which karyotype confir- lyzed for a range of criteria including genotyping, interpretation and clerical mation of fetal anomalies were available. Next, we constructed a compre- accuracy. hensive system of maternal plasma DNA sequencing results mo- Result deled to contain sub-chromosomal events at genomic coordinates reported Participants came from 23 different countries including Australia and the in the ISCA database. Finally, we constructed an analytical model system US; participant number increased from 11 in 2004 to 27 in 2014. The to- with both karyotype and microarray confirmed samples with genome wide tal genotyping error rate has decreased from a maximum of 20% to 1.4% sub-chromosomal deletion and duplicatiIonn-s eilviceon ts. although in every year at least one lab missed at least one mutation. Many In karyotype confirmed samples, we detected 17 of 18 samples with a sub- laboratories have serious shortcomings in genotype-phenotype predictions. chromosomal deletion or duplication. modeling of 587 genome 2007 and 2012 several laboratories offered prenatal testing for genotypes wide ISCA sub-chromosomal deletion and duplication events ≥7 Mb sinh-oswiliecdo not associated with clinical symptoms (MHP). that sensitivity could reach 94% with high specificity. Discussion Using whole genome sequencing results, we were able to model Quality of PAH genotyping has improved over the years but mutation inter- genome wide events and estimate sensitivity metrics for their detection. pretation remains a major challenge for a number of laboratories. Availabili- Measurement of analytical performance in mixture models with confirmed ty of improved mutation databases would probably help to further improve deletions/duplications is currently ongoing. diagnostic quality. PM14.086 Grant reference: EMQN A new NGS-based assay for detecting PALB2 variants in familial breast PM14.088 & pancreatic cancer Real-time quantitative PCR for copy number analysis: has our service M. A. Goldgraben1, J. Redman1, A. Larionov1, F. Rodger1, K. Brugger2, A. Richards3,4, H. improved? Martin2, S. Abbs2, M. Tischkowitz1,2; S. F. Jose, S. M. Morgan, R. Butler; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrookes’ Treatment Centre, University of Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2East Anglian Medical Genetics Centre, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Genetics Laboratories, Addenbrookes’ Treatment Centre, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) to determine copy number was intro- Cambridge, United Kingdom. duced as a diagnostic service by the All Wales Medical Genetics Service (AWMGS) in June 2014. At this time increasing demand on the laboratory budget, in particular for the send-out budget, meant that there was an ur- Genetic testing for breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 gent need to develop a cost effective strategy for validation of dosage results, and BRCA2, is well established for the early identification and management particularly following array CGH testing. An in-house qPCR method was de- of hereditary cancers. Another gene involved in the DNA damage repair veloped and validated that allowed cost effective, flexible assay design for (DDR) pathway is PALB2 (partner and localizer of BRCA2) or FANCN. It re- unique and recurrent genomic regions. We are aware that only a few labora- cruits BRCA2 to BRCA1-bound damaged DNA sites, to mediate homologous tories within the UK have adopted this testing strategy. There are no current recombination. Heterozygous PALB2 mutant carriers have significant cel- professional guidelines or external quality assessment schemes for qPCR. lular DNA repair defects, whilst homozygous mutant patients develop Fan- Review of the first 6 months post implementation of this service for vali- coni anemia. We recently showed that heterozygous carriers of deleterious dation of array CGH imbalances showed evidence of the cost benefit of this PALB2 germline mutations have at least 5 times greater predisposition to service compared with previously available follow up techniques. In addi- developing breast cancer compared to the general population, with increa- tion, the clinical utility of this testing has also been demonstrated through sing risk in younger age groups. Carriers are also predisposed to pancreatic detection of a homozygous imbalance in a proband who had inherited the cancer, independent of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. deletion from each of his hemizygous parents. More recently, qPCR testing We have developed a low-cost clinical assay for PALB2 variant detection has also been applied for confirmation of potential dosage imbalances de- which complements the existing BRCA1 and BRCA2 assays offered in our tected by next generation sequencing (NGS) assays within this laboratory. NHS clinical laboratory. It combines long-range PCR amplification with next Further advantages following implementation include targeted prenatal te- generation sequencing (NGS). This provides high sequencing depth for con- sting and targeted familial studies, eliminating the possibility of detecting fident variant calling and flexibility at multiplexing, thus minimizing indi- incidental findings. vidual sample costs. Previously known PALB2 wild-type and mutant DNA We present a review of the first 11 months of the qPCR service to evaluate samples, detected by other NGS methods, are used to validate the assay. whether we have improved our laboratory services. Another clinical utility could be for newly identified mutant PALB2 carri- P S14
.089 er breast cancer patients to be considered as candidates for PARP inhibitor QSTR*R-PL: Development and Validation of a QF-PCR based IVD for therapeutics, targeting defective DDR. However, the assay will initially be Rapid Aneuploidy Screening in the Event of Pregnancy Loss included for breast and pancreas cancer screening at our NHS genetics la- G. Fitzgibbon, G. Batman; boratory and cost efficiency analysis is ongoing, comparing against other Elucigene Diagnostics, Manchester, United Kingdom. targeted resequencing panels. ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLANIDnt,r oUdKuc t|i Won:W EWluc.iEgeSnHe GD.iOagRnoGstics has developed QST*R-PL, a si2m9p3leABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index to use assay for the rapid and accurate diagnosis of the six most common mTOR and CCND2. This assay uses long range-PCR as the target enrichment autosomal trisomies associated with miscarriage. QST*R-PL employs the strategy and Illumina’s MiSeq system to perform next generation sequen- commonly used QF-PCR (Quantitative Fluorescence-PCR) technique, which cing, followed by analysis using a custom bioinformatics pipeline. offers numerous advantages over the techniques currently used in the dia- Assay validation was undertaken across five independent MiSeq runs com- gnosis of miscarriage. prising 20 analyses of 12 patient samples previously screened by pyrose- Methods: A QST*R-PL performance evaluation assay was provided by Elu- quencing or Sanger sequencing. NGS data was directly compared to pre- cigene Diagnostics and evaluated using protocols developed by Elucigene vious data with fully concordant results. Assay repeatability and sensitivity Diagnostics. Testing involved 150 anonymised DNA samples extracted from were determined, and the bioinformatics pipeline was validated to detect fetally derived tissues/product of conception, whose aneuploidy status was mutations down to a 5% admixture. previously determined using alternative testing methods including Karyo- As a result of this validation, the NGS Segmental Overgrowth Syndrome typing, FISH and Microarray. QST*R-PL test accuracy was assessed through assay is now offered at the Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine. Po- concordance with the previous diagnosis. tentially disease causing mutations have been identified in 50% of patients Results: The QST*R-PL data demonstrated high quality results across all te- tested so far and confirmed using Sanger sequencing or ARMS-PCR. sting sites. Comparison of the QST*R-PL diagnostic results with that of the PM14.092 previous diagnostic data showed 100% concordance with no failed results. European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN): First Conclusion: The QST*R-PL assay used in the clinical setting can provide experience with External Quality Assessment for the molecular users with a rapid aneuploidy screening service for miscarriage cases and diagnosis of SHOX-deficiency in Europe can easily integrate into any existing QF-PCR based prenatal service. QST*R- G. Wildhardt1, K. E. Heath2, E. De Baere3, S. Patton4; PL also enables the identification of maternal cell contamination and speci- 1bio.logis Center for Human Genetics, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 2Institute of Medical fic cases of triploidy which are less easily detectible using current diagnostic & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3Center methods. Such a service can provide closure to patients or couples who have for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 4EMQN, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom. undergone a traumatic miscarriage event and can aid the management by modification of risk calculations for future pregnancies and can change the way recurrent pregnancy loss is managed clinically in the future. The European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) is a not-for-pro- PM14.090 fit organization promoting quality in genetic testing worldwide by provision Whole transcriptome next-generation sequencing to detect gene of standard External Quality Assessment (EQA) schemes and agreed best fusions in haematological malignancies practice. Since 2011, SHOX-deficiency has been one of these EQA schemes J. Chapman, A. Stretton, R. White, S. Austin, R. Butler; and involves sending three DNA samples, with matched mock clinical refer- All Wales Medical Genetics Service, Cardiff, United Kingdom. rals, for analysis by the participating laboratories. A panel of three assessors Introduction: using previously agreed marking criteria anonymously marks the resulting clinical reports. Each participating laboratory is scored for genotyping, in situC urrent methods of detection of genetic markers for haema- interpretation and clerical accuracy (max score is 2.00 per category), and tological malignancies include the identification of gene-fusions using fluo- tailored comments are fed back. A report summarizing the results of the rescence hybridisation (FISH), karyotyping, real-time PCR (RT-PCR) scheme is also provided. and screening genes for mutations through targeted sequencing. However, In 2014, a total of 43 laboratories from 15 countries participated in the Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) has a number of potential advantages SHOX scheme. One case involving a patient with disproportionate short sta- over traditional methods. We aimed to establish a workflow for detecting ture and Madelung deformity (SHOX p.Ala170Pro mutation), had a worryin- gene-fusion transcripts using NGS, in order to develop a service to detect a gly high genotyping error rate of 26%. This mutation has previously been range of diagnostic BaCnRd- AprBoLg1n ostic genetic markers of haematological mali- reported to cause an aberrant signal for the exon 4 MLPA probe of the most gnancies. We have validated this method through the detection of recurrent, commonly used MLPA kit. Many laboratories did not follow best practice wMeeltlh-cohda:r acterised gene fusions in patients with chronic myeloid and failed to use an alternative method to verify this abnormal finding lea- leukaemia (CML) fusions as a proof of principle study. ding to an incorrect result. Consequently, the mean genotyping error rate Whole transcriptome libraries were prepared from RNA exBtrCaRc/- for the scheme was high (8.77%). A full summary of all the results of the AteBdL f1r om the blood and bone marrow of patients with chronic myeloid leu- SHOX schemes run between 2011-2014 will be presented. The errors iden- kaemia (CML) and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) and known tified indicate a clear need for EQA to improve the standards of technical and fusions using the Illumina TruSeq RNA Access library prep kit. These reporting performance in clinical diagnostic laboratories offering a SHOX lRibersaurlitess: were sequenced on the IllBuCmRi/nAaB HLi1S eq 2500 and a bioinformatics testing service. pipeline was developed to detect the gene fusions. This method detected the fusions in the patient samples P S14
.093 and can distinguish between different breakpoints in the genes. A compa- Efficient, targeted personalized medicine by BRAF, KRAS and NRAS rCiosonncl uofs idoinff:e rent algorithms for the detection of gene fusions and a cost- genotyping on a benchtop sequencer benefit analysis of this technique will also be presented. K. De Leeneer1, E. De Latter1,2, N. Van Roy1, J. Van Dorpe3, D. Creytens3, L. Vandemaele3, I. Rottiers3, B. Verhasselt2, B. Denys2, K. Vandepoele2, A. De Jaegher1, G. Vandercruyssen1, E. We have shown that whole transcriptome NGS is a promising De Baere1, K. Claes1; method for detecting gene-fusions which can be developed further to detect 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Departments of genetic markers in a range of complex haematological malignancies. Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, P S14
.091 Belgium, 3Department of Pathology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Development of a Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) gene panel assay Ghent, Belgium. for Segmental Overgrowth Syndromes. C. L. M. Langley, E. Howard, S. Williams, A. Wallace; Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom. Reliable tumor tissue molecular analysis with high sensitivity and speci- ficity is crucial to guide correct personalized medicine in cancer. Somatic mutation detection in several codons of the BRAF, KRAS and NRAS genes Segmental overgrowth syndromes (SOS) are a heterogeneous group of rare has a great impact on colorectal cancer treatment decision. The release of diseases characterised by substantial localised or asymmetrical excessive benchtop Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) instruments has paved the tissue growth manifesting at birth or later in life. SOS encompass disorders way to implement the NGS chemistry in a clinical setting without making such as Megalencephaly-Capillary Malformation (MCM/MCAP) syndro- sacrifices in terms of cost and turnaround time. me, Megalencephaly-Polymicrogyria-Polydactyly-Hydrocephalus (MPPH) We developed and validated a PCR based NGS approach for mutation de- syndrome, Congenital Lipomatous Overgrowth Vascular Malformations, tection in Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) samples. Nine BRAF, Epidermal Nevi and Skeletal abnormalities (CLOVES syndrome), Proteus KRAS and NRAS target codons are amplified in seven reactions followed by syndrome and Cowden syndrome. Due to overlapping phenotypes clinical NexteraXT library preparation and sequencing on a Miseq. Except for the diagnosis can be challenging. challenge of performing NGS with FFPE samples in terms of DNA quality and Many SOS have been attributed to mutations in genes of the phosphoinositide homogeneity, a thorough validation of the detection limit appeared to be 3-kinase PI3K-Akt signalling pathway, with both germline and somatic mu- essential. The detection limit is influenced by different factors including the tations associated. We have developed a Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) quality of the specimen, the sequence to be analyzed, primer design and PCR assay for key genes in this pathway with whole gene screening of PIK3CA bias. We investigated these factors resulting in a reliable detection of the va- a2n9d 4PTEN, and targeted screening of hotspEoSt HexGon 2s i0n1  P5
IK  |3
 RG2L, AAKSTG1,O AKWT,3 ,S COriaTnLtsA dNowDn, tUo K3% | WwitWh aW m.EinSimHaGl c.oOveRraGge of 1000x of each target. Hence,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index our approach can identify the selected mutations with a sensitivity unseen rison to identify comprehensive genomic structural variation is feasible on with traditional Sanger sequencing and directly quantifies the amount of the a single platform. mutant allele. In brief, we developed a simple, robust, flexible and sensitive PM14.096 sequencing assay for somatic mutation detection in colorectal cancer using Evaluation of SureSelectQXT Target Enrichment library preparation NGS, which can serve as a model for tumor tissue molecular analysis for for Illumina parallel sequencing other acquired diseases. Y. G. Patel, S. Lillis, L. Brodd, S. Yau; PM14.094 Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Ten years of SCA external quality assessment (EQA) schemes organised by EMQN S. Sousa1,2, I. Alonso1,2,3, S. Patton4, D. E. Barton4, S. Wieczorek5, J. E. Martindale6, S. Parallel sequencing library preparation protocols using minimal sample in- Seneca7, J. Sequeiros1,2,3; put and manipulation, while maintaining high sensitivity are an essential 1CGPP, IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2I3S requirement for a clinical laboratory. Agilent Technologies SureSelectQXT - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3ICBAS, kit improves on their standard SureSelectXT library preparation times with Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4EMQN, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Department of as little as 50ng of input DNA. Using a transposase-based library prepara- Human Genetics, Ruhr Univ, Bochum, Germany, 6Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service, Sheffield Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 7Center for tion with improved hybridization that decreases both hands-on-time and Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium. hybridization time from 16 hours to 90 minutes. We have evaluated the kit using 4 different focused target-enrichment gene panels (Congenital Myopothies; Congenital Muscular Dystrophies, In-born Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are autosomal dominant neurodegenerative Metabolic Diseases and Breast Cancer) and 41 samples comprising of 44 diseases, caused by triplet-repeat expansions in the most common forms. An previously identified variants (28 SNVs and 16 CNVs). Most of these variants EQA scheme, provided by EMQN, has been running since 2004. We assessed were previously sequenced using the SureSelectXT protocol with Covaris reports for 3 mock-cases, every year, for genotype and interpretation (score: randon-shearing and although the SureSelectQXT shearing is not entirely 0-2). Laboratories were expected to discriminate, and accurately size, both random, all the expected variants were detected. Additionally CNV coverage allele repeats for SCA1, SCA2, MJD/SCA3, SCA6 and SCA7; assessment inclu- data from the QXT protocol seems to show more consistent and less variable ded also (1) pre-test requirements; (2) appropriate methodologies, updated CNV data compared to the Covaris SureSelectXT protocol. knowledge and acceptable repeat range; and (3) interpretation, reporting Sequencing results show both a comparable percentage of on-target se- and recommendations. quencing reads and a high concordance of variants detected by the Sure- Laboratories (28-73; mean: 51) from 34 countries (mean: 22), from all con- SelectQXT protocol and known previously identified variants in the these tinents, increased over time. We found an improvement in genotyping and samples. Overall the SureSelectQXT library preparation kit showed confi- interpretation, and a decrease of gross errors (range: 0-5%). Mean scores dent coverage of the genomic regions of interest tested here, allowing us were compared according to the participation of each lab (once, 2-6, 7-10 to perform both point mutation analysis and CNV analysis from the same times). Differences (factorial ANOVA) were not significant, but labs that par- data. Furthermore this protocol has a reduced number of steps providing a ticipated only once had lower scores (1.75) and the greatest heterogeneity. streamlined approach that is amenable to automation on an Agilent Bravo Labs participating frequently had higher scores (1.89) and the most consi- workstation, allowing us dramatically increase our throughput from 96 to stent results. 288 samples a week. Many labs do not treat EQA as their routine diagnostics. Other common pro- P S14
.097 blems included: missing homoallelism; not specifying both allele sizes; not A novel method for DNA and RNA target enrichment reporting size of normal and/or expanded alleles; out of acceptable margins C. L. Richard, Y. Bei, K. Patel, B. D. Galvin; of error; not offering the minimum “menu” for SCA testing. Directed Genomics, Ipswich, MA, United States. EMQN best practice guidelines were published in 2010, to help improving the quality of SCA testing. This EQA scheme shows a global progress in la- boratory SCA testing performance. Labs participating more often showed Recent developments in next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies an overall better performance. These results emphasize the importance of have made a great impact on medical research. However, in order for NGS to regular participation in EQA schemes. be fully incorporated into routine diagnostic genetic testing, target enrich- ment methods are required that are fast, simple, and cost effective. To meet P S14
.095 these requirements, we have developed a novel target capture technique Mapping the “Dark Matter” of Genome using Nanochannels - Long that offers significant advantages over traditional in-solution hybridization repeats, Complex Structural Variations and Their Biological Relevance A. Hastie1, A. Pang1, E. Lam1, T. Chan1, W. Andrews1, T. Anantharaman1, X. Zhou1, J. and multiplex PCR protocols. Reifenberg1, M. Saghbini1, H. Sadoski1, M. Austin1, P. Sheth1, Z. Dzakula1, E. Holmlin1, X. Our method utilizes rapid enrichment of target DNA or cDNA through the Xun2, T. Graves3, J. Sikela4, P. Kwok5, H. Cao1; hybridization of short probes to fragmented DNA. The probes both enable 1Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States, 2BGI, Shenzhen, China, 3washington the capture of the target DNA to beads and define the boundaries of the re- University, St Louis, MO, United States, 4University of Colorado School of Medicine, gions of interests. Off-target sequence is removed by enzymatic digestion, Denver, CO, United States, 5UCSF, San Francisco, CA, United States. followed by ligation of platform-specific adaptors to the trimmed targets and PCR amplification. To demonstrate the high specificity, sensitivity and uniformity of this me- Despite NGS advancements, portions of the human genome remain unresol- thod, we have applied it to the capture of genes commonly mutated in can- ved. During assembly, gaps and unknown structural information, the “dark cer. matter” of the genome, is challenging to detect Dwei tnho vcou rrent technologies. PM14.098 Rapid comprehensive genome mapping in NanoChannel Arrays represents GenoDENT, a targeted next-generation sequencing assay for the a complementary platform to DNA sequencing. assembly of single diagnosis and discovery of mutations in orodental disorders molecules yields unprecedented long contiguous maps, advantageous in M. K. Prasad1, V. Geoffroy1, V. Haushalter-Laugel2, M. Paschaki1, B. Gasse3, M. Switala4, highly repetitive regions and complex structures in their native form. M. Manière4,5, B. Leheup6, D. Droz7, M. Muller-Bolla8, A. Loing4, C. Tardieu9, B. Richard10, We present results showing hundreds of large structural variants and ha- S. Lopez-Cazaux11, F. Obry4,5, V. Vogt5, F. Clauss4,5, T. Davit-Beal12, A. Kaiser13, S. Odent14, I. plotype differences in genomes; 11% of 24,360 large SVs found in the 22 Bailleul-Forestier15, C. Stoetzel1, H. Dollfus1,16, A. Bloch-Zupan2,4,5; euploid human genome are unique to a specific genome while 23% of those 1Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, INSERM U1112, Fédération de Médecine SVs were common to 20/22 samples. In 1 human, we detected >700 of inser- Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire and Cellulaire-Centre Européen de tions/deletions and inversions >1 kb. Without considering SVs that overlap Recherche en Biologie et en Médecine, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique with N-base gaps in hg19, 90% of these SVs are supported by orthogonal ex- (UMR7104), Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (U964), Illkirch, perimental methods or historical evidence. A high portion of complex geno- France, 3Evolution et Développement du Squelette-EDS, UMR7138-SAE, Université mes is composed of previously unknown repeating units (>2 kb) spanning Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 4Centre de Référence des Manifestations Bucco- several tens of kilobases to megabases, the exact locations and copy num- Dentaires des Maladies Rares, Pôle de Médecine et Chirurgie Bucco-dentaires, Hôpitaux bers often remain elusive with NGS. Without knowing the genomic context Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 5Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, or amount of these repeats, it is difficult to attach biological relevance to Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 6Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Nancy, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Lorraine, Vandoeuvre-Les-Nancy, them. Using BioNano’s Irys® platform, repeat regions can be more accura- France, 7Département d’Odontologie Pédiatrique, Faculté d‘Odontologie, Université tely characterized and put into context. We found repeats and complex SV regions spanning 100-200+ kb thEatS aHreG cl i2ni0ca1ll5y a|s GsoLciAatSedG wOitWh d, iSseCasOesT oLrA ND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 295 disorders. For the first time, population scale cross-sample genome compa-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Henri Poincaré, Strasbourg, France, 8Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Service d‘Odontologie, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, Nice, France, 9Faculté d‘Odontologie, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France, 10Département d’Odontologie of exon sequences. The product workflow consists of three general steps: Pédiatrique, Faculté d’Odontologie, Lyon, France, 11Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, acoustic DNA shearing, library preparation and rapid capture exon enrich- Service d’Odontologie Pédiatrique, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France, 12Département ment step. All steps have been optimized to provide high percentage of reads d’Odontologie Pédiatrique, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, Université Paris Descartes, on target, high coverage uniformity and minimized oxidative DNA damage. Montrogue, France, 13Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 14Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Rennes, It was demonstrated that mutations can be introduced during acoustic shea- Rennes, France, 15Odontologie Pédiatrique, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, Université ring. To counter the observed oxidative damage we added EDTA to our shea- Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 16Centre de Référence pour les Affections Rares en ring buffer. Furthermore, we optimized the library preparation procedure Génétique Ophtalmologique, Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de to obtain median insert size of ~150bp, which provides optimal enrichment Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. metrics. Also, we reduced the number of PCR cycles to limit the amount of duplicates introduced during amplification, but still obtain sufficient yield to enable flexibility in choosing the amount sample input into enrichment. Oro-dental genetic disorders can manifest in both syndromic and non-syn- The TruSeq Exome Enrichment kit is designed for use with Illumina’s Co- dromic forms. Of the >5000 syndromes listed in the London Dysmorpho- ding, Expanded and Custom Exome pools selected using Illumina’s Design- logy Database, >900 have been documented to have dental manifestations. Studio. During enrichment optimization we validated a new wash buffer Therefore, the dental consultation can be an important port of entry for the that further protects the DNA from artificially induced mutations. The com- management of a number of genetic disorders. We have developed a targe- bination of EDTA in the shearing buffer and the new wash buffer allows us ted next-generation sequencing (NGS) assay, GenoDENT, for the diagnosis to decrease probability of incorrect variant calls. and discovery of mutations in 560 known and candidate genes in orodental We have enabled pre-enrichment pooling of up to 12 libraries for higher diseases. We demonstrate the utility of this assay for the molecular diagno- throughput without compromising standard enrichment metrics of >80% sis of a variety of syndromic and non-syndromic dental disorders, eg. amelo- reads on-target. Both the high enrichment efficiency and high coverage uni- genesis imperfecta, selective tooth agenesis, ectodermal dysplasias etc. In a formity makes our new TruSeq Exome Enrichment kit an ideal tool for ana- cohort of 104 patients referred to the Reference Centre for Orodental Mani- lyzing the exome or other areas of interest. festations, Strasbourg, France, we delivered a definitive molecular diagnosis P S14
.101 in 38 cases (~37%). Interestingly, in several cases a molecular diagnosis for Sample processing for the UK Biobank Genotyping Project the dental disorder led to a refinement of the patient’s phenotype and sup- S. Murphy1, T. Montoye2; plementary clinical tests in cases suggestive of syndromes, thus having a 1UK Biobank, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Trinean, Gentbrugge, Belgium. direct impact on overall patient care. GenoDENT provides superior coverage for the targeted region as compared to whole exome sequencing (Mean Co- verage: GenoDENT - 371X vs. Exome V5 - 96X; GenoDENT - 98% nucleotides UK Biobank is a health research charity which has collected biological samp- covered at >20X vs. Exome V5 - 87% nucleotides covered at >20X) at lower les and a wide range of data on over 500,000 participants aged 40-69 years cost. Therefore, we have developed the first NGS assay to target genes im- old. Data and samples are available for use by bona-fide researchers to in- plicated in orodental disorders and development. This EU-funded project vestigate aetiology of disease. A genotyping project was initiated in 2013 to (ERDF) A27 „Oro-dental manifestations of rare diseases“, is supported by perform SNP genotyping on all UK Biobank participants within 18 months. the RMT-TMO Offensive Sciences initiative, INTERREG IV Upper Rhine pro- The aim of the project - now 75% complete - is to generate high quality ge- gram www.genosmile.eu. notype data which is available for researchers to use, via UK Biobank. P S14
.099 DNA extraction and quantification is performed at UK Biobank; genoty- High efficiency targeted sequencing for accurate identification of low ping (on the custom UK Biobank Axiom® Array) is undertaken by Affyme- frequency somatic variation in cancer trix; and the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics is performing QC, D. Burgess, D. Green, K. Jefferson, H. Halvensleben, M. Brockman, R. Bannen, M. phasing and imputation on the derived data. D‘Ascenzo, K. Heilman, L. Feng, J. Voichick, T. Richmond; UK Biobank used the Trinean DropSense96 instrument for DNA quantifica- Roche NimbleGen, Inc, Madison, WI, United States. tion whilst Affymetrix used the PicoGreen method. This poster describes the sample processing workflow employed on the project and presents a com- parison between the two quantification methods used. Genotyping metrics Somatic genome variation is a key feature underlying the pronounced cellu- for a subset of the samples are also included. lar and clinical heterogeneity observed across a wide range of cancers. The PM14.102 ability to detect and accurately quantify this variation in tumors, particularly Deciphering the atypical and discovering the unexpected in exome- as it evolves over time, will be useful for predicting and monitoring the effec- sequencing using VarElect for phenotype-based variant prioritization tiveness of therapy, the emergence of pharmacoresistance and metastasis, D. Oz-Levi1, G. Stelzer1, S. Zimmerman1, N. Rappaport1, T. Olender1, Y. Anikster2,3, B. Ben and projecting a patient’s prognosis. An effective solution for this challen- Zeev4,3, M. Safran1, D. Lancet1; ging application must be sensitive, accurate, reproducible, fast, low-cost and 1The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 2Metabolic Disease Unit, Edmond automatable, with robust data analysis and reporting outputs. We developed and Lily Safra Children‘s Hospital, Sheba Medical center, Ramat Gan, Israel, 3The Sackler a targeted NGS method called HEAT-Seq (High Efficiency Amplification of Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Pediatric Neurology Unit, Targets for Sequencing) based on highly optimized, multiplexed, molecular Edmond and Lilly Safra Children‘s Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel. inversion probes. HEAT-Seq probes incorporate unique molecule identifiers (UIDs) to facilitate the tagging of PCR duplicates and accurate assessment of molecular complexity free of amplification bias. We evaluated the per- Exome-sequencing is an effective tool to identify genes underlying Mende- formance of this technology using a series of normal and cancer reference lian disorders. However, its routine clinical application is only beginning to samples. A panel of ~700 HEAT-Seq probes targeting mutational hot spots emerge. A typical analysis generates a variant short-list often containing within a set of 55 cancer genes, coupled with Illumina MiSeq sequencing, hundreds of candidates. To overcome the hurdle of connecting one variant demonstrated that >98% of the target region was covered to at least 50x to the patient’s phenotype, we constructed VarElect, a new Variant Election coverage depth, with a duplicate read rate less than 20%, and with >96% of software tool that attains phenotype-dependent variant prioritization, le- the probes exhibiting ≥20% of the mean panel coverage. Initial evaluation veraging the comprehensive information within GeneCards and MalaCards. of sensitivity for this panel demonstrated that known single nucleotide vari- Users submit phenotype/disease related keywords and a gene list. VarElect ants in the samples could be reliably detected when present at frequencies then produces a prioritized list of contextually annotated genes, scored ac- down to below 1%. We conclude that optimized HEAT-Seq panels are a pro- cording to their likelihood to be disease related, thus enabling to perform mising solution for important applications in cancer genomics. the last decisionT sTtCe3p7 in NGS analysis in a fast and objective manner. In this realm, we diagnosed trichohepatoenteric syndrome in a girl harboring a no- PM14.100 vel mutation in (Oz-Levi et al. 2014). The new Illumina TruSeq Exome Enrichment kit optimized for In Pa CsDeHco1n9d case, trio exome-sequencing of a girl with severe epileptic en- less oxidative damage, higher enrichment efficiency and higher cephalopathy and her healthy parents revealed a novel missense mutation uniformity of coverage. A. K. Czyz, L. Freeberg, S. Kuersten, D. Schlesinger, A. Tan, V. Ruotti, D. Hill, R. in on chrX, causing epilepsy and mental retardation, limited to fe- Vaidyanathan; males (EFMR). Illumina, Inc., Madison, WI, United States. This disorder is showing a rare X-linked inheritance wherein an affected girl inherits a deleterious mutation thrPoCuDgHh 1h9er unaffected father, a scenario that would not have been discovered by standard trio analysis that disre- Starting from only 100ng of gDNA the newly developed Illumina TruSeq gards such mutations on chrX. The mutation was also found in the 296 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG Exome Enrichment kit delivers comprehensive and highly uniform coverage asymptomatic grandmother suggesting somatic mosaicism of neuronal cellsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P S14
.105 TruePrime™, a novel technology for whole genome amplification from as a result of skewed X-inactivation leading to phenotypic variability. Our single cells and limited material findings emphasis the impact of combining NGS with proper bioinformatics A. Schneider1, A. Picher2, O. Wafzig1, L. Blanco3; tools on discovery and diagnostics of the atypical and unexpected. 1SYGNIS Bioscience, Heidelberg, Germany, 2SYGNIS Biotech SLU, Madrid, Spain, 3CBM, Madrid, Spain. P S14
.103 Development of a universal variant classification system and reporting scheme for routine NGS panel diagnostics for diagnostic purposes TruePrime™ is a novel technology dedicated to the amplification of whole A. Laner, A. Benet-Pagès, U. Schön, E. Holinski-Feder; genomes and DNA from various sources. TruePrime™ is based on the com- Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany. bination of the highly processive Phi29 DNA polymerase with the recently discovered primase/polymerase TthPrimPol. In this setup, TthPrimPol synthesizes the DNA primers needed for Phi29 DNA pol, which allows for NGS is now widely used in routine molecular-genetic diagnostics and many the exponential amplification of target DNA. TthPrimPol is a thermostable laboratories have access to high-quality NGS data resulting in reliable vari- member of a recently discovered family of enzymes named PrimPol. Tth- ant detection. Guidelines [1] are currently formulated to standardize and PrimPol is a monomeric enzyme (34 kDa) that displays a potent primase harmonize many aspects of NGS testing with an emphasis on technical is- activity, preferring dNTPs as substrates unlike conventional primases. This sues. Nevertheless, considerable inter- and intra-laboratory discrepancies DNA primase activity can be activated by magnesium or manganese ions, concerning the classification and reporting of „variants of uncertain clinical having a wide sequence specificity for template recognition. significance“ (VUS) can be observed. Key advantages of the TruePrime™ technology include complete absence There are several variant classification systems published. Some are restric- of primer artefacts, insensitivity to external DNA contaminations, reduced ted to specific genes or phenotypes (e.g. IARC [2]; HNPCC genes only), some amplification bias compared to methods using random synthetic primers, are restricted to specific modes of inheritance (e.g. Ambry [3]; autosomal and an exquisite reproducibility when amplifying from single cells or minu- dominant and X-linked only), and most of them require extensive additional te DNA amounts. Moreover, TruePrime™ shows superior sensitivity, is easy information (IARC, Ambry and Emory [4]; e.g. segregation data, functional to use and works perfectly well with commonly used NGS platforms such as assays, RNA data, immunohistochemical data, etc.) often unavailable at the Illumina or IonTorrent. time the report is created. We aimed to formulate a universal classification We believe that TruePrime™ will advance human genetic analyses from sin- algorithm, allowing a robust and simple variant classification suitable for gle cells or otherwise limited input material. routine diagnostic laboratories. PM14.106 Furthermore we created an algorithm for classification of variants which Standardising the approach to recruitment and phenotyping in rare possibly affect RNA splicing, based on published data [5], [6], since these diseases - experiences from the Genomics England Rare diseases type of variants_although quite common_are not covered by the abovemen- programme tioned systems. A. D. Devereau; Population frequency data from several exome sequencing studies and addi- Genomics England, London, United Kingdom. tional data (e.g. segregation analysis in families, clinical data, co-occurrence of pathogenic mutations, etc.) suggest that certain variants previously clas- sified by the abovementioned classification schemes as pathogenic (e.g. We report on our experiences of developing eligibility criteria and pheno- truncating variants, variants affecting conserved splice sites, start-lost va- typic data models for recruitment of participants into the 100,000 genomes riants) should actually be classified as VUS [7]. To address this problem, we project in England. suggest a more stringent approach, classifying variants observed de novo The Genomics England Rare Diseases Programme will recruit and whole as class 4 or 5. genome sequence (WGS) 50,000 English National Health Service (NHS Eng- PM14.104 land) patients with the aim of transforming diagnostic services and impro- The ABC of improving patient care and management in pediatric ving the understanding of rare human diseases. neurology by implementing next generation sequencing in routine While this approach is expected to improve the accuracy and speed of ge- diagnostic care netic diagnosis for patients, the reliable identification and interpretation of L. E. L. M. Vissers1, J. H. Schieving2, K. J. M. van Nimwegen3, L. Krabbenborg4, T. disease-associated genetic variants is challenging. The success of the project Kleefstra1, E. Kamsteeg1, G. van der Wilt3, H. G. Brunner1, J. P. C. Grutters3, M. A. A. P. depends on the selection of participants with a high probability of having a Willemsen2, S. van der Burg5, J. A. Veltman1; disease with an underlying monogenic cause and the collection of detailed 1Dept. of Human Genetics Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Dept. of Neurology, phenotypic data. Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Dept. for Health Evidence, Radboudumc, Therefore, the implementation of the Programme has required the develop- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Dept. of IQ Healthcare, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, ment of clear guidelines regarding patient recruitment and the collection 5Dept. of IQ Health care, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands. of phenotypic information. Given the complexity of rare diseases (>120 are currently included within the Programme) it has been necessary to provide guidance in a disease-specific manner. This has been achieved through the Implementation of novel genetic tests into routine diagnostic practice is ge- creation of disease-specific eligibility statements and phenotypic capture nerally driven by technological advances as they promise to be faster and/ models, and a process for their curation. In particular, we will describe the or lead to increased diagnostic yield. Yet, other aspects including costs-to- value of the process as a means of defining best practice in the assessment diagnosis and the patients‘ information and communication needs are of- and diagnosis of rare diseases and clarifying relationships between inde- ten not assessed prior to implementation. Here, we have addressed these pendent diseases, as evidenced by the frequent re-use of models. aspects for the implementation of whole exome sequencing (WES) in pe- We are confident that the creation of these resources will be one of the lega- diatric neurology. We collected two cohorts (50 retrospectively and 100 cies of the Genomics England programme. prospectively selected patients) presenting with complex neurological pro- blems of suspected genetic origin. Typically, finding a diagnosis in these pa- P S14
.107 tients is not easy, nor fast or cheap, and often involves burdensome procedu- Implementation of a diagnostic clinical whole exome sequencing res. In a unique parallel study design, all patients underwent both the con- service with virtual panel analysis: experience at Guy’s Genetic ventional diagnostic procedure as well as WES. This unique set-up allowed Centre, London S. M. Lillis1, Y. Patel1, E. Thomas2, M. Irving2, F. Flinter2, L. Izatt2, D. Josifova2, L. Robert2, for direct comparison of diagnostic outcomesv,s t.urn-around-times and costs C. Deshpande3, M. Holder2, A. Shaw2, F. Connell2, M. Simpson4, K. Ryan1, J. Ahn1, S. involved. Anvasl.yses of the retrospective cohort indicavtsed that WES identified Mohammed2, S. Yau1; significantly more conclusive diagnosevss. (10 3, p=0.04), using less gene- 1Viapath, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics, Guy‘s Hospital, tic tests (1 7.72, p<0.01), in a shorter time (12 40 months), and cost London, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics, Hospital de Cruces, London, United reduction for genetic testing (€4,372 €5,321). In-depth interviews with Kingdom, 4Genomic Medicine Group, KCL, London, United Kingdom. parents pointed towards the need for more information and communication of the test and its results, and for more support in their daily struggles and concerns associated with living with a child with a rare genetic condition. Whole exome sequencing (WES) is becoming a frontline molecular diagno- Preliminary analysis of our prospective cohort confirms WES being superior stic test in many Genetic Centres particularly for patients with heteroge- to sequential genetic testing with regards to diagnostic yield. Our results neous disorders. To assess the feasibility of delivering an end-to-end Clinical provide essential information for an evidence-based implementation guide- WES service we have performed a pilot study of 96 patients over 6 months line of WES in pediatric neurology. and describe our experience of the first 50 patients. Analysis using virtual Financial support: ZonMW grant E 40S -H 41G 20 2 00 -91 85 -9 1| 3G 1L , TA hS e G NeO thW erl, a S ndC sO . TLAN pD an, eU lsK r e| s W tricW ts W inv.E esS tiH gaG tio.O nsR toG only clinically relevant genes, limitin2g 9th7eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index chance of incidental findings whilst enabling panel flexibility for newly dis- ping), and the median depth 27X (90% mapping). Therefore even in samp- covered genes. les with a high percentage of bacteria, a sufficient proportion of reads are Initially, 7 virtual panels were designed jointly by scientists and clinical mapped such that variant detection should be possible. geneticists with expertise in these disorders (dysmorphology, endocrine, We find bacterial qPCR to be a robust and scalable method for screening neurology, ophthalmology, renal, skeletal & connective tissue disorders). samples for the presence of bacterial DNA. While it may not encompass the Patients were phenotyped by clinical geneticists prior to testing using the full spectrum of non-human DNA (e.g. viral, fungal), it provides a cost-effec- Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon v5 kit on a HiSeq 2500. Variants detected tive method for detecting and filtering out poor candidates for WGS. within each virtual panel were filtered and those classified as potentially Grant: Health Innovation Challenge Fund (HICF-1009-003) pathogenic were further assessed at a Multidisciplinary Team Meeting prior PM14.110 to verification by Sanger sequencing. Towards gene correction of IV S1
-110 β-thalassaemia Clear pathogenic variants were identified in 26/50 (51%) of patients con- P. Patsali1,2, C. Mussolino3, C. Stephanou1,2, M. N. Antoniou2, T. Cathomen3, C. W. Lederer1, firming their clinical diagnosis. The pathogenic variants identified spanned M. Kleanthous1; across a total of 27 different genes, include SNV, insertion/deletion and in 1Molecular Genetics of Thalassemia Department, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and 2 cases homozygous/hemizygous partial gene deletions. 12/27 (44%) of Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King‘s College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Institute for Cell and Gene Therapy, University genes currently have no testing available on UK GTN including the PODXL Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. gene, which was identified as a candidate gene for focal and segmental glo- merulosclerosis (FSGS) in 2014. These results show that a diagnostic WES service can achieve a high dia- Thalassemia is amongst the commonest single-gene disorders worldwi- gnostic yield in a clinically relevant time frame. We now plan to test another de and caused by deficient production of α- or β-globin. The disease has 150 patients. limited curative treatment options, but as a monogenic disorder of the he- PM14.108 matopoietic system is ostensibly an ideal target for gene therapy. Specific Rapid screening for monogenic diseases in severely ill newborns and β-thalassemia mutations have already been addressed by the burgeoning infants using whole genome sequencing field of genome editing, targeting mutations of minor prevalence in the West W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, C. C. van Diemen1, T. J. de Koning1,2, B. Sikkema-Raddatz1, and combining homology-mediated gene repair with the expansion of cor- J. D. H. Jongbloed11, K. M. Abbott1, J. C. Herkert1, P. B. T. Neerincx1, M. T. Meems- Veldhuis1, M. Viel1, A. J. Scheper1, K. de Lange1, J. Dijkhuis1, M. de Haan1, M. A. Swertz1, rected iPS cell clones K. A. Bergman2, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1, I. M. van Langen1, C. Wijmenga1, R. H. Our research is focused on the development of efficient gene-correction Sijmons1, R. J. Sinke1; tools (TALENs and CRISPR-Cas9) specific for the common and severe HB- 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center, Department of Genetics, Groningen, BIV S1
-110 (G>A) mutation, which in most Mediterranean and many We- Netherlands, 2University of Groningen, University Medical Center, Beatrix Children‘s stern countries has a frequency of above 20% (with 80% on the island of Hospital, Groningen, Netherlands. Cyprus) amongst β-thalassemia carriers. This mutation introduces an ab- normal splice acceptor site in intron 1 of the β-globin gene, therefore retai- ning an intronic in-frame premature stop codon in the mature, aberrantly Monogenic diseases are frequent causes of neonatal and infant morbidity spliced mRNA. and mortality. Routine molecular testing is time consuming and available In this study, we illustrate the high cleavage activity of novel IV S1
-110- for only few of these diseases. For severely ill newborns and infants quick specific genome-editing tools (TALENs and CRISPR-Cas9) in HEK293T cells molecular diagnosis is important for clinical decision-making and can pre- and in HBBIV S1
-110-transgenic murine erythroleukaemia cells. Towards vent unnecessary and sometimes invasive diagnostics. the assessment of therapeutic efficiency of our designer nucleases at the Here we describe a procedure and present the first results to analyze 2800 mRNA level, we have validated a multiplex RT-qPCR method for the absolute genes in severely ill newborns and infants by rapid whole-genome sequen- quantification of the correctly and aberrantly spliced HBB mRNAs. Finally, cing (WGS). The procedure is carried out by a multidisciplinary team of immunoblots indicate the partial correction of β-globin protein expression pediatricians, clinical geneticists, technicians, laboratory specialists, re- in treated HBBIV S1
-110-transgenic MEL cells compared to mock controls. searchers and bioinformaticians. Thus far we have included 11 patients and These preliminary data indicate HBBIV S1
-110 as a suitable target for gene analyzed them with a turnaround time of approximately one week. We have therapy genome editing and that our approach may serve as a model for the provided a diagnosis of a monogenic diseaseE fPoGr5 one patient who presented correction of many other intronic disease-causing mutations. with microcephaly, seizures and developmental delay and appeared to have P S15
.01 compound heterozygous mutations in the gene which is associated A patient with 4q13-q22 chromosomal deletion and Incontentia with Vici syndrome.We retrospectively tested 4 of the patients without dia- Pigmenti skin lesion. Diagnostic problems and therapeutic options gnosis using rapid clinical exome sequencing in trio design, focusing on the G. J. Braathen1, L. M. Tveit2, V. Haugan1, A. K. Eek1, Ø. L. Holla1, Ø. L. Busk1, K. Tveten1; same set of 2800 genes, resulting in no additional diagnoses. We additio- 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, nally tested 5 patients who died withiBnR tAhTe1 first year of life using clinical Skien, Norway, 2Department of Pediatrics, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway. exome sequencing in trio design to further test this procedure. We found Background: compound heterozygous mutations in in one child with an unexplai- ned severe seizure and rigidity disorder. Deletions of the 4q13-q22 chromosomal region have infre- P S14
.109 quently been reported. The patients may be short, microcephalic and se- Whole genome sequencing of human saliva samples within the verely retarded with multiple minor anomalies. Two of the three patients Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) study reported died before 11 months of age. D. Rajan, E. Prigmore, C. Wright, M. Hurles, „on behalf of the DDD project“; Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a genodermatosis that segregates as an X-lin- Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. ked dominant disorder and is usually lethal prenatally in males. In affected females it causes highly variable abnormalities of the skin, hair, nails, teeth, eyes, and central nervous system. The DDD exome pipeline routinely generates high quality DNA sequence EMxaotmerei asle aqnuedn Mcientgh iosd as :t echnique for sequencing all the protein-coding ge- data from saliva samples. Here we investigate the suitability of saliva DNA nes in a genome. for whole genome sequencing (WGS). Our aim was to evaluate the poten- A new born girl with some dysmorphic features de- tial for off-target mapping caused by the presence of bacterial DNA in the veloped a skin rash, cephalic hematoma and seizures. She was treated with sample. antiepileptic drugs. We whole genome sequenced 30 DDD trios (proband, mother, father) to an MReRsIu alntsd: EEG were done as well as chromosomal analysis, Array comparati- average depth of 30X on the Illumina X10 HiSeq platform. Parental DNA was ve genomic hybridization (ACGH) and exome sequencing. extracted from saliva collected in Oragene tubes (DNA Genotek), while pro- Chromosomal analysis revealed the 4q13.1-22 deletion while band DNA was extracted from either blood or saliva. ACGH defined the breakpoints. The skin lesion was compatible with IP. Bacterial qPCR was performed as described by DNA Genotek (PD-PR-065). Exome sequencing was done to look for variants in the remaining allele of The assay utilises “universal” bacterial primers targeting a well-conserved the deleted genes at 4q looking for variants of importance for her phenotype region of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene. The median percentage of bacteria aCnodn cthluussi ohnop; efully give possible therapeutic options. The exome results are was 5.5% in adult saliva, 27.7% in child saliva and 0.02% in blood. We com- pending. pared the percentage bacteria per sample to the percentage of reads map- 4q13-q22 deletion and Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) have never ping on-target by WGS. We discovered a high level of correlation between been described in the same patient and it is the first large 4q13-q22 deletion t2h9es8e two parameters. The minimum deptEhS pHerG sa m20pl1e 5w a|s G 10LXA ( S35
G%O mWap, -SCO caT seL wA iN thD id, e U ntK ifi e| dW brW eaW kp. oE inS tsH .G.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PM15.04 Using genetic and gene expression methods to identify biological To our knowledge this is the first case with a defined chromosomal deletion predictors of response to cognitive behavioural therapy for anxiety where exome sequencing was done to investigate the remaining allele of the disorders deleted genes looking for possible therapeutic options. J. R. I. Coleman1, G. Breen1,2, T. C. Eley1; PM15.02 1King’s College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, MRC Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP) Centre, London, United Kingdom, Swedegene: genome-wide association study of drug-induced 2National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, South London and agranulocytosis Maudsley National Health Service Trust, London, United Kingdom. M. Wadelius1, N. Eriksson1, Q. Y. Yue2, P. K. Magnusson3, E. Eliasson3, H. Melhus1, P. Hallberg1; 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Medical Products Agency, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Anxiety disorders are the most prevalent group of psychiatric disorders, and represent a major global burden both to the individual and to the sta- te. Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is commonly used to treat anxiety, Introduction: Agranulocytosis is a rare, serious condition with a case-fa- and is effective in children and adults. However, a substantial proportion tality rate of 7-10%. It can be caused by a multitude of drugs, and genetic of those receiving CBT fail to remit following treatment. The expense and factors are believed to play a role in the pathogenesis. Swedegene (www. distress of ineffective treatment is good justification for seeking predictors swedegene.se) is collecting patients with drug-induced agranulocytosis on of response. a nation-wide basis. We aim to discover genetic and clinical factors that pre- Genome-wide methodologies present a hypothesis-neutral strategy for ex- dispose to drug-induced agranulocytosis to enable personalised treatment ploring the potential of genetic variants as predictors. We have performed in the future. GWAS in a global study of predictors of response to CBT in children with Materials and Methods: A genome-wide association study was performed on anxiety disorders (the Genes for Treatment study, N=980). Although no va- 94 adjudicated Swedish agranulocytosis cases and 4891 unrelated controls riants reach conventional levels of genome-wide significance for response from TwinGene. Cases were genotyped with Illumina HumanOmni2.5-8 immediately post-treatment, or at a six-month follow-up, seven loci are sug- and controls with Illumina HumanOmniExpress-12v1 at Uppsala Universi- gestive of significance. ty SciLife SEQ&SNP Technology Platform. Analyses were performed using The results of the GWAS suggest that individual genetic variants are unlikely PLINK and HLA imputations using SN P2
HLA. After quality control, the to predict useful amounts of variance in response. However, polygenic ap- merged genotype set contained ~600k SNPs. The significance level was set proaches may be valuable. We have used an independent cohort of adults at p<8.39x10-08. receiving CBT for anxiety disorders (N=200), to perform polygenic risk Results: The main causative drugs were sulfasalazine, antithyroid agents scoring to predict response. and antibiotics. Statistical analyses identified significant associations in the Genetic variants do not exist in isolation. Using our adult cohort, we have HLA region on chromosome 6. After HLA genotype imputation, the strongest undertaken a combined analysis of genome-wide genetic and gene expres- signal was HLA-C*02:02 (OR [95% CI] = 3.37 [2.25, 4.92], p=8.75x10-10). sion data. In addition to identifying cis-eQTLs for differentially-expressed The HLA locus remained significant when utilising 233 controls matched for transcripts, we have created modules of genes using literature-driven and disease and/or treatment. data-driven modalities, and derived principal components from these to test Conclusions: We found an association between drug-induced agranulocy- whether genetic variants can be identified that drive the expression of rele- tosis and the HLA locus. We are proceeding with additional cases and con- vant pathways. trols obtained through collaboration with Spain, France and Germany to P S15
.05 strengthen the finding. Collaborators with replication cohorts are invited. Non-invasive genomic profiling of bladder cancer using urinary cfDNA Grants: Swedish Research Council, Heart-Lung Foundation, Society of Me- F. S. Togneri1, R. T. Bryan2, D. G. Ward2, J. M. Foster3, A. J. Devall2, P. Wojtowicz1, S. Alyas1, dicine and Medical Products Agency, Uppsala University Clinical Research F. Ramos Vasques1, A. Oumie4, N. D. James5, K. K. Cheng6, M. P. Zeegers7, N. Deshmukh2, B. Support (ALF) and Uppsala County Council Research Fund. O‘Sullivan8, P. Taniere8, K. G. Spink4, D. J. McMullan1, M. Griffiths1; 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Bladder P S15
.03 Cancer Prognosis Programme, School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, CY P2
D6 enzymatic deficiency and weight gain in patient treated with Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Affymetrix UK Ltd., Wooburn Green, United Kingdom, atypical antipsychotics 4Affymetrix UK Ltd, Wooburn Green, United Kingdom, 5Clinical Trials Unit, University N. Andreescu, S. Farcas, L. Nussbaum, V. Dumitrascu, R. Gradinaru, M. Puiu; of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom, 6School of Population and Health Sciences, University of Medicine &Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania. University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 7Department of Complex Genetics, NUTRIM School for Nutrition, Toxicology and Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 8Department of Histopathology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom. Introduction. Several atypical antipsychotic drugs are associated with me- tabolic side effects including weight gain, body mass index (BMI)/blood In- sulin level increase. The half-life of atypical antipsychotics varies depending Urothelial bladder cancer (UBC) is the 7th most common cancer in Western on the activity of the CY P2
D6 enzyme, but there is lack of data regarding the societies with a rising global incidence. UBCs are highly heterogeneous in impact of CY P2
D6 isoenzyme polymorphisms on the long-term effects, in their clinical characteristics, and this is mirrored in the often highly com- paediatric patients using atypical antipsychotics. plex genomic profiles observed in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) Aim. In this study we aimed to underline the role of individual genetic va- tumour material. Identification of such complex genomics and detection of riation, in correlation with the CY P2
D6 genotype, for weight gain in patients important specific genomic biomarkers in a non-invasive fashion would be treated with atypical antipsychotics. highly advantageous for diagnosis, treatment selection and monitoring of Material and methods. The study lot included 80 patients, aged between 9 disease. and 20 years, median age being 15.75. The sex percentage in the sample was Here we show genomic data from >100 FFPE UBC tumour samples profiled 55% girls / 45% boys. All the patients were receiving one of the choosen using the OncoScan® FFPE assay kit. The samples were obtained from a well atypical antipsychotic-Risperidone, Aripiprazole or Olanzapine. We evalu- characterised UBC patient cohort with >3 years clinical follow-up. Analysis ated the BMI and the blood insulin variations for these patients in different of this data reveals novel predictive and prognostic genomic biomarkers in time points during the treatment with atypical antipsychotics. CY P2
D6*3, UBC. Additionally we show data from concurrent, parallel genomic analyses *4, *5, *41 allele identification was performed. of 23 UBC patients using DNA extracted from urine cell pellets; cell-free DNA Results. Based on the CY P2
D6 genotype, three activity groups were identi- (cfDNA) from urine supernatants, and DNA from FFPE tumour samples. This fied and compared. The CY P2
D6 genotype in children and adolescents with data illustrates the potential of DNA extracted from the urine for non-inva- schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, proved to be a good predictor for the sive genomic profiling of UBC and for the identification of predictive and risk of gaining weight, metabolic ratio and the increase of insulin blood le- prognostic biomarkers. Interestingly our data shows increased sensitivity vel. of cfDNA (85%) over DNA from urinary cell pellets (55%) for accurate non- Conclusion. The significant correlations between the CY P2
D6 polymorphis- invasive genomic profiling of UBC. ms and the weight gain/BMI and/or blood Insulin increase, as major side effects induced by antipsychotics proved the fact that the pharmacogenetic PM15.06 screening is needed in the future clinical practice, allowing for individuali- Alteration in the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in Czech breast cancer zed treatment. patients B. Kubova1, J. Simova1,2, M. Uvirova1,2, H. Tomaskova2, Z. Bravencova3, S. Pitronova1, A. Hopenstokova1, I. Zebrakova1, R. Ondruššek1, J. Dvorackova1,2,4; ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 299ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Laboratory of molecular genetics and pathology, CGB laboratory Inc., Ostrava, Czech PM15.08 Republic, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 3Institute Clinical validation of a NGS based in vitro diagnostic (CE-IVD) kit for of Oncology, Faculty Hospital in Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Pathology, targeted detection of actionable gene rearrangements in lung cancer Faculty Hospital in Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. specimens J. Schageman; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austin, TX, United States. Introduction: Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of cancer death in females worldwide. Deregulation of PI3K/ AKT signaling pathway has been associated with cancer development and In recent years, advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies progression and is promising target for breast cancer therapy. have enabled faster and cheaper methods for uncovering the genetic basis Materials and Methods: DNA samples of breast tumour tissues were tested of disease. For cancer, NGS based screening for known tumor subtypes can for presence of selected somatic mutations in PIK3CA and AKT1 genes. Ana- inform diagnosis and allow the clinician to tailor a specific therapy based on lysis was performed by primer extension method or real-time PCR. Statuses testing outcome. Here we present the validation of one such NGS based kit of HER2 gene and ER/PR expression were evaluated by FISH and/or immu- approved for CE-IVD use to screen for specific chromosomal translocations nohistochemistry methods using FFPE tissue sections. Correlation between in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples by targeting specific break- PIK3CA mutation status and clinicopathological characteristics were esti- points in known fusion transcripts. mated with the chi-squared test (95% CI). The kit tested (Oncomine™ Solid Tumor Fusion Transcript Kit) included a Results: Somatic mutations in PIK3CA gene were detected in 26,1% single primer pool containing amplicon designs to simultaneously screen (63/241). Mutations in the exons 9 and 20 were detected in 36,5% and for over 75 specific rearrangements involving the receptor tyrosine kinase 57,1%, respectively. Coexistence of mutations (exon 9 and 20) was found in (RTK) genes ALK, RET and RO S1
 as well as NTRK1. The panel was compatib- 6,4%. Mutation p. E17
K in AKT1 gene was detected in 1,7% (2/115). PIK3CA le with formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded lung tumor samples and achieved mutations were signicantly associated with low histopathological grade and high-sensitivity down to 10 ng of RNA input. In addition, amplicon assays ER positive status. designed at the 5’ and 3’ ends the RTK genes provide non-specific evidence Conclusions: Frequency of PIK3CA and AKT1 gene mutations correlates that a translocation exists in a sample by comparing expression imbalance with published data. Marked differences in distribution of PIK3CA mutati- between the two ends. ons were found among breast cancer subtypes (ER+ , HER2- and triple ne- Validation testing was carried out at three external clinical laboratories gative). Alterations involving the PI3K/AKT pathway may have distinct pro- (CLIA, CAP, INAB). In addition to positive and negative control samples, gnostic and predictive impacts on patients. Novel combination of treatment each site contributed FFPE lung tumor samples for which ALK fusion sta- strategies, involving PI3K pathway inhibitors, has a potential to improve tus was known prior to NGS library preparation carried out using the Ion clinical benefit of breast cancer patients. AmpliSeq™ workflow. For site-specific samples samples (n=144), high con- Supported by TE - The Technology Agency programme “Competence Cen- cordance, sensitivity and specificity were measured at 97.2%, 90.5% and tres”, T E02000058
, Center of competence for molecular diagnostics and 98.4% respectively. personalized medicine. P S15
.09 P S15
.07 Effect of CY P2
D6 genotypes on the pharmacodynamics of carvedilol in Association of Twist transcription factor expression and healthy korean volunteers chemosensitivity of primary breast tumor samples D. Seo, H. Jeong, F. Jiang, Y. Kim, Y. Hyun, J. Lee, I. Hwang, H. Na, J. Kim; S. Ulusal1, M. H. Muslumanoğlu2, M. Muslumanoğlu3, S. Başaran4, Z. Z. Çalay5, A. National Institute of Food & Drug Safety Evaluation, cheongju-si, Korea, Republic of. Aydıner6, U. Vogt7, T. Çakır8, S. Artan9; 1Trakya University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Edirne, Turkey, 2Yıldız Technical University Faculty of Science and Literature Department of Depending on the variation of genes related with the drug metabolism, a Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Bezmialem University Faculty of Medicine Department of General Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul University Faculty drug may express no effect or cause severe adverse effect. For this reason, of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Istanbul University MFDS, Korean national drug regulatory authority put great effort to harness Cerrahpaşa Medical Faculty Department of Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Istanbul pharmacogenomics using genomic information from Korean population. University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Oncology, Istanbul, Turkey, As a part of this effort, the pharmacodynamic study of carvedilol, a impor- 7European Laboratory Assocation ELA, Ibbenbueren, Germany, 8Gebze Technical tant beta blocker widely used in Korea, has been conducted to find out the University Faculty of Engineering Department of Bioengineering, Istanbul, Turkey, effect of CY P2
D6 genotype on pharmacodynamic endpoints of carvedilol. 9Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, After recruiting CY P2
D6 genotype-specific subjects(EM, IM1 and IM2), a cli- Eskişehir, Turkey. nical study was conducted to check pharmacodynamic endpoints. Heart rate, systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure were de- creased by medication of carvedilol in all genotype groups. Isoproterenol Doxorubicin and Docetaxel are anticancer agents which commonly used as sensitivity test (IST) also showed increased CD25 after the medication in all a part of breast cancer chemotherapy regimens. TWIST1 (OMIM 601622) genotype groups like other vital signs. gene encodes Twist transcription factor which is a basic-helix-loop-helix The mean CD25 value showed no statistically significant change when com- protein and regulates the mesoderm formation and differantiation during pared with basal level. But the mean CD25 value between different genotype development. In vitro studies using cancer cell lines sugessted that Twist groups (EM vs IM) revealed some statistic singificance (p <0.05). transcription factor might have a role in resistance to chemotherapeutic The pharmacodynamic study of carvedilol in Korean populations showed agents in some cancer types including breast cancer. We aimed to investi- that CY P2
D6 genotype caused difference in CD25 value of IST but not in ma- gate the association of twist gene expression levels and theraphy response jor clinical endopoint such as heart rate, systolic blood pressure and diasto- to doxorubicin and docetaxel in primary breast tumor samples. 26 tumor lic blood pressure. These results inferred that carvedilol does not cause any samples were collected from the patients. Chemosensitivity of primary bre- important clinical difference depending on the CY P2
D6 genotype. In conclu- ast tumor samples to doxorubicin and docetaxel have been determined by sion, these results suggested that dose adjustment does not requried for the ATP based tumor chemosensitivity assay. Total RNA was extracted by using carvedilol treatment in Korean population. RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) from tumor samples. Twist gene expression of tu- Acknowledgement : This research was supported by a grant (14181MFD S532
) mor samples were determined by Real Time Reverse Transcriptase PCR by from Ministry of Food And Drug Safety in 2014. using beta actin gene expression as reference. (Real Time Ready Gen Expres- sion Assay, Roche) 9 out of 26 tumors were nonresponsive to doxorubicine PM15.10 whereas only 3 out of 26 tumors were nonrespnsive to docetaxel. Doxoru- Development and analytical validation of an ADME gene Ion AmpliSeq bicine non-responsive breast tumors had higher TWIST1 gene expression sequencing assay covering 143 SNP and CNV Pharmacogenetics levels compared to doxorubicine responsive breast tumors (p=0.041) The- targets. re were no association of twist gene expression with docetaxel resistance T. Chen, M. Manivannan, S. Chen, T. Hartshorne, A. Mongan, C. Ainli, G. Liu, M. Andersen, F. Hyland; (p=0.3). In conclusion our results support that twist transcription factor Thermo Fisher, South San Francisco, CA, United States. might be a candidate biomarker to predict chemoresponse of breast tumors to doxorbicine. Further studies with larger sampe groups are needed to cla- rify the role of Twist gene expression in resistance to chemotheraphy. Cytochrome  P450
 (CYP) enzymes metabolize about 75% of drugs, with UGT enzymes metabolizing about another 15%. Variations in gene sequence or copy number may result in an inactive, defective, unstable, mis-spliced, low expressed, or absent enzyme, an increase in enzyme activity, or an altered 300 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOafTfinLiAtyN foDr ,s uUbKst r|a WtesW. ADWM.EE SgeHnGe g.OenRotGypes can predict whether an indi-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index vidual is a poor or rapid metabolizer, facilitating dose optimization to avoid lue predicting an adequate response to therapy. adverse or insufficient drug reaction. Allelic discrimination for SNPs in UGT1A1, UGT1A3, CY P1
A1, CY P1
A2, We have designed a pharmacogenomics (PGx) Ion Ampliseq panel to detect CY P2
D6, MR P2
 and BCR P1
 genes is performed by real-time PCR. Drug plas- 143 variants in 37 ADME genes including copy number detection in CY P2
D6, ma concentrations are measured by an HPLC-UV validated method. AUC covering the common, actionable, interpretable and reimbursable targets in over 24 hours values are determined by the mixed log-linear rule, using Ki- genes encoding drug metabolism enzymes and associated transport prote- netica software. ins, including CY P2
D6 and CY P3
A4. The panel contains 134 amplicons in an Sixty patients meet the inclusion criteria. UGT1A1 CT/TT (rs887829), UG- ultrahigh-multiplex PCR in a single pool, followed by Ion Torrent™ semicon- T1A3 TT (rs1983023) and AG/GG (rs3806596) SNPs show an influence ductor sequencing; the assay is compatible with FFPE samples as well as on the half-life (p=0.029, p=0.043 and p=0.043 respectively); UGT1A3 GG non-FFPE samples, requiring as little as 10 ng of input DNA. This panel can (rs3806596) and CT/TT (rs1983023) SNPs significantly influenced AUC, be customized, allowing additional targets to be added. volume of distribution, maximum serum concentration and time of maxi- Analytic validity of the panel was established by sequencing 90 annotated mum concentration. According to Chirnomas effectiveness definition, a cell lines from Coriell, and comparing the Ion AmpliSeq genotypes to gold deferasirox AUC cut-off value of 360 ng/mL/h was identified (ROC-curve, standard TaqMan OpenArray genotypes. Concordance with TaqMan geno- p=0.012). UGT1A1 rs887829 (p=0.008) and ABCG2 rs13120400 (p=0.007) types was > 99.8%, genotype reproducibility was > 99.9%, and the genotype SNPs are factors able to predict concentration above 360 ng/mL/h in the no-call rate was < 0.15%. logistic regression analysis. These data contribute to a better management These results demonstrate an ADME genotype assay with high accuracy, of deferasirox treated patients, suggesting the usefulness of a genetic-based which can be used to explore potential pharmacogenomic relationships, in- dose personalization. cluding the relationship between copy number and genotype of DME genes P S15
.13 on drug tolerability and clinical outcomes. Harnessing publicly available genetic data to prioritize therapeutic P S15
.11 targets based on adverse risk profile High frequency and founder effect of the CY P3
A4*20 loss-of-function V. Tragante do O1, F. W. Asselbergs1,2, D. I. Swerdlow2, T. M. Palmer3, B. J. Keating4,5, M. V. allele in the Spanish population classifies CY P3
A4 as a polymorphic Holmes5,6; 1Divisie Hart & Longen, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Institute of Cardiovascular enzyme Science, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Division of Health M. Apellaniz-Ruiz1, L. Inglada-Pérez1,2, M. G. Naranjo3, L. Sánchez-Barroso1, V. Sciences, Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom, Mancikova1, M. Currás-Freixes1, A. A. de Cubas1, I. Comino-Méndez1, S. Triki4, A. Rebai4, 4Center for Applied Genomics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, M. Rasool5, G. Moya6, M. Grazina7, G. Opocher8, A. Cascón1,2, P. Taboada-Echalar9, M. United States, 5Department of Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Ingelman-Sundberg10, Á. Carracedo5,11, M. Robledo1,2, A. Llerena3, C. Rodríguez-Antona1; Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 6Clinical Trials Services Unit, Nuffield 1Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Department of Population Health, Richard Doll Building, University of Oxford, Oxford, Madrid, Spain, 2ISCIII Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), United Kingdom. Madrid, Spain, 3CICAB Clinical Research Centre at Extremadura University Hospital and Medical School, Badajoz, Spain, 4Research Group on Molecular and Cellular Screening Processes, Laboratory of Microorganisms and Biomolecules, Centre of Biotechnology of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 5Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) reduction effectively reduces risk of coronary University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 6Pontificia Universidad Católica Argentina and Genos artery disease (CAD). However, statins (the most widely prescribed LDL-C laboratory, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 7Faculty of Medicine CNC-Centre for Neuroscience lowering drugs) increase type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk. Using public domain & Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 8Familial Cancer Clinic and data from genome-wide association studies, we conducted genetic epide- Oncoendocrinology, Veneto Institute of Oncology, Padova, Italy, 9Programa de Genética miological investigations to identify druggable loci that alter LDL-C and CAD Humana, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de Medicina Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile, 10Section of Pharmacogenetics, Department of Physiology risk without causing dysglycemia. A one standard deviation (SD) increase in and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 11Fundación Pública de LDLC caused an increased odds ratio (OR) for CAD of 1.63 (95% confidence Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS. Grupo de Medicina Xenómica, CIBERER, IDIS, Santiago de interval [CI]: 1.55, 1.71) and LDL-C/CAD-associated SNPs showed consistent Compostela, Spain. effect directions (binomial P=4.93x10-21). A 1-SD higher LDL-cholesterol was protective of T2D (OR 0.86; 95%CI: 0.81, 0.91), however LDL-C/T2D- ssociated SNPs didn’t show consistent ef- Cytochrome  P450
 3A4 (CY P3
A4) is a key drug metabolizing enzyme. Loss- fect directions (binomial P=0.08). PCSK9, APOB, LPA, CETP, PLG and ALDH2 CofY-Pfu3nAc4t*io2n0 variants have been reported as rare events, and the only de- were identified as druggable loci that alter LDL-cholesterol and CAD risk wi- moCnYsPtr3aAti4o*n2 0o f a CY P3
A4C YpPro3tAe4in* 2l0a cking functional activity is caused by thout causing dysglycemia, indicating drugs targeting these gene products allele. Here we characterized the world distribution and origin may reduce CAD risk without increasing T2D risk. of mutatioCnY.  P3
A was determined in more than 4000 P S15
.15 iCnYdPi3viAd4u*a2l0s representing different populations and haplotype analysis Genomic risk prediction of obesity and related disorders: body mass was performed using CYpPo3lAym4*o2r0phisms and microsatellite markers. index vs. waist-to-hip ratio allele was present in 1.2% of the Spanish population (up to 3.8% M. L. Bermingham1, R. Pong-Wong1, M. Perez-Alcantara1, A. Spiliopoulou1, C. Hayward1, in specific regions), and all carriers had a commoCnY hPa3pAl4otype. I. Rudan1, H. Campbell1, A. F. Wright1, J. F. Wilson1, F. Agakov2, P. Navarro1, C. S. Haley1; This is compatible with a Spanish founder effect and clasCsYifPie3sA  C4
Y*2 P03
A4 as a 1College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, University of Edinburgh., Edinburgh, polymorphic enzyme. This constitutes the first description of a loss- United Kingdom, 2Pharmatics Limited, Edinburgh Bioquarter, Edinburgh, United of-functiCoYnP v3aAr4iant with high frequency in a population. results Kingdom. together with the key role of CY P3
A4 in drug metabolismCY, sPu3pAp4o*r2t0 screening for rare functional alleles among subjects with adverse drug events in certain populations. Currently, CwYPe 3aAr4e* 2ge0notyping allele in Introduction: Waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) has been suggested to be a better Spanish individuals treated with various CY P3
A4-substrates to better cha- predictor of obesity and related disorders than body mass index (BMI). Ho- racterize the pharmacokinetics of carriers. wever, it is unclear which of the two are most appropriate for genomic risk stratification. The aim of the study was to test whether predicted genomic PM15.12 values (PGV) for WHR are better than those of BMI in classifying outcomes Role of pharmacogenetic on deferasirox AUC and efficacy S. Allegra1, J. Cusato1, S. De Francia2, D. Massano3, A. Piga3, A. D‘Avolio1; for obesity and related disorders within a Croatian (N=2,159) and into a 1University Of Turin-Department Of Medical Science, Turin, Italy, 2University Of Turin- UK (N=805) population sample. Materials and Methods: PGV were estima- Department Of Biological And Clinical Sciences, Turin, Italy, 3University Of Turin- ted in the genomic best linear unbiased prediction (GBLUP) and Bayes C Department Of Paediatrics, Turin, Italy. framework. The discriminative power of BMI and WHR PGV in classifying outcomes for general (BMI ≥30 kg/m2) and abdominal (WHR >1.0 in men and >0.85 in women) obesity and related disorders (chronic obstructive Deferasirox is a once-daily oral administered iron chelator and its phar- pulmonary disease, hypertension, peripheral vascular disease and metabo- macokinetic significantly correlates with therapy outcome. This drug is lic syndrome) was assessed by the area under the receiver operating cha- metabolized in liver by UDP-glucuronyltransferase (UGT) 1A1 and 1A3, by racteristic curves (AUC) and bootstrap-derived confidence limits. Results: cytochrome- P450
 (CYP) 1A1, 1A2 and 2D6 enzymes, and it is eliminated via Performance of GBLUP prediction was similar to that of Bayes C in both biliary-enteric circulation through multidrug resistance protein 2 (MR P2
). populations; suggesting that the genetic architecture of BMI and WHR ap- We perform a retrospective study of deferasirox pharmacokinetic (AUC, proximates the infinitesimal model. BMI classified genomic risk of obesity area under the curve) according to single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and related disorders as well as or better than WHR. All AUC reported in this in genes involved in this drug metabolism and elimination, in a cohort of study ranged from 0.51 to 0.81; indicating low to moderate discriminatory ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, UK | WWW.ESHG.ORG 301 adult β-thalassemic patients. Moreover, we define a plasma AUC cut-off va- value. Conclusions: Inclusion of PGV in combination with the traditional riskABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Genotype No. patients No. events HR 95%CI p-value factors (age, age2 and sex) in most cases augmented the AUC; indicating that genomic information can be used to supplement traditional risk factors in XPD codominant prediction models. AA 30 8 Reference 0.008 AC 36 16 2.07 0.88-4.86 0.094 PM15.16 CC 12 8 3.80 1.41-10.26 XPD dominant 0.031 BRAF mutations in Slovak cohort of patients with gastrointestinal AA 30 8 Reference stromal tumors AC+CC 48 24 2.43 1.09-5.44 Z. Lasabová1, K. Gemzová1,2, V. Buzalková2, G. Minárik3, A. Štanclová2, P. Szépe2, L. Plank2; XPD recessive 0.028 1Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Molecular CC 12 8 Reference AA+AC 66 24 0.40 0.18-0.91 0.007 Biology, Martin, Slovakia, 2Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of XPD additive Medicine, Department of Pathological Anatomy, Martin, Slovakia, 3Comenius University AA/AC/CC 78 32 1.95 1.19-3.18 in Bratislava, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Bratislava, ERC C1
 codominant 0.029 Slovakia. TT 31 8 Reference TC 34 18 2.65 1.11-6.36 CC 13 6 2.36 0.79-7.02 0.124 ERC C1
 dominant 0.028 Introduction: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are highly resistant TT 31 8 Reference TC+CC 47 24 2.57 1.11-5.98 to conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy, however sensitive against ERC C1
 recessive tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitors. Approximately 10 to 15% of GISTs are lak- CC 13 6 Reference TT+TC 65 26 0.77 0.31-1.88 0.566 king the mutations in KIT and PDGFRA and are referred as wildtype GISTs ERC C1
 additive (wtGISTs) which are less sensitive to TK inhibitors. One of the reasons can TT/TC/CC 78 32 1.56 0.97-2.51 0.064 be the activated RAS-BRAF signaling. PM15.18 Material and methods: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue Resequencing of GWAS loci identifies new candidate genes on sections were collected as a part of the National GIST Registry from 705 pa- chromosome 5 for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia tients with the diagnosis of GIST in years 2004-2014 and were genetically A. Witten1, J. Bolbrinker2, A. Barysenka1, F. Rühle1, U. Nowak-Göttl3, E. Garbe4, R. Kreutz2, characterized for KIT and PDGFRA mutations by dideoxysequencing - 150 M. Stoll1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany, 2Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and patients’ samples corresponded to wtGISTs and further 100 patients with Toxicology and Pharmacovigilance-Center FAKOS, Berlin, Germany, 3Institute of Clinical mutation in KIT or PDGFRA were included in the study. For the detection of Chemistry, Kiel, Germany, 4Department of Clinical Epidemiology, BIPS - Institute for BRAF V600E, dideoxysequencing and allele-specific PCR were used. Epidemiology and Prevention Research, Berlin, Germany. Results: The proportion of the BRAF-positive patients (V600E and K601N) in the total cohort of patients with GIST analyzed for the mutational status in KIT and PDGFRA genes is 1.42% (10/705), in the wtGIST subset 6.67% Treatment with unfractionated (UFH) or low molecular weight heparins (10/150). Only in 5 cases, the BRAF mutation could be confirmed by di- (LMWH) represents a mainstay for the prevention and treatment of throm- deoxysequencing showing the low amount of BRAF positive cells in the tu- botic disorders. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is a potentially mor mass. Two patients of hundred previously identified as mutated in KIT deleterious complication of heparin use. To explore whether a genetic pre- or PDGFRA have harbored the BRAF mutation too. disposition contributes to HIT, we performed a pharmacovigilance study en- Conclusion: BRAF mutations may affect the response to imatinib of wtGIST rolling patients with suspected HIT and corresponding control patients. Sub- and KIT imatinib-sensitive mutations representing new mechanisms of sequently, we selected 182 cases and 182 controls for the pharmacogenetic primary resistance to targeted therapy in GIST. The BRAF testing in GIST substudy consisting of a genome-wide association study (96 cases) with re- should be taken into account. plication in additional 86 cases, followed by imputing and overall fine map- Co-supported by EU sources ITMS 26110230071 ping analysis. One single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, rs1433265) from P S15
.17 initially 16 identified SNPs was successfully replicated (P=1.5x10-4) and re- Association of polymorphisms in DNA repair genes with disease-free mained the most strongly associated SNP (P=3.5x10-5) after imputing geno- survival in patients diagnosed with head and neck cancer types on chromosome 5. Fine mapping revealed two significantly associated R. Seijas-Tamayo1,2, J. Fernández-Mateos3,1,2, E. del Barco-Morillo1,2, C. Cieza-Borrella3,2, haplotypes with an odds ratio of 0.63 (95% CI, 0.46-0.88; P=5.6x10-3) and R. González-Sarmiento3,2,4, J. Cruz-Hernández1,4,2; 2.41 (95% CI, 1.64-3.55; P=4.9x10-6).In order to find variants not detected 1Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute in our GWAS but contributing to the association signals, we applied a NGS- of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL). University Hospital of Salamanca -USAL- based targeted resequencing approach in a subgroup of 73 HIT patients and CSIC, Salamanca, Spain, 3Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Institute of molecular and cellular biology of cancer 23 controls for the regions with the 16 most strongly HIT-associated SNPs. A (IBMCC). University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain. C-alpha test was applied to perform a gene-based test for the impact of rare variants in our targeted region and we were able to detect two associated HIT-candidate genes, IC E1
 (P = 0.010) and ADAMT S16
 (P= 0.005) contai- Introduction: Head and neck cancer represents one of the most common ning 17 and 23 rare variants, respectively. These results provide a basis for cancers in the developed world. The main risk factors (tobacco, alcohol, further studies that aim to characterize the genetic predisposition to HIT. etc.) can cause DNA damage as well as cancer treatments. Therefore, poly- P S15
.19 morphisms in DNA repair genes may alter the ability to repair DNA damage IFN L4
 polymorphism is a predictor of hepatitis C treatment efficiency increasing the susceptibility to develop the disease and modifying the re- in Ukrainian patients sponse to treatment and survival. In this work we focused on the inflXuReCnCc1e A. Kucherenko1, V. Pampukha1, K. Romanchuk2, S. Chernushyn1, I. Bobrova3, L. Moroz2, of these poAlyPmEXo1r phisms on theX dPiDsease free surEvRivCaCl1. XRC C3
 L. Livshits1; Methods: We studied 173 patients with head and neck cancer. 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Department of Human Genomics, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2National Pirogov Memorial rs25487, rs1130409, rs13181, rs11615 and Medical University, Department of Infectious Diseases with Epidemiology Course, rs861539 polymorphisms were genotyped. Statistical analysis was perfor- Vinnytsya, Ukraine, 3Ukrainian Treatment and Diagnostic Center, Kyiv, Ukraine. med according to the different models of inheritance (codominant, domi- naXnPt,D receEssRiCveC,1 additive). We stratified the analysis by stages at diagnosis. Results: We found an increased risk of relapse in patients with minor alleles The discovery of host genotype impact in combination with virus genotype of or (Table 1) in 78 patients with localized disease (stages I and on chronic hepatitis C (CHC) treatment outcome was a milestone in the de- II). Regarding patients with advanced disease (XsPtaDges III and IV), we stEuRdCiCed1 velopment of antiviral therapy strategies. The aim of this study was to ex- a total of 95 patients and we did not find any statistically significant results. amine association between IFN L4
 (interferon-lambda 4) gene ss469415590 Conclusions: We found an association of (rs13181) and and treatment efficiency in group of Ukrainian PEG-interferon-treated CHC (rs11615) variants with disease free survival depending on the stage at patients. diagnosis. These results support the importance of the nucleotide excision Study group was 92 unrelated HCV genotype 1 mono-infected CHC patients. repair pathway in these tumors. Viral load was detected at weeks 4, 12, 24, 48 and 72. The patients were Grants distributed into: case group - 29 patients with late or absent viralogical re- and fellowships: PI11/00519, PI10/00219, PI13/01741, GRS 630/A/11, sponse, and control group - 63 patients with sustained viralogical response AP/2009-1073, CM10/0006, EDU/1064/2009, EDU/1084/2012. (SVR). Study material - genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood. Ge- Table 1. Genotypic distribution in patients with local disease. notyping for IFN L4
 gene ss469415590 was performed using amplification- refractory mutation system PCR. Statistical analysis was performed using 302 ESHG 2015 | GLASGOW, SCOGeTnLeAPoNp Dan,d U OKp e|n WEpWi stWati.sEtiScaHl Gpa.cOkaRgGes. A P-value of less than 0.05 wasABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index regarded as significant. trols. These results suggest that some SNPs across the human genome have Frequency of ss469415590 ΔG carriers was significantly higher in patients dual effect and may predispose sprint/power athletes to increased risk of without SVR (86.2%) comparing to group with SVR (50.8%). Obtained re- developing metabolic morbidities compared with the general population. sults imply ss469415590 TT/TT genotype positive association with SVR, PM15.22 whereas ss469415590 ΔG/ΔG genotype is associated with poor virolo- NRAS genotyping in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer gical response. This association fits into additive model of inheritance, G. Gordo1, J. Tenorio1, P. Arias1, L. Ostios2, M. Muñoz3, H. Tong3, R. Lubomirov3, J. ss469415590 ΔG/ΔG homozygotes have 3,6-times higher risk of poor re- Miranda2, A. M. Borobia3, J. Feliu2, A. J. Carcas-Sansuán3, N. Rodríguez2, P. Lapunzina1; sponse to PEG-interferon/ribavirin combination therapy (OR=3,62; CI95%: 1Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics-INGEMM. Hospital Universitario La Paz, 1.12-11.67). Madrid, Spain, 2Medical Oncology Service. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3Clinical Farmacology Service. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Our study presents the evidence of ss469415590 being informative phar- macogenetic marker of CHC treatment efficiency in Ukrainian patients. This work was supported by the NAS of Ukraine [# 0112U002108]; and the President of Ukraine’s grant for talented youth [# 72/43]. Introduction: Metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is the second cause of dead in the world. Development of monoclonal antibodies against Epider- PM15.20 mal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR), Cetuximab and Panitumumab, has in- The plant cytokine kinetin as a potential therapeutic agent to correct creased the survival of patients with mCRC. The efficiency of these drugs CFTR splicing defects depends on the use of genetic biomarkers such as KRAS and, recently, NRAS. L. Straniero1,2, G. Soldà3,2, V. Rimoldi2, R. Asselta3,2, S. Duga3,2; 1University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, It has been found that patients with mutations in these genes have poorer Italy, 3Humanitas University, Rozzano, Italy. survival rate when they are treated with anti-EGFR therapy. The objective of this study is to perform a mutational analysis of NRAS in patients with mCRC, and correlate the findings with the response to anti-EGFR drugs. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common recessive disorder caused by >1900 muta- Material and Methods: We performed mutational analysis by pyrosequen- tions in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. About cing to detect the commonest changes in codons 12, 13, 59, 61, 117 and 146 13% of CFTR mutations are classified as splicing defects. Besides these se- of NRAS, in tumours samples of 493 patients with mCRC treated with anti- vere mutations, other variations are known to modulate the correct CFTR EGFR drugs, and whose KRAS mutational status has been studied previous- splicing, the most important being the polymorphic TG(9-13)T(5,7,9) locus, ly. We also compared the percentage of mutations detected in the different which influences exon-10 inclusion and has been associated with mono- codons of KRAS and NRAS with previous works. symptomatic forms of CF. Recent advances in CF treatment have demonstra- Results: We have found 15 mutations in NRAS in 15 tumour samples. Four- ted the efficacy of drugs targeting specific classes of molecular defects, such teen did not have mutations in KRAS. Codon 61 is the most frequently muta- as potentiators (Ivacaftor, already FDA approved and suitable for about 4% ted. The percentages obtained in our study are in agreement with previous of patients) and correctors (Vx-661 and Vx-809 for F508del), opening a new studies. era of personalized treatment. However, no such therapies are available for Conclusion: This study demonstrates that a percentage of KRAS-negative patients carrying splicing mutations. colorectal tumours has mutations in NRAS, and that this status would be For this reason, we are exploring the possibility to improve exon-10 inclusi- related to the response of anti-EGFR therapy. on in CFTR mRNA using the plant cytokinin kinetin, an FDA-approved drug P S15
.23 previously found to correct aberrant splicing in familial dysautonomia and The most frequent monogenic disorders in Russian population neurofibromatosis. identified by microarray “Ethnogene” We tested the effect of kinetin on CFTR splicing in Caco-2 cells, which ex- M. M. Litvinova1,2, T. A. Roslova2, M. S. Balashova1,2, F. A. Konovalov2, K. G. Shevchenko2, press high level of CFTR transcript and present a significant amount of exon- E. A. Pomerantseva2, K. A. Konduktorov2, Y. V. Kovaleva2, A. A. Isaev2; 1Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Human 10 skipping. Stem Cells Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation. By competitive fluorescent RT-PCR and digital RT-PCR we demonstrated that different concentrations of kinetin determine a dose-response rescue of wild-type CFTR splicing. These results reveal a remarkable impact on Introduction: It is known that every person has 5-7 pathogenic mutations splicing fidelity by this small molecule, which may represent a promising in genome (mostly in genes of autosomal-recessive disorders). In such ca- therapeutic agent for CF and particularly atypical forms. Moreover, it will ses carrier status does not lead to clinical manifestation however, if both be interesting to test whether kinetin treatment can also partially rescue parents have mutations in the same gene, the risk for offspring to develop severe splicing mutations in CFTR. disease is 25%. In our clinical practice we prophylactically detect carrier P S15
.21 status in spouses using genetic screening “Ethnogene” (APEX microarray Do metabolic disease genes SNPs affect elite sports performance? technology). This screening program can be also used for diagnostic purpo- V. Ginevičienė1, A. Jakaitienė1, L. Tubelis2, A. Utkus1; se. It is especially important at pre-clinical stage of disorder when there is a 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Lithuanian University chance to prevent disease complications. of Educational Sciences, Vilnius, Lithuania. Materials and Methods: Microarray “Ethnogene” allows detecting the mu- tations leading to 60 monogenic disorders most frequent in Russia. In this study we prophylactically analyzed 336 persons including adults and child- Introduction: Complex metabolic diseases and physical activity levels are clo- ren of different age. sely-related. PPAR family and members of the PGC-1 are key regulators of en- Results: 8.6% of 336 genotyped patients were diagnosed to have monogenic ergy homeostasis and metabolism. We studied the association of PPARG C1
A disease (table 1). 70% of examined persons appeared to have 1-3 mutations rs8192678, PPARG C1
B rs7732671, PPARA rs4253778, PPARD rs2016520, in carrier status. PPARG rs1801282 which have been shown to impact metabolic dysfunction Conclusion: Application of microarray screening “Ethnogene” helps to reve- and elite athletic status. We hypothesised the metabolic risk genotype/allele al carrier status among couples planning pregnancy and to determine risk to be underrepresented in elite athletes (n=130, sprint/power and enduran- for offspring to be affected by certain monogenic disorders. Detection of mo- ce orientated) compared to controls (n=175, healthy unrelated non-athlete nogenic diseases in yet asymptomatic patients allows preventing a number Lithuanians). Methods: Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP. Results: of complications by prescribing pathogenic therapy. The genotypes’ distribution was in HWE within all groups. For three SNPs the genotype frequencies were significantly different between the total athlete and control group (PPARG C1
