L2  What‘s New? Highlight Session P
L2 .1 P
L1  Opening Plenary Session Genomic landscape of balanced cytogenetic abnormalities in subjects with multiple congenital anomalies P
L1 .1 C. Redin1,2,3, H. Brand1,2,3, R. L. Collins1, C. H. Hanscom1, V. Pillalamarri1, T. Kammin4, RAS genes and Human Disease: From Rasopathies to Cancer E. Mitchell5, J. C. Hodge5,6, S. Schilit4, B. B. Curall4, S. Pereira4, C. Seabra1, M. Stone1, W. M. Barbacid; Lawless1, D. Lucente1, C. Antolik1, R. Hochstenbach7, I. Renkens7, E. Brilstra7, S. Vergult8, Molecular Oncology Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas B. Menten8, S. Janssens8, B. Callewaert8, A. D’heedene8, M. D’hooghe9, F. Roelens10, J. (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. van de Kamp11, A. Nieuwint11, P. J. Poddighe11, C. van Ravenswaaij-Arts12, P. Rump12, T. RAS van Essen12, J. Freixo13, D. Deszo14, E. C. Liao15,16,17, N. de Leew18, H. G. Brunner19,20, W. Kloosterman7, E. C. Thorland5, C. C. Morton3,4,21, J. F. Gusella1,2,3, M. E. Talkowski1,2,3; genes have attracted a significant deal of attention in biomedical re- 1Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachussetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, search due to central their role in mediating mitogenic signaling and to their United States, 2Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Program in Medical and Population Genetics, oncogenic activation in at least one third of all human cancers including Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Department of some of the most frequent and malignant tumor types such as colorectal Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, carcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Boston, MA, United States, 5Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo More recently, Ras genes have also been implicated in developmental disor- Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 6Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, ders including Costello and Noonan syndromes. In spite of the wealth of in- Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 7Department of Medical formation accumulated over the last 30+ years on these genes we still have Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, rather scant information regarding how their misregulationR aAfSfects human Netherlands, 8Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, De Pintelaan 185, Ghent, Belgium, 9Algemeen Ziekenhuis Sint-Jan, Brugge, Belgium, 10Algemeen Ziekenhuis Delta, health. More importantly, as of today, there are no efficacious inhibitors to Roeselare, Belgium, 11Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, De treat those diseases caused by mutations or alterations in genes. Our Boelelaan 1117, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 12University of Groningen, University Medical laboratory has been interested in the development of genetically modified Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 13Medical Genetics (GEM) animal models that faithfully reproduce the natural history of these Service, Central Lisbon Hospital Centre, Lisbon, Portugal, 14Department of Human diseases and in the identification and subsequent validation of targets with Genetics, National Institute of Health Dr Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 15Center poteG1n2tVial therapeutic value.I 1I4 Vwill describe our GEM models for Costello (H- for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical Ras ) and Noonan (K-Ras ) syndromes along with oRuars efforts to validate School, Boston, MA, United States, 16Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Bost potential therapeutic strategies to correct their developmental defects. I will also describe our new generation of GEM models for K- mutant lung and pancreatic tumors and review the genetic approacRhaess that we are utilizing Balanced chromosomal abnormalities (BCAs) represent a unique class of to validate the therapeutic value of each of the kinases involved in the MAPK genomic variation that involves large rearrangement of the chromosomes. signaling cascade, the key pathway involved in K- oncogenic signaling. To date their detection has been limited to cytogenetic resolution as most We hope that these RsAtuSdies will serve to guide the design of future clinical first-tier genetic screening methods are blind to their presence. We defined trails to treat people suffering from Rasopathy syndromes as well as cancer the genomic landscape of de novo BCAs associated with human congenial patients carrying K- mutant tumors. P
L1 .2 anomalies in 235 subjects using whole-genome sequencing. We observed The Spanish Experience of Retinal Dystrophies that 22% of all BCAs harbored additional cryptic complexity, ranging from C. Ayuso1,2; three breakpoints to chromothripsis events involving up to 57 breakpoints. 1Madrid, Spain, 2Fundacion Jimenez Diaz Univeristy Hospital (IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid, Compared to random expectations, BCAs were more likely to occur between Spain. loci in close physical proximity in the nucleus, and their breakpoints were significantly enriched for evolutionarily constrained and embryonically ex- pressed genes. From our convergent genomic interpretation using orthogo- The retinal dystrophies (RDs) are degenerative diseases involving RPE and/ nal datasets, we predict that the congenital anomaly phenotype was likely or photoreceptors of the retina and currently without treatment options attributable to the BCA in at least 30% of subjects. An additional 4% of BCAs for the patients. RD may be syndromic or non-syndromic and can affect pe- disrupted long-range regulatory regions such as topologically associating ripheral, central retina or both. They affect about 1:4,000 individuals and domains (TADs) resulting in position effects on genes associated with spe- there are more than 270 known causative genes-loci. Mendelian (autosomal cific clinical manifestations that were compatible with the proband sequen- recessive, autosomal dominant or X-linked inheritance) and non-mendelian ced here. Remarkably, we observed a cluster of six independent transloca- inheritance have been described. tions that disrupted a TAD and consequently altered MEF2C expression, This great clinical and genetic heterogeneity and the need for a genetic dia- mimicking the 5q14.3 microdeletion syndrome. These results suggest that gnosis to help and refine clinical management and guide genetic counseling de novo BCAs represent a highly penetrant class of genomic variation asso- are a real challenge. ciated with congenital anomalies, and that nucleotide resolution offers in- Two decades ago, we started the study of RD in Spain (EsREtNet: Antiñolo, sights into phenotypic prediction from direct gene disruption and alteration Baiget, Carballo, Millan, Valverde & Ayuso). The modes of inherCitlainn cGee nfreet-. of long-range regulatory domains that are likely to be a significant source of 1q9u9e5ncy were established (15% SyndrRoHmOic;C aRnBd1 1, U2%SH d2oAm, eitnca)nt, 39% reces- causal variation in human disease. sive, 4% Xlinked and 41% sporadic cases and 4% unclassified P
L2 .2 ) and the first mutated genes ( , affecting Spa- Formation and content of novel chromatin domains (neo-TADs) nish population were identified, using gene mutation screening approaches determine pathogenesis of genomic duplications (SSCP, dHPLC) or Sanger sequencing. Blanco-Kelly et M. Franke1, D. M. Ibrahim1, G. Andrey1, W. Schwarzer2, V. Heinrich1, R. Schöpflin1, R. Farl;o Mmo 2l 0V0is7 2, 0w1e2 u )s ed array-based primer extenRsiioveni r(oA PetE aXl) I tOeVcSh n2o0l1o2gy, with Kempfer3, I. Jerković1, W. Chan4, M. Spielmann4, B. Timmermann1, L. Wittler1, I. Kurth5, P. Cambiaso6, O. Zuffardi7, G. Houge8, L. Lambie9, F. Brancati10, A. Pombo3, M. Vingron1, F. a diagnostic yield from 14% (for autosomal dominant RD; Spitz2, S. Mundlos1,4; to 54% (for Stargardt cases; ) in RD 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2European Molecular patients. Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Berlin Institute for Medical Systems In 2011 new genomic analysis technologies, including next generation se- Biology, Max Delbrück Centre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 4Institute for quencing (NGS) and chromosome microarrays were implemented. In total Medical and Human Genetics, Charité, Berlin, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, 36% of the ≈3000 RD families were characterized and we identified new University Hospital, Jena, Germany, 6Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital-IRCCS, Rome, mutations and genes, and clinical associations. Italy, 7Department of Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy, 8Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine; Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 9Division Molecular characterization allowed us to refine clinical diagnosis, to con- of Human Genetics, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa, firm or change thUeS Hp2aAtt,e NrnR 2oEf 3in, hReHrOit,a XnLcReS, ,i mCHpMro voirn gA BcCliAn4ical management 10Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, Gabriele d’Annunzio of RD cases and families. Moreover, we have established very well chRarPaEc6te5-, University, Chieti, Italy. PriDzeEdA ,cohorts of patients, useful for natural history of disease studies. Additionally, mutated cases for among others can be offered to be included in current clinical trials. Mammalian genomes are organized in distinctly folded chromatin modu- At present, a more accurate and efficient algorithms for molecular diagno- les, called topologically associated domains (TADs) that are separated from sis are available for RD patients to improve their clinical care, however we each other by boundary regions. TADs subdivide the genome into discrete need still to improve the diagnosis rate and fill the gap to obtain effective chromatin domains that direct the contacts enhancers can establish with therapies. their target genes. How copy number variations interfere with TAD structu- In 4ternational collaborative efforts for research E o Sn H m Gol e 2cu 0l 1ar 6, e |p i Bd Aem Rio Clo Eg Li- ONrAe ,a nSdP hAoIwN t h| iWs mWigWht .cEonStHribGu.tOe tRo Ghuman disease, is not well understood. cal and therapeutic aspects are needed to achieve these goalsABSTRACTS PLENARY LECTURES Back to index SOX9 Here, we analyze partially overlapping duplications at the locus, which ter a negative diagnostic work-up, a proband clinical WES was perfor- are associated with a limb malformation (Cooks syndrome), sex reversal or med and pinpointed a de novo acceptor-splice variant of MS
L3  was no abnormality in humans. By analyzing patient cells and corresponding (NM_001193270.1:c.1345+1G>T). To assess the relevance of this finding mouse models with chromosome conformation capture assays, we show we asked international collaborators for patients with truncating variants that large duplications spanning a TAD boundary result in the formatioSOn Xo9f of MS
L3 . Seven unrelated individuals from France, UK, the Netherlands, Ger- a novel chromatin domain, or neo-TAD. The formation of ctihsis neo-TAD ex- many, USA were identified with de novo single-nucleotide variants (4/7), plains the divergent phenotypes of the overlapping duplications at the whole-gene de novo deletions (2/7) or chromosomic inversion causing a locus. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the duplicated -regulatory in- fusion transcript of MS
L3  and GAB3 genes (1/7). Clinical findings of patients formation is functiocniaslly isolated and does not influence genes outside the with point mutation are very similar but less recognizable in patients with neo-TAD. Instead, the pathogenicity of duplications depends on the combi- chromosomal anomalies. This include speech and walk delay, intellectual nation of genes and -regulatory information that are contained within the disability, neonatal hypotonia, facial dysmorphism, abnormal limbs, abdo- neo-TAD. Taken together, our results show that duplications including TAD minal symptoms and cutaneous anomalies. The MS
L3  gene, located on the boundary regions can result in the formation of novel chromatin domains X chromosome, encodes a subunit of a transcriptional regulator complex that are functionally and spatially separated from their genomic neighbors. responsible of lysine 16 of histone H4 acetylation (H4K16ac). Functional Moreover, our findings provide a framework for interpreting the pathogenic studies revealed a decreasing of H4K16ac mark and complex assembly de- effect of genomic duplications, frequently detected in patients with congeni- fects. In conclusion, we delineate a new syndrome of the epigenetic machi- tal malformations, intellectual disability or cancer. nery characterized by neurodevelopmental delay and multiple congenital P
L2 .3 anomalies. Mutations in ACTRT1 and its transcribed non-coding elements lead P
L2 .5 to aberrant activation of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in inherited Haplotype-assisted noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of common and sporadic basal cell carcinomas monogenic diseases using massively parallel sequencing of plasma E. Bal1,2, Z. Belaid-Choucair1,2, H. Kayserili3, M. Naville4, M. Madrange1,2, C. Gordon1,2, cell-free DNA clinical investigators, G. Gyapay5, S. Fraitag6, H. Roest Crollius4, A. Munnich1,2, P. Vabres7, Y. Gao1, F. Chen1,2, Y. Yuan3, Y. Wang3, S. Lu1, H. Jiang1, X. Xu1; A. Smahi1,2; 1BGI, Shenzhen, China, 2Section of Molecular Disease Biology, Department of Veterinary 1INSERM U1163,Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, Disease Biology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2Université Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 3Medical Genetics Department, İstanbul Copenhagen, Denmark, 3BGI Clinical Laboratories –Tianjin, Tianjin, China. Medical Faculty, İstanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Institut de Biologie de l’ENS, UMR8197, INSERM U1024, Paris, France, 5Genoscope (CEA), CNRS UMR 8030, Université d‘Evry, Evry, France, 6Service d‘anatomie pathologique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 7Service de dermatologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Hôpital du Introduction Bocage, Dijon, France. Since 2012, haplotype-assisted noninvasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) has been developed in our laboratory, and validated in a number of monogenic diseases using clinical samples from trio families. The purpose of this study Basal cell carcinoma (BCCs) is the most common human cancer, resulting was to summarize the performance of this method in different monogenic from aberrant activation of Hedgehog signaling pathway. While most cases diseases. are sporadic, some forms are inherited, as in Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndro- Method and Material me (BDCS), an X-linked dominant cancer-prone genodermatosis. Studying a Customized panels were designed to capture the coding region and flanking series of 6 BDCS families, we found mutations in the ACTRT1 gene, encoding area of disease-associated genes. Genomic DNA from each trio family (fa- the Arp-T1 protein, in 2/6 BDCS families, and absent expression of Arp-T1 ther, pregnant mother, and proband child) and plasma cell-free DNA from in BDCS tumors and most of sporadic BCCs. High-throughput sequencing each pregnant mother was targeted-sequenced using the customized pa- revealed germline mutations in non-coding sequences, belong to a new class nels. Fetal fraction was calculated with the differently homozygous SNPs in of enhancers (eRNA), surrounding ACTRT1 in the remaining families. Muta- both parents. Parental and fetal haplotype were deduced based on genetic tions reduced expression of the specific eRNAs and their enhancer capacity. information from the trio family and Hidden Markov Model. Amniocentesis Using Crispr-Cas9 technology, we demonstrated that induced mutations in was performed to confirm NIPD results. these enhancers significantly decreased the expression of Arp-T1 protein. Result When stably expressed in MDA-MB231 breast cancer and U2OS osteosar- 97 trio families covering 12 monogenic diseases have been tested before coma cell lines, wild type ACTRT1 reduced cell proliferation and migration. receiving prenatal diagnosis (Table). The mutations consisted of point mu- Consistently, xenografts of ACTRT1-MDA-MB231 and ACTRT1-U2OS cells in tations and copy number variants. Mean gestational age of pregnant women nude mice demonstrated that ACTRT1 normally inhibits tumor growth. In- while receiving NIPD was 18 weeks. Fetal fraction was between 2.8% to deed, transcriptomic analyses revealed that ACTRT1 could modulate the ex- 22.6%, with the mean of 9.1%. 60 pregnancies were identified as disease- pression of genes involved in regulation of cell cycle progression, cell death affected. So far amniotic fluid was tested for prenatal diagnosis in 70 preg- and survival or cell migration. Finally, Arp-T1 acts as a tumor suppressor via nancies, all consistent to NIPD results. its direct binding to Hedgehog signaling target genes, thus inhibiting their Conclusion expression. Haplotype-assisted NIPD showed high accuracy in predicting the existence Our study identifies a novel mechanism accounting for hereditary and spo- of fetal monogenic disease, and can be used in different diseases and muta- radic BCCs, and suggests that ACTRT1 may be potential therapeutic targets tion types. in oncology. Haplotype-assisted NIPD of monogenic diseases This work was supported by the Association pour la Recherche contre le Cancer and Société Française de Dermatologie. Disease Gene famTr ii lo ie s Amn foio r t ci oc nfl fu irid m a av tia oi nlable P
L2 .4 Phenylketonuria (PKU) PAH 13 12 De novo mutations MS
L3  gene cause a new recognizable syndrome Methylmalonic acidemia MMACHC 19 6 A. Bruel1,2, I. Aktas3, M. Basilicala3, I. Van der Burgt4, J. Morton4, S. El Chehadeh-Djebbar5, Alpha thalassemia HBA1,HBA2 1 0 A. Hoischen6, C. Gilissen6, L. Vissers6, R. Pfundt6, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, H. Brunner6, J. Beta thalassemia HBB 2 2 Rivière1,2, L. Faivre1,2, A. Akthar3, J. Thevenon1,2; Hemophilia (A, B) F9 2 1 U1É nq iu veip re si E téA d4 e2 2 B7 o1 u rG gA oD g, n U e/n Civ He Urs Dité ij od ne , B Do iju or ng , o Fg rn ae n, c D e,i j 3o Mn a, F x r Pa ln ac ne c, k 2 F InH sU ti- tT uR tA e N ofS LAD, C hyo pn eg re pn li ata sil a adrenal cortical CAH 12 12 Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Spinal muscular atrophy SMN1 14 13 Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5Centre de génétique, Duchenne muscular dystrophy DMD 24 19 CHRU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 6Radboud University Medical Center, Congenital hearing impairment GJB2 7 2 Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. 6 Sy-P ny thru av seo y Dlt ee ft icra ieh ny cd yropterin PTS 1 1 P tyo ply ecystic kidney disease, infantile PKHD1 1 1 Maple syrup urine disease BCKDHA 1 1 Whole-exome sequencing (WES) has proven to be useful for the identifica- Total 97 70 tion of the molecular basis of heterogeneous conditions such as intellectual disability with congenital anomalies. A large number of results remain non- conclusive, especially when facing ultra-rare conditions that limit genotype- phenotype correlations. International data-sharing catalyzes the identifica- tion of additional cases and allows the delineation of new syndromes. We report on a female patient with developmental delay, moderate in- ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 5 tellectual disability, facial dysmorphism and severe constipation. Af-ABSTRACTS PLENARY LECTURES Back to index P
L2 .6 Parent-of-origin specific signatures of de novo mutations J. M. Goldmann1, W. S. W. Wong2, M. Pinelli3, T. Farrah4, D. Bodian2, A. B. Stittrich4, G. sumer testing evolve? Glusman4, L. E. L. M. Vissers5, A. Hoischen5, J. C. Roach4, J. G. Vockley2,6, J. A. Veltman1,7, B. 6) How can huge databases be made useful for interpretation of genomic D. Solomon2,6,8, C. Gilissen5, J. E. Niederhuber2,9; sequence and relationships between health and genotype? 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Inova Translational P
L3 .2 Medicine Institute, Inova Health Systems, Falls Church, VA, United States, 3Telethon Our visions of genomic medicine: a dialog Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 4Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, M. C. King1, J. L. King2,3,4; WA, United States, 5Department of Human Genetics, Donders Centre for Neuroscience, 1University of Washington, Department of Medicine & Genome Science, Seattle, WA, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Department of Pediatrics, United States, 2Strasbourg University, IGBMC, Department of Translational Medicine Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, United States, & Neurogenetics, Illkirch, France, 3CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 4IGMA Genet 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Diagnostic Lab; Collège de France, Paris, France. Netherlands, 8Department of Pediatrics, Inova Children’s Hospital, Inova Health System, Falls Church, VA, United States, 9Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. The invitation from ESHG to both of us to present our thoughts on the cur- rent state and the future of genomic medicine bore the risk of having two monologues with undue overlaps or contradictions and too little time for Introduction: De novo mutations (DNMs) originating in gametogenesis are open discussion. We have chosen instead an alternate form of dual presen- an important source of genetic variation and can cause human disease. tation of some issues in the development of genomic medicine. We will each Here, we investigate the properties of DNM on paternal and maternal alleles speak brief on these questions, in turn, and intermingle our comments with in order to understand the underlying mechanisms. questions and comments from session chairs and from the audience. The Methods: We applied whole-genome sequencing to a cohort of 816 parent- topics we propose to address (not necessarily in the final order) are: offspring trios, yielding in 35,793 autosomal single-nucleotide DNMs. Ha- 1) The application of genomics to prediction of risk, to non-invasive diagno- plotype assembly could resolve the parental origin of 7,216 DNMs. We com- sis, and to individualized treatment; given our experience, we think of these pare parental age effects, genomic regions and spectra of paternal versus issues in the context of cancer; maternal DNMs. 2) Whole genome sequencing for everyone? why? when? For adults, new- Results: Our results show that the number of DNMs in offspring increases borns, fetuses, preconception? not only with paternal age (0.9 DNMs/year), but also with maternal age 3) Application of genomic medicine to rare diseases; in particular how to (0.24 DNMs/year). The genome regions with highest enrichment for ma- determine pathogenicity and causality given whole genome sequence (e.g. ternally derived DNMs are the known fragile sites FRA8B and FRA16D. We problems of missense variants, non-coding variants, hypomorphic vari- identify parent-of-origin-specific mutation signatures that become more ants). How best to obtain precise and useful natural history for more than pronounced with increased parental age, with transitions in A.G context 5000 different monogenic diseases? For how many families may specific being the most biased mutations. Moreover, we find DNMs that are spatially treatments rather than symptomatic medical care be offered? Meanwhile, clustered to have a unique mutational signature with no significant diffe- what is the place of prevention through prenatal diagnosis? How can one rences between parental alleles, suggesting a different mutational mecha- address the risk of uncontrolled eugenism, which already occurs in the con- nism. text of sex selection in some countries? Conclusions: We find that the different biology of male and female gameto- 4) Development of precision medicine for common diseases (beyond cancer, genesis gives rise to distinct mutational patterns. These patterns are valuab- above). What is the current medical value of genotyping and sequencing? le to understand physiology and pathology of the human germ line. How will the value be increased? What is the role of various omics? Of know- ledge of gene-environment interactions? How much can we expect new me- P
L3  My vision on genomic medicine dications based on knowledge of causal genes? 5) How can services be made available to everyone? How may direct to con- P
L3 .1 sumer testing evolve? Our visions of genomic medicine: a dialog 6) How can huge databases be made useful for interpretation of genomic J. L. Mandel1,2,3, M. C. King4; sequence and relationships between health and genotype? 1Strasbourg University, IGBMC, Department of Translational Medicine & Neurogenetics, Illkirch, France, 2CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3IGMA Genet Diagnostic Lab; Collège de France, Paris, France, 4University of Washington, Department of Medicine & P
L4  Mendel Lecture Genome Science, Seattle, WA, United States. P
L4 .1 Mendel Lecture: Epigenetics and Rett syndrome The invitation from ESHG to both of us to present our thoughts on the cur- A. Bird; rent state and the future of genomic medicine bore the risk of having two Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. monologues with undue overlaps or contradictions and too little time for open discussion. We have chosen instead an alternate form of dual presen- tation of some issues in the development of genomic medicine. We will each The word epigenetics excites great interest within biology and beyond, speak brief on these questions, in turn, and intermingle our comments with despite uncertainty about its definition. At one level it concerns the signi- questions and comments from session chairs and from the audience. The ficance of the plethora of chemical marks on chromosomes that modulate topics we propose to address (not necessarily in the final order) are: gene activity (collectively known as the “epigenome”). Prominent among 1) The application of genomics to prediction of risk, to non-invasive diagno- these marks is DNA methylation - a modification that is directly applied to sis, and to individualized treatment; given our experience, we think of these DNA and affects its interaction with proteins. Several clinical disorders invol- issues in the context of cancer; ve genes that interpret or lay down the epigenome. For example, the autism 2) Whole genome sequencing for everyone? why? when? For adults, new- spectrum disorders Rett syndrome and MEC
P2 -duplication syndrome are borns, fetuses, preconception? caused by mutations in the gene for the protein MeC
P2 . The MeC
P2  protein 3) Application of genomic medicine to rare diseases; in particular how to binds to sites on DNA that are chemically altered by DNA methylation and determine pathogenicity and causality given whole genome sequence (e.g. appears to interpret this “epigenetic” mark to affect gene expression. Clues problems of missense variants, non-coding variants, hypomorphic vari- to the function of MeC
P2  are provided by the spectrum of mutations causing ants). How best to obtain precise and useful natural history for more than Rett syndrome and the biochemical and genetic analyses. Recent evidence 5000 different monogenic diseases? For how many families may specific derived from animal and cellular models suggests that the primary function treatments rather than symptomatic medical care be offered? Meanwhile, of this protein is to restrain transcription in a DNA methylation-dependent what is the place of prevention through prenatal diagnosis? How can one manner. Interestingly, the resulting defects are reversible in model systems address the risk of uncontrolled eugenism, which already occurs in the con- suggesting that the disorder may be curable. Current research addressing text of sex selection in some countries? these aspects of MeC
P2  biology will be presented. 4) Development of precision medicine for common diseases (beyond cancer, above). What is the current medical value of genotyping and sequencing? How will the value be increased? What is the role of various omics? Of know- ledge of gene-environment interactions? How much can we expect new me- dications based on knowledge of causal genes? 5) 6 How can services be made available to everyEoSneH? GHo 2w0 m1a6y d| iBreActR toC cEoLn-ONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index CONCURRENT SYMPOSIA School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Analytical and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 7Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. 
S01  ESHG/EMPAG SYMPOSIUM: The future lies in uncertainty Schizophrenia is a heritable brain illness with unknown pathogenic mecha- nisms. Schizophrenia‘s strongest genetic association at a population level 
S01 .1 involves variation in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) locus, but Tolerating uncertainty in the clinic - the impact of new genetic the genes and molecular mechanisms accounting for this have been chal- technologies lenging to identify. Here we show that this association arises in part from A. Lucassen; many structurally diverse alleles of the complement component 4 (
C4 ) ge- University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, United Kingdom. nes. We found that these alleles generated widely varying levels of 
C4 A and 
C4 B expression in the brain, with each common 
C4  allele associating with schizophrenia in proportion to its tendency to generate greater expression Despite the rhetoric of precision medicine afforded through advances in ge- of 
C4 A. Human 
C4  protein localized to neuronal synapses, dendrites, axons, netic technologies, and a common perception that genetic tests offer clear and cell bodies. In mice, 
C4  mediated synapse elimination during postnatal cut predictions, the reality in 2016 remains far from this in all but a few di- development. These results implicate excessive complement activity in the stinct areas. Whole genome approaches do provide novel diagnoses or pre- development of schizophrenia and may help explain the reduced numbers dictions in some families where all previous targeted genetic investigations of synapses in the brains of individuals with schizophrenia. drew a blank, but for many others the clinical significance of findings from 
S02 .2 new genetic technologies is unknown until much more evidence -be that RNA splicing is a primary link between genetic variation and disease bioinformatic or clinical follow up- can be gathered. One of the problems for Y. Gilad; practice is that the inversion of the phenotype to genotype approach pre- Chicago, IL, United States. viously used in genetic clinics, to predicting phenotypes from geno[me]ty- pes is a quantitative qualitative as well as quantitative leap. This has impor- tant implications for how we seek consent for, for example, whole genome Noncoding variants play a central role in the genetics of complex traits, but sequencing. We can no longer expect patients to be able to have considered we still lack a full understanding of the molecular pathways through which all the possible outcomes from such testing in any detail as part of a consent they act. We quantified the contribution of cis-acting genetic effects at all process. Indeed as genomic medicine becomes a mainstream activity, dis- major stages of gene regulation from chromatin to proteins, in Yoruba lym- covery of genomic predispositions to disease that lies outside the clinical phoblastoid cell lines (LCLs). About ~65% of eQTLs (expression Quantitati- experience of the consenter will become more common place. Is ‘fully in- ve Trait Loci) have primary effects on chromatin, while the remaining eQTLs formed’ consent a desirable goal in genomic testing? Or should we instead are enriched in transcribed regions. Using a novel method, we also detec- begin to focus on mechanisms that engender greater trust in the venture in ted 2,893 splicing QTLs, most of which have little or no effect on gene-level question? Using the example of ‘incidental’ findings from genomic testing, expression. These splicing QTLs are major contributors to complex traits, I will explore whether we are placing too much emphasis on consent as a roughly on a par with variants that affect gene expression levels. Our study gateway to testing and whether this, perhaps paradoxically, carries the risk provides a comprehensive view of the mechanisms linking genetic variation of accusations of paternalism. Consent to genomic testing with a full under- to variation in human gene regulation. standing of all the possible outcomes and consequences will not be possible so we will need to consider how best to obtain broad or generic consent to 
S02 .3 testing that is realistic about the uncertainties and builds in mechanisms for Modeling genetic and non-genetic sources of variation in single cells revised interpretation in the wake of new knowledge. O. Stegle; Cambridge, United Kingdom. 
S01 .2 Personal genomic testing: How individuals understand and respond to genetic risk information Recent technological advances have enabled assaying single-cell transcrip- S. Roberts; tomes and DNA methylation on a genome-wide scale. In this talk, I will University of Michigan School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. discuss some of the computational challenges when analyzing these data from genetics perspective. I will revisit statistical approaches for decompo- sing the sources of variation between cells using on linear mixed models, This presentation will discuss how individuals appraise and respond to ge- which is similar to approaches used for estimating heritability in genetics. netic susceptibility testing for a range of medical conditions. Topics to be These methods enable decomposing single-cell heterogeneity into biologi- addressed include public understanding and attitudes regarding testing cal divers, confounding factors and genetic effects. One of the main challen- options, challenges in communicating test results, psychological effects of ges when linking genetic variation with single-cell states is that most studies genetic risk information, and health behavior changes following testing. profiles cells from very few distinct genetic backgrounds. We show that re- The author will draw upon his research program that includes the following cent advances in learning and inference can help to overcome these limita- projects: 1) the REVEAL (Risk Evaluation and Education for Alzheimer‘s tions, such that genetic effects on single-cell variability can be elucidated Disease) Study, a series of randomized clinical trials examining the impact using cells from a single genome. of different methods of disclosing APOE genotype status to individuals at risk for Alzheimer‘s disease, and 2) the Impact of Personal Genomics (PGen) 
S03  Hereditary cancer Study, a longitudinal survey of over 1800 consumers of direct-to-consumer genetic testing services. Implications of research findings for practice and policy will be discussed. 
S03 .1 
S02  Understanding functional effects of Hereditary colorectal cancer: Recent advances and future perspectives genomic variants L. Valle; Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain. 
S02 .1 Using single-cell RNA-seq to understand effects of rare variants Family history of cancer is one of the strongest predictors of colorectal A. Sekar1,2, A. R. Bialas3,4, H. de Rivera1,5, A. Davis1,5, T. R. Hammond3, N. Kamitaki1,5, cancer (CRC) risk, being this risk higher with increasing number of affec- K. Tooley1,5, J. Presumey4, M. Baum1,3, V. Van Doren1, G. Genovese1,5, S. A. Rose5, R. E. ted relatives and when CRC occurs at young age. Crude estimates indicate Handsaker1,5, Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, M. that 20-25% of all CRC patients have at least one relative affected with the J. Daly5,6, M. C. Carroll4, B. Stevens5,3, S. A. McCarroll7,5; disease, which may be explained by shared genetic and/or environmental 1Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 2MD- factors. Approximately 3-6% of all CRC patients carry germline mutations PhD Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Department of associated with syndromic hereditary colorectal cManLcHe1r. TMhSiHs 2geMneStHic6 pre- Neurology, F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children‘s Hospital, Harvard Medical disposition to CRC has been classically associated with germline mutations ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPA (I aN nd | eW piW muW tat. iE oS nsH ) G in. O theR mG ismatch repair genes , , 7andABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index PM
S2  MUTYH APC for non-polyposis cases, and in and for adenoSmMAatDo4usB cMo-- with almost every multifactorial disease or trait. Nevertheless the relation PloRn1icA pSoTlKyp1o1sis. OPtThEerN CRC predisposing syndromes, characterized by the between carrying genetic risk factors and disease outcome is not clear-cut presence of hamartomatous polyps, are caused by mutations in , as some people develop disease while others are resilient despite carrying , and . Despite this knowledge, much of the genetic predis- many genetic risk alleles. Population-based prospective cohort studies fol- position to CRC remains unexplained. low individuals before the onset of disease, allowing for studies that can The identification of a germline mutation that causes the increased risk and identify biomarkers and disease- modifying effects (including protective aggregation of CRC in a family has clear consequences in the clinical ma- factors). The LifeLines Cohort Study is a large population-based cohort stu- nagement of its members. Therefore, important efforts are being invested dy and biobank that was established as a resource for research on complex to identify novel genes that explain this predisposition, in particular in fa- interactions between environmental, phenotypic and genomic factors in milies with clear dominant inheritance of the disease. In the last decade, the the development of multifactorial diseases. Baseline phenotypes, biochemi- rapid development and decrease in the economic cost of massively parallel stry and dietary data have been collected for 167,729 participants, aged 6 sequencing-based approaches and genome-wide copy number techniques months to 93 years. Genetic information by GWAS is available for about 10% has allowed the identification of novel genes responsible of hereditary CRC of the cohort. From a subset of approx. 1500 individuals (LifeLinesDEEP) cases, in some instances also associated with polyposis. For some of the more detailed genomic data was collected including genome-wide RNAseq, identified genes, the evidence gathered to date is robust and their testing methylation, metabolomics and gut metagenomics, allowing us to investiga- has been included in routine genetic diagnostics, while for others, the iden- te the intricate relationship between host genetics, diet and gut microbiome tification of additional pathogenic mutations in high risk families is manda- on the susceptibility to multifactorial diseases. Based on RNAseq data we tory to provide the required evidence to consider the study of the gene in are able to assess which common genetic risk variants impact the expressi- the clinical setting. I will review the latest advances in this field and discuss on of nearby (cis-eQTL) or distant (trans-eQTLs) genes, even in a context- current challenges and future perspectives. dependent manner by deconvolution of the data into different blood cell types. Allele specific expression (ASE) even allows investigation of single 
S03 .3 patients from clinical families. A comprehensive analysis of the gut microbi- The genetics of skin and uveal melanoma ome revealed strong associations with dietary habits, life-style, medication N. K. Hayward; QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia. use and health parameters. We showed for example that the use of proton pump inhibitors - one of the most widely used drugs in Western populations - lead to a less healthy gut microbiome. We also showed that the gut micro- biome plays a larger role in the variation in body mass index and blood lipid Family and twin studies indicate that cutaneous melanoma (CM) suscep- levels than host genetics. Our study supports the potential of microbiota- tibility has a strong genetic component. CM sometimes runs in families in modifying intervention by diet, prebiotics or probiotics to prevent or treat which there is an inherited mutation in a single ‘high penetrance’ gene, but multifactorial diseases. The comprehensive analysis as we have performed in the general population CM predisposition is likely governed by variati- in LifeLinesDEEP exemplifies a systems approach to understand health and on in a combination of ‘low penetrance’ genes. To date, genome-wide asso- disease and is expected to pave the way towards personlized health care. ciation studies (GWAS) have identified 20 low penetrance loci associated with CM susceptibility in populations of European descent. The majority of 
S04 .3 these loci are related to well chaMraCc1teRrisAeSdIP C, MTY rRiskS LpCh4e5nAo2t,y OpeCsA o2f IliRgFh4t pig- Cost effective designs with population specific imputation panels in TmYeRnPta1tion and high numbers of melanocytic nae vMi. TTAhPe/yC DinKcNlu2dAe, PvaLrAi2anGt6s, the Sardinian isolate IinR Fo4r annedarT pEiRgTmeCnLtPaTtiMon1 Lgenes: , , , and S. Sanna; ; and genes associated with naevus count: IRGB-CNR, Monserrato, Italy. AT/M CAS
P8 , .C TCeNnD a1d, dMitXi2o,n FaTl Om, ePlAaRnPo1m, aA GsRus3c, eCpDtKibAiLli1ty, RloAcDi 2n3oBt assoSciEaTteDdB w1ith either of these risk phenotypes have been identified. These lie in or near , ATM PAR
P1  Identification of rare and low frequency variants is possible by whole-ge- and , sCuCgNgDe1sting aC nAuSm
P1 ber of other pathways are involved in mela- nome sequencing, but to assure enough statistical power for analyses seve- noma susceptibility. The and loci allude to involvemCDeKntN o2fA DNA ral thousands of individuals have to be sequenced, at a cost that is still not rCeDpKa4ir, while and point to regulation of cell proliferation or negligible. An alternative cost-effective approach is to integrate genotyping death respectively. High penetrance germline mutations in the and arrays data for a large number of individuals with a reference set of sequen- genes account for susceptibility in ~40% of case-dense CM families. ced genomes, either using public resources or by direct sequencing a subset Recently, exome sequencing has identified several new familial CM genes. of the study samples. The benefits of the latter strategy are expected to be Initial success was the finding of a variant (p.
E318 K) in MITF, the lineage higher for homogenous populations, especially in isolates, as there are fe- specific transcription factor and oncogene for melanoma, which was 2.33 wer haplotypes to be tracked down, and also because rare and less frequent times more prevalent in melanoma cases than population controls, indi- alleles may have raised in frequency due to genetic drift or selection. We cating it is a TmEeRdTium-penetrance melanoma susceptibility variant. Subse- have generated a Sardinian-specific reference panel for imputation by low- quently, the identification of rare germline gain-of-function mutations in the pass whole-genome sequencing of to up to 3514 Sardinians, and used this promoter of , as well as inactivating mutations in genes encoding the panel to impute a cohort of 6,602 Sardinian individuals genotyped at ~900K sheBlAtePr1in components POT1, ACD and TERF2IP, implicate telomere dysregu- SNPs. We observed that efficiency of imputation was remarkably higher lation as a novel risk pathway in familial melanoma. Additionally, mutations when compared to inferences made with existing public resources, and that in hBaAvPe1 been associated both with CM and uveal melanoma (UM) pre- low frequency and rare variants could be predicted with proper precision. disposition, as well as susceptibility to mesothelioma and a range of other Inferred genotypes were subsequently tested for association with several cancers. is currently the only documented high penetrance UM gene, quantitative traits, revealing that this genotyping-combined with populati- however it is responsible for susceptibility in only ~5% of UM families, on-specific sequencing approach provides not only an average benefit in ac- therefore other as yet unidentified familial UM genes are likely to exist. In curacy, but also leads to the discovery of novel associations that would have contrast to CM, there have been no GWAS for UM to date. A worldwide col- been missed otherwise. Novel associated loci showing strong differences in laborative effort is needed to establish such an endeavour to increase our frequency and linkage disequilibrium patterns compared to populations in understanding of UM genetics. 1000 Genomes or at which the causative variant was absent from the publi- cly available reference panels were indeed misplaced or completely missed 
S04  From families to populations and back when a non-Sardinian source of haplotypes was used for imputation. Over- all, these results demonstrate the benefits of a population-specific panel in Sardinians for complex traits genetics. 
S04 .2 Population biobanks: a crucial hub in clinical research C. Wijmenga; University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. Next generation genetics builds bridges between clinical research and population biobanks. Many diseases are multifactorial in origin, implying that they are caused by a combination of genetic and environmental com- po8nents. To date, common genetic variants havEeS bHeeGn i2de0n1ti6fi e|d B aAssRocCiaEteLdO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S05  Circulating Cell-Free Nucleic Acids neuronal differentiation. These microexons modulate the function of inter- action domains of proteins involved in neurogenesis and are modulated by 
S05 .3 neuronal activity. Most neural microexons are regulated by the neuronal- Genomewide plasma DNA sequencing for cancer detection and specific splicing factor nSR100/SRRM4 through its binding to adjacent in- noninvasive prenatal testing tronic enhancer motifs, and reduced levels of this protein are also observed Y. Lo; in autistic brains. Collectively, these results provide evidence that misregu- Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong lation of a splicing network affected by neuronal activity is associated with Kong, China. associated with autism spectrum disorder. 
S06 .3 Recently, there is a lot of interest on the use of circulating cell-free DNA in Genetics of schizophrenia plasma for molecular diagnostics. In particular, the success in noninvasive M. O‘Donovan; prenatal testing using cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma has demon- MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, strated the power of this approach. We have ongoing efforts to explore the United Kingdom. applicability of a similar approach for the noninvasive detection of cancer, using genomewide plasma DNA sequencing. Using this approach, we have found that cancer-associated copy number aberrations and methylation ab- Risk alleles for schizophrenia span the full spectrum of population fre- errations can be detected in a genomewide manner in the plasma of cancer quencies and include common alleles of small effect sizes and rare alleles patients. We have also demonstrated that circulating tumor-derived DNA is with large effect sizes. The past few years has seen a rapid expansion in the shorter than that from non-tumor tissue in plasma. Very recently, we have number of robustly implicated genetic risk factors associated with schizo- shown that by using over 5800 methylation markers showing tissue-specific phrenia, increasingly facilitating analyses seeking to link genetic findings to methylation changes, one can profile the origin of DNA in plasma. Using this biological processes that underlie some aspects of pathophysiology. In this approach, one can pinpoint the tissue of origin of an observed plasma DNA presentation, I will summarize the progress in identifying schizophrenia as- aberration, thus helping one to localize the site of a putative cancer. This sociated variants from a diverse set of study designs based on published and technology, called plasma DNA tissue mapping, has also shed light on the unpublished data, show that they appear to converge on proteins involved origin of circulating DNA in healthy subjects. In this regard, we have shown in various facets of synaptic biology, and highlight work showing that some that most of the circulating DNA in healthy subjects is derived from myeloid of the risk alleles have manifestations that are apparent in early childhood. and lymphoid cells. We believe that plasma tissue mapping has diagnostic applications in many other clinical scenarios associated with cell death phe- 
S07  Long distance regulation of transcription nomena. and translation 
S06  Behavioural disorders 
S07 .1 Gene regulation dynamics and chromatin architecture during 
S06 .1 development and evolution Using next-generation sequencing to understand the genetics of J. L. Gómez-Skarmeta; autism Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones E. Eichler1,2; Científicas/Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Sevilla, Spain. 1Seattle, WA, United States, 2University of Washington & HHMI, Seattle, WA, United States. Temporal and evolutionary dynamic of gene expressionc iiss critical for tissue formation during animal development and has been essential for morpho- Autism is a devastating neurodevelopmental disorder that afflicts approxi- logical diversification along evolution. This depends on -regulatory infor- mately 1% of live births. It is characterized by deficits in language, social in- mation located at the non-coding DNA. What is the dynamic of this regulato- teraction and repetitive behaviors. I will summarize our findings regarding ry information along development and evolution and how this information the discovery of genetic mutations and their contribution to autism spec- is organized in the genome? Here I will present a comparative study of the trum disorder (ASD) and developmental delay (DD). I will present evidence vertebrate epigenome during development that reveals an evolutionary from exome and molecular inversion probe sequencing of more than 10,000 conserved process at cis-regulatory regions essential for vertebrate body children with simplex autism and show how these data may be used to pin- plan formation. In addition, I will show the evolutionary history of the 3D point specific genes. The emerging data strongly argue that the develop- chromatin architecture of critical genomic loci. ment of the human brain is particularly sensitive to the timing and expres- sion of many different genes; multiple genetic perturbations within specific 
S07 .2 neurodevelopmental pathways related to long-term potentiation, chromatin Dissecting mammalian transcriptional organization by analyzing the remodeling, synaptic function and Wnt signaling appear particularly impor- content of transcription factories tant; and that the maternal and paternal contributions differ significantly. I A. Papantonis; Cologne, Germany. will present data on how grouping patients based on a specific gene can be used to predict clinical subtypes of autism. Next-generation exome and ge- nome sequencing data provide a powerful path forward for understanding Mammalian cell nuclei contain three RNA polymerases (I, II, and III), each the genetic architecture of these diseases but the heterogeneity demands an transcribing a different gene subset. The active forms of these polymerases unprecedented level of global cooperation and networking. are contained in supra-molecular complexes known as ‘transcription fac- 
S06 .2 tories’. These complexes harbor >95% of nuclear transcriptional activity, A highly conserved program of neuronal microexons is misregulated and are embedded in the 3D structure of the nucleus. We recently descri- in autistic brains bed a novel method by which the protein and RNA contents of transcription M. Irimia1, M. Quesnel-Vallieres2, N. Parikshak3, D. H. Geschwind3, S. P. Cordes4, B. J. factories can be isolated and analyzed in a high throughput fashion. Using Blencowe2; these approaches we may now directly interrogate aspects of mammalian 1Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, transcriptional organization that remain elusive. For example, using nas- ON, Canada, 3University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada. cent RNA isolated from factories, we were able to show for the first time that many human introns are spliced in a recursive manner. This molecular mechanism utilizes cryptic, non-canonical, sites embedded in introns. The A key challenge in understanding autism is to establish whether this gene- tight association of these sites with intragenic cis-regulatory elements, and tically heterogeneous disorder is caused by common mechanisms. Tran- potentially with underlying genetic variants, suggest a whole new way by scriptomic profiling has revealed consistently altered signatures in autistic which results from both genetic and functional studies should now be ap- brains. These include a program of 3-27 nucleotide ‚microexons‘, which is proached. misregulated in the brains of individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Relative to all other types of alternative splicing, microexons display the most striking evolutionary conservatiEonS HanGd s2w0it1ch6- l|i kBe AreRguClaEtLioOn NduAri,n Sg PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 9ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S08  Sensory disorders First, UK parliament recently legalized a novel reproductive genetic techno- logy to prevent mitochondrial DNA disorders: mitochondrial replacement 
S08 .1 techniques. Now both the technological barriers as well as the policy bar- Functional studies reveal how mutations of MYO15A cause human riers for MRT are considerably lowered, at least in the UK, the first clinical deafness DFNB3 use is expected shortly. This would encompass a modification of the mito- T. B. Friedman, A. U. Rehman, J. E. Bird; chondrial genome. Second, recent advances in genome editing techniques National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH, Bethesda, MD, such as CRISPR/Cas9 make it possible to edit DNA sequences in virtually United States. any organism of choice. In April 2015, Chinese scientists published the first report of the use of gene editing techniques for basic research in human embryos. Gene editing experiments in human embryos have now been ap- Autosomal recessive mutations in any one of almost a hundred genes ac- proved in China, the UK and Sweden. These developments have sparked an count for nearly half of the irreversible non-syndromic deafness found in international ethical debate. Leading scientific journals Nature and Science newborn humans. Additionally, there are at least 400 clinically distinct syn- rejected the first Chinese publication for ethical reasons and published dromes described in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man that involve commentaries that called for an international moratorium. Others view the hearing loss. Twenty years ago, deafness segregating in a Balinese village continuation of basic gene editing research on human embryos as a ‘moral was mapped to chromosome 17p11.2 and designated the DFNB3 locus. Sub- imperative’ for its offers the future potential of correcting genetic disease, sequently, missense mutations of myosin 15 were found to cause DFNB3 many of which are currently untreatable. Many, among which myself as a and the shaker 2 deaf mouse phenotype. Across diverse ethnic groups, re- member of the Hinxton Group, emphasized the need for ethical and public cessive mutations of MYO15A encoding myosin 15 are now recognized as deliberation about emerging genome editing techniques and (international) a common cause of congenital, profound deafness. Myosins are molecular oversight. In this presentation I will review the key ethical arguments in fa- motors that generate tension and produce force to power motility along cy- vor and against germline modification and identify some of the ethical and toskeletal actin filaments. Three distinct alternative splice isoform classes governance questions that need to be examined in the coming period. of myosin 15 have been discovered, of which the 395 kDa (3,530 residues) isoform 1 is the largest member of the myosin superfamily. Presently, 192 
S09 .4 different recessive mutations of MYO15A associated with DFNB3 are distri- ASHG statement on germline genome editing buted across 49 of its 67 exons (43% missense, 23% frameshift, 16% non- K. Ormond; sense, 16% splice site and 2% indels). Several of the truncating mutations of Stanford, CA, United States. MYO15A are located in giant exon 2 which alone encodes 1,233 amino acid residues, and yet it is surprising that there isn’t a single convincing pathoge- nic missense mutation reported in this exon. The pathogenicity of MYO15A The American Society of Human Genetics (ASHG) developed a workgroup mutations and the wild-type functions of myosin 15 have been gleaned from to create a policy statement on human germline genome editing. This work- biochemical studies and animal models of DFNB3. Isoform 2 of myosin 15 group consists of a combination of clinician scientists and biomedical ethi- transports whirlin and EP
S8  to the tips of stereocilia. This complex is essen- cists from the United States, Canada, and the UK. Somatic gene editing appli- tial for the metamorphosis of microvilli into mechanosensitive stereocilia cations fall under already established guidelines in most countries, and are bundles on the apical surface of hair cells. Shortly after birth, hair cells then therefore not included in this statement. The presentation will discuss the switch expression to myosin 15 isoform 1 that maintains adult actin-cyto- current status of the policy draft and our key positions, as well as the ethical skeleton of stereocilia and is necessary for life-long hearing. Supported by justifications. NIDCD/NIH Intramural funds D
C000048 -19 to TBF 
S10  Brain genetics 
S08 .2 Genetics of visual impairment D. Schorderet; Institut de Recherche en Ophtalmologie, Sion, Switzerland. 
S10 .1 The genetics of brain calcification C. Klein1,2; Inherited diseases of the eye encompass a large number of entities including 1Lübeck, Germany, 2Institute of Neurogenetics, Luebeck, Germany. recessive and dominant diseases, autosomal, X-linked and mitochondrial. As the eye is a complex structure, diseases affecting each of its structures may induce loss of vision. Developmental anomalies, corneal dystrophies, glau- Linkage analyses of large families affected by autosomal dominant primary coma, rod-cone or cone-rod dystrophies, vitreoretinopathies and even can- familial brain calcification (PFBC; formerly known as idiopathic basal gan- cer may all lead to visual impairment. During this presentation I will focus glia calcification (IBGC)) identified three candidate loci (named IBG
C1 -3). on diseases of the cornea and retina, describing some of the most prevalent In 2012, mutations in SL
C20 A2 were found within the IBG
C3  locus. In the disorders. I will also show how current genetic research has accelerated the following years, using next-generation sequencing, three further PFBC ge- pace of discovery of new genes and discuss why geneticists should interplay nes (PDGFRB, PDGFB, XPR1) were discovered and the respective disease much more with ophthalmologists for a better management of patients. forms were subsequently designated as IBG
C4 -6. A systematic search of the MEDLINE database for articles published until 2014 for the three genes 
S09  ASHG/ESHG/EMPAG SYMPOSIUM: with more than one report in the literature (SL
C2012 , PDGFRB, and PDGFB) and a search of individual reference lists of all identified articles left 15 re- Debating germline genome editing ports of genetically confirmed cases with individual clinical information. A total of 179 cases were reported, including 162 individuals who belonged to 25 families. Availability of information ranged from 96.6% for ethnicity to 
S09 .3 24.4% for age at onset. All cases, regardless of which of the three genes was Ethical aspect of germline gene editing mutated, had calcifications on comprehensive cranial computed tomogra- A. Bredenoord; phy, most frequently located in the basal ganglia (70.6%), subcortical white Utrecht, Netherlands. matter (40.8%), cerebellum (34.1%), or thalamus (28.5%). Mean (SD) AAO was 27.9 (22.3) years, and the AAO was likewise comparable across genes (P = .77). The most frequently described clinical signs were movement dis- Since the advent of recombinant DNA technology in the 1970s, genetic te- orders, such as parkinsonism (12%) and dystonia (19%). Penetrance of sting, selection and screening have been considered to be ethically justi- the imaging phenotype was 100% compared with only 61% of the clinical fiable and allowed under most jurisdictions, but genetic modification of phenotype. Pathophysiological pathways of all four genes involved in PFBC the human germline has for many been an ethical line that should not be converge on impaired phosphorus homeostasis and integrity of the blood- crossed. Germline modification encompasses any biomedical intervention brain barrier. that modifies the genome that a person can transmit to his or her child and the child’s entire lineage. Until recently, the technological tools that enable a viable path to realizing human germline modification were not available. However, two recent scientific developments have revived the international discussion on the ethics of germline modification and underscore the need to1 a0ddress the ethics and governance of humanE gSeHrmGli n2e0 m1o6d i|f icBaAtioRnC nEowLO. NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S11  Human genomics: transcriptome, 
S12  SeX and the citY proteome and interactome 
S12 .1 Sex determination: why so many ways of doing it? 
S11 .1 D. Bachtrog; The human transcriptome across tissues and individuals Tree of Sex Consortium, Berkeley, CA, United States. R. Guigó; Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG) and Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain. Sexual reproduction is an ancient feature of life on earth, and the familiar X and Y chromosomes in humans and other model species have led to the impression that sex determination mechanisms are old and conserved. In The pilot phase of the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project has pro- fact, males and females are determined by diverse mechanisms that evolve duced RNASeq from 1,641 samples originated from up to 43 tissues from 175 rapidly in many taxa. Yet this diversity in primary sex-determining signals post-mortem donors, and constitutes a unique resource to investigate the is coupled with conserved molecular pathways that trigger male or female human transcriptome across tissues and individuals. Clustering of samples development. Conflicting selection on different parts of the genome and on based on gene expression recapitulates tissue types, separating solid from the two sexes may drive many of these transitions, but few systems with not solid tissues, while clustering based on splicing separates neural from rapid turnover of sex determination mechanisms have been rigorously stu- non-neural tissues, suggesting that post-transcriptional regulation plays a died. I will discuss our current understanding of how and why sex deter- comparatively important role in the definition of neural tissues .About 47 % mination evolves in animals and plants and identify important gaps in our of the variation in gene expression can be explained by variation of across knowledge that present exciting research opportunities to characterize the tissues, while only 4% by variation across individuals. We find that the rela- evolutionary forces and molecular pathways underlying the evolution of sex tive contribution of individual variation is similar for lncRNAs and for pro- determination. tein coding genes. However, we find that genes that vary with ethnicity are enriched in lncRNAs, whereas genes that vary with age are mostly protein 
S12 .2 coding. Among genes that vary with gender, we find novel candidates both Origins and functional evolution of Y chromosomes across mammals to participate and to escape X-inactivation. In addition, by merging informa- H. Kaessmann; tion on GWAS we are able to identify specific candidate genes that may ex- Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. plain differences in susceptibility to cardiovascular diseases between males and females and different ethnic groups. We find that genes that decrease with age are involved in neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson and Y chromosomes underlie sex determination in mammals, but their repeat- Alzheimer and identify novel candidates that could be involved in these di- rich nature has hampered sequencing and associated evolutionary studies. seases. In contrast to gene expression, splicing varies similarly among tissu- In an ongoing project, we are tracing Y functional evolution across represen- es and individuals, and exhibits a larger proportion of residual unexplained tative mammals based on various types of high-throughput sequencing data. variance. This may reflect that that stochastic, non-functional fluctuations We previously uncovered three independent sex chromosome originations of the relative abundances of splice isoforms may be more common than in mammals and birds (the outgroup). The original placental and marsupial random fluctuations of gene expression. By comparing the variation of the (therian) Y, containing the sex-determining gene SRY, emerged in the theri- abundance of individual isoforms across all GTEx samples, we find that a lar- an ancestor approximately 180 million years ago, in parallel with the first ge fraction of this variation between tissues (84%) can be simply explained of five monotreme Y chromosomes, carrying the probable sex-determining by variation in bulk gene expression, with splicing variation contributing gene AMH. The avian W chromosome arose approximately 140 million years comparatively little. This strongly suggests that regulation at the primary ago in the bird ancestor. The small Y/W gene repertoires, enriched in regula- transcription level is the main driver of tissue specificity. Although blood is tory functions, were rapidly defined following stratification (recombination the most transcriptionally distinct of the surveyed tissues, RNA levels moni- arrest) and erosion events and have remained considerably stable. Despite tored in blood may retain clinically relevant information that can be used to expression decreases in therians, Y/W genes show notable conservation of help assess medical or biological conditions. proto-sex chromosome expression patterns, although various Y genes evol- ved testis-specificities through differential regulatory decay. Thus, although 
S11 .3 some genes evolved novel functions through spatial/temporal expression Mapping Human Long Noncoding RNAs shifts, most Y genes probably endured, at least initially, because of dosage R. Johnson; Barcelona, Spain. constraints. In my talk, I will describe these findings as well as other intere- sting aspects of Y chromosome evolution that we recently uncovered. 
S12 .3 The Gencode manually-curated gene annotation is a fundamental resource A Y-like social chromosome causes alternative colony organization in for long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) research. Despite rapid growth it remains fire ants. incomplete, both in terms of missing gene structure elements (splice sites, L. Keller; exons, transcription start and termination sites) in annotated genes, as well Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, as unknown numbers of unannotated genes. Switzerland. To address both issues, we are applying RNA Capture methodology coupled to Third Generation long-read sequencing (“Capture Long-Seq”, CLS) in both Human and Mouse. We have designed capture libraries that target (a) the Intraspecific variability in social organization is common, yet the underlying entire set of known intergenic lncRNA genes, and (b) thousands of regions causes are rarely known. In this talk I will show tha, the existence of two suspected to harbour unannotated lncRNA based on small RNA, enhancer, divergent forms of social organization is under the control of a pair of hete- conservation or orthology evidence. romorphic chromosomes that have many of the key properties of sex chro- Analysis of > 2 million complete long reads of captured RNA from 6 tissues mosomes. The two variants, hereafter referred to as the social B and social deepens known lncRNA annotations several times over: using conservati- b (SB and Sb) chromosomes, are characterized by a large region of approxi- ve filters, the set of canonical lncRNA splice junctions increases by 250%. mately 13 megabases (55% of the chromosome) in which recombination is Around 80% of lncRNAs are detected, at a mean depth of 70 reads. We ob- completely suppressed between SB and Sb. The lack of recombination can serve numerous cases of new exons, unified gene models underlying mul- be explained by at least one large inversion, and this absence of recombi- tiple annotations, and mono-exonic genes. Taking advantage of long read nation has led to the accumulation of deleterious mutations, including re- information, we also map 132,305 polyadenylation sites genome-wide. petitive elements in the non-recombining region of Sb compared with the Combining this data with CAGE transcription start site maps, we create the homologous region of SB. Importantly, most of the genes with demonstrated first annotation of confident, complete lncRNA transcript models. We use expression differences between individuals of the two social forms reside in this to define the fundamental properties of lncRNA gene structure. the non-recombining region. These findings highlight how genomic rearran- gements can maintain divergent adaptive social phenotypes involving many genes acting together by locally limiting recombination. <!--EndFragment--> ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 11ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S13  Epigenetic reprogramming in disease lier decisions. They can ensure resilience against environmental change, but also allow adaptation. Nowhere is this more important than in the gamete 
S13 .1 and the early embryo. We are seeking to understand what governs how DNA Epigenetics in health and disease methylation and other epigenetic marks are patterned during gametogene- M. Esteller; sis and embryogenesis. Using mouse as a model, we have shown that tran- IDIBELL, Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Hospital Duran i Reynals, scription is the major determinant of the DNA methylation landscape in the Barcelona, Spain. oocyte. To understand the mechanistic connection between transcription and de novo methylation, we have profiled histone modifications in growing oocytes and identify chromatin states permissive for and resistant to DNA For the last twenty-five years an increasing amount of evidence has shown methylation characterised by reciprocal enrichment of H3K4me2/me3 and the relevance of epigenetics in cell biology and tissue physiology, being DNA H3K36me3. This finding is reinforced by the consequences on the DNA me- methylation aberrations in cancer the flag-ship for the recognition of its thylation landscape of genetically ablating specific H3K4 demethylases and disturbance in human diseases. From the candidate gene approaches, new methyltransferases. Key to such studies is the development of methods for powerful technologies such as comprehensive DNA methylation microar- genome-wide profiling of epigenetic marks in low numbers of cells, inclu- rays and whole genome bisulfite sequencing has recently emerged that have ding at the single-cell level, which could have application widely in epige- reinforced the notion of epigenetic disruption in the crossroad of many sick- netic studies, particularly for rare cell types and for investigating cell-to-cell ness. From the poster-boy cases of MGMT and GST
P1  hypermethylation in heterogeneity in epigenetic marks at critical developmental transitions. the prediction of alkylating drug response and prostate cancer detection, re- spectively, to the personalized treatment of leukemia with small molecules 
S14  Reproductive genetics and genomics targeted to fusion proteins involving histone modifiers such as DOT1L and MLL, the field has walked a long path. The current talk will focus in the epi- genetic profiling, basically at the level of DNA methylation and histone modi- fications, that is starting to provide clinical value in the diagnosis, prognosis 
S14 .1 and prediction of response to drug therapies, with an emphasys in neopla- Cell fate decisions during early development sia, but without forgetting the novel advances in other human disorders M. Zernicka-Goetz; such as neurodegenerative or cardiovascular diseases. For cancer, we have University of Cambridge, Dept. of Physiology, Development & Neuroscience, Cambridge, United Kingdom. already a wide view of the undergoing DNA methylation events that expand beyond classical promoter CpG islands of tumor suppressor genes and we have a growing list of mutated chromatin remodeler genes that contributes Embryonic development progresses through successive cell fate decisi- to the tumorigenesis process. It is time to apply this knowledge in practi- ons and intricate three-dimensional morphogenetic transformations. Im- cal clinical situations like the diagnosis of cancers of unknown primary, the plantation is the defining event in mammalian pregnancy during which a screening of malignancies in high-risk populations or a biomarker selection fundamental morphogenetic transformation is initiated: the body axes are of the patients that should receive treatment with epigenetic drugs. Beyond established and the embryonic germ layers created. Despite its importance, that, epigenetics is involved in the aging process and many others aspects a comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms, transcriptio- of human biology. nal pathways, cellular interactions, as well as the spatio-temporal develop- 
S13 .2 ment of the embryo at implantation stages is at present lacking, due to the Intergenerational and Stochastic Epigenetic Control of Metabolic embryo’s inaccessibility. To overcome these limitations, we have generated Disease: Evidence for polyphenism in mouse and man? a culture system that allows the development of implanting embryos out- J. A. Pospisilik; side of the mother. This system provides the opportunity to address how ar- Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany. chitectural features and signaling events integrate to induce the emergence of the body plan. I will describe our progress in using this system to analyse the pathways underlying the very first morphogenetic changes that occur More than one half billion people are obese. Though substantial progress in the embryo following implantation and how we can mimic these events is being made in understanding genetic predisposition for obesity, much of using ESCs both for the mouse and for human embryos. Our next challenge the high heritability for the disease remains enigmatic. Our lab focuses on is to establish how the pluripotent epiblast cells interact with flanking ex- understanding how chromatin state biases can be established to generate tra-embryonic tissues during this developmental stage to generate AP axis or modify disease susceptibility. We have begun to dissect how core chro- within the embryo and progress to gastrualtion. matin regulatory systems can impact metabolic phenotypes, their variabi- lity and their distribution. In a first study, we have identified a paradigm of 
S14 .2 paternal-diet-induced intergenerational metabolic reprogramming (IGMR). Human Embryo Genome Activation We find that diet can act as a physiological suppressor of variegation, capab- J. Kere, V. Töhönen; Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. le of selectively modifying genomic output for the lifetime of the offspring individuals. This occurs in a chromatin-state-specified manner and controls transcriptome signatures in mature sperm of the father and in offspring em- After fertilization, massive oocyte RNA degradation takes place, followed by bryos. This model has allowed us to identify Polycomb and core-hertero- a cascade-like activation of transcription from the embryo genome (Embryo chromatin machinery as required for the manifestation of intergenerational Genome Activation, EGA). We have characterized human EGA by single-cell metabolic reprogramming (Ost, Cell 2014). In a second study, we identify a RNA sequencing of over 340 oocytes, zygotes and isolated blastomeres from Trim28-sensitive epigenetic switch that triggers obesity stochastically and 4-cell and 8-cell stage embryos, focusing on the transcription start sites in an apparently ‘On/Off’ manner. Using genetic dissection and transcripto- (TSS) using the STRT method (Töhönen, Katayama & al. Nat Comm 6:8207, me analyses, we map this phenotype toT croimnt2r8ol of a series of metabolically 2015). Our results revealed that 32 transcripts, including seven previously potent imprinted genes. We find that human children present in similarly incompletely annotated PRD-like homeodomain transcription factor genes, distinct sub-populations stratifying by expression, imprinted gene were the first to be transcribed at 4-cell stage (day 2 after fertilization), fol- dysregulation, anpdo plyrpohfoenuinsdmly distinct transcriptome organization (Dalg- lowed by 129 transcripts at 8-cell stage (day 3). The total content of mRNA aard Cell 2016). To the best of our knowledge, the latter data provide the remained essentially unchanged in oocytes and zygotes, but was reduced first evidence of in mouse and humans and break major as- 16-fold in 4-cell blastomeres, consistent with the cell division effect and sumptions made in our understanding of complex trait genetics, evolution oocyte transcript degradation. Supporting degradation, at 4-cell stage the and medicine. In the presentation, I will provide our latest updates on these majority of transcript reads mapped elsewhere than the 5’ promoter and ideas as well as their extensions towards tissue specificity of function. upstream regions of genes. For the first activated genes, our TSS targeted 
S13 .3 data allowed the identification of critical regulators of EGA as 36 bp and 35 Epigenetic reprogramming in the germline and early embryo bp conserved promoter elements at the two stages of EGA, respectively. We G. Kelsey, K. Stewart, L. Veselovska, S. Smallwood, C. Hanna, J. Huang, H. Saadeh; cloned and verified the genomic structures of seven homeobox genes not The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. present in the rodent genomes: ARGFX, CPHX1, CPHX2, DPRX, DUXA, DUXB, and LEUTX. Exploration of FANTOM5 data and other databases showed exclusive expression of these genes during the EGA and absent expression Epigenetic mechanisms are fundamental for the orderly regulation of gene already in human embryonal stem cells (hESCs). Our functional analyses ex1p2ression throughout the life-course, providiEngS Ha cGri t2ic0al1 m6e |m BorAyR oCf eEaLr-ONcAon, fSirPmA tIhNei r| WactWivitWy .aEs StrHanGsc.OripRtiGon factors with a spectrum of activityABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index SMN2 SMN2 from strong activators to strong suppressors of transcription in hESC mo- normal protein. In effect, incompletely rescues an otherwise lethal dels (Jouhilahti, Madissoon & al. unpublished work). Our data constitute a condition. The number of copies of is inversely related to the severity resource for understanding the earliest steps of human embryonal develop- of the phenotype. There is a broad range in phenotype. Over half of affected ment and provide new genes of interest for the study of pluripotency and patients have the most severe form, type I, which presents in early infancy. stem cell technologies. These infants fail to sit or gain motor skills and generally die by 2 years of age, due to related respiratory muscle weakness and pulmonary infection. 
S14 .3 The less severe forms present as: type II, in later infancy with sitting achie- Mechanisms of lineage specification in human embryos and stem cells ved, and type III, in childhood with walking achieved. K. Niakan; The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom. Multiple treatment strategies for spinal muscular atrophy have entered cli- nical trials in recent years. Pre-clinical cell-based and animal model studies have identified several approaches to rescue the phenotype and possibly intervene pre-symptomatically. Initial drug trials in SMA examined rSeMpuNr2- During early human development totipotent zygotes diverge into pluripo- posed use of existing drugs: HDAC inhibitors to increase gene transcription tent embryonic cells, which form the fetus, and extra-embryonic cells, which (valproic acid, phenylbutyrate), modulators of exon 7 inclusion in the contribute to the placenta and yolk sac. Understanding the molecular me- gene (valproic acid, hydroxyurea, quinazolones), and inhibitors of excitoto- chanisms that regulate pluripotency in human embryos and how is it dis- xicity (glutaminergic: riluzole; GABAergic: gabapentin) or muscle mitochon- engaged during cellular differentiation is of fundamental biological impor- drial enhancement (l-carnitine). None of these demonstrated meaningful tance. Using single-cell RNA-sequencing of human and mouse embryos we have elucidated conserved transcriptional programs along with those that clinical benefit. SMN2 Current drug development for SMA focuses on three strategies: (1) splice are human-specific. By modulating signaling pathways we discovered a re- site modulation to promote inclusion of exon 7 in the transcript via: quirement for TGF-β signaling in the maintenance pluripotency in human (a) intrathecal delivery of anti-sense oligonucleotides (ASO), “nusinersen” embryos. By uncovering the molecular basis of these early cell lineage de- (Ionis/Biogen) or (b) small-molecule oral drugs, “LMI070” (Novartis) and cisions we underscore their significant clinical implications for infertility, “RG7916” (Roche); (2) intravenous gene transfer therapy using scAAV9- miscarriages, developmental disorders and therapeutic applications of stem SMN1 (AveXis/Nationwide Children’s Hospital) and; (3) down-stream mo- cells. dification via: (a) neuroprotective/mitochondrial enhancement, “olesoxi- 
S15  Therapy in rare diseases me” (Trophos/Roche), or (b) troponin activation in muscle, “CK-2127107” (Cytokinetics). This talk will focus mainly upon the ASO approach to generate full-length transcript in target motor neurons, and will summarize the clinical trials 
S15 .1 that have demonstrated SpMroNm2ising improvement in survival and motor Gene therapy in Fanconi anemia functSioMnN. A1 pre-symptomatic study is also underway. J. A. Bueren; Summary: Both targeted gene editing drugs and AAV vector medi- Division of Hematopoietic Innovative Therapies. CIEMAT, CIBER of Rare Diseases and ated gene replacement studies are advancing through clinical trials IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. and show promising early safety and efficacy results. Downstream disease modifying drugs, by targeting motor neurons or muscle, may provide ad- ditional supplemental benefit. Combined treatment may eventually offer a Fanconi anemia (FA) is an inherited disease mainly characterized by con- rational multidimensional approach to optimizing therapeutic benefit. How genital abnormalities, progressive bone marrow failure, and cancer predis- early to treat and how much of the phenotype can be rescued remain critical position. Gene therapy may constitute a good alternative for the treatment questions. of Fanconi anemia (FA) patients lacking a HLA matched donor. However, in contrast to other disorders already treated by gene therapy, marked prolife- 
S15 .3 ration and differentiation defects have been observed in FA hematopoietic Novel Approaches to the Treatment of Cystic Fibrosis stem cells (HSC), complicating the harvesting of a high number of CD34+ M. D. Amaral; cells to be used in gene therapy protocols. On the other hand, the prolifera- University of Lisboa, Faculty of Sciences, BioISI – Biosystems & Integrative Sciences tion advantage of gene-corrected FA HSCs may facilitate the hematopoietic Institute, Lisboa, Portugal. reconstitution of the patient by a low number of transduced HSCs. For the collection of HSCs from FA patients, filgrastim and plerixafor have been used+ as mobilizingF AaNgeCnAts. The short transduction of small aliquots of mPB CD34 Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a major life-shortening genetic disease leading to samples from these patients with a GMP-produced lentiviral vector that severe respiratory symptoms caused by mutations in CF transmembrane harbors the therapeutic gene corrected the phenotype of 20-40% of conductance regulator (CFTR), a chloride/bicarbonate channel expressed these +progenitor cells. To assess the repopulating ability of transduced FA-A at the apical membrane of epithelial cells. Absence of functional CFTR from CinD v3i4vo cells, samples were transplanted into immunodeficient NSG mice. Re- the surface of respiratory cells reduces mucociliary clearance, promoting markably, most of the transplanted samples engrafted th+e NSG mice, and an airways obstruction, chronic infections and ultimately lung failure [1]. To proliferation advantage of gene-corrected CD34 FA-A cells was ob- date ~2,000 CFTR mutations were reported [2] but one single mutation - served in recipients’ BM. Based on these preclinical studies, a gene therapy F508del - occurring in ~85% of CF patients worldwide, is associated with trial of FA-A patients is currently open in Spain. In addition to conventional intracellular CFTR protein retention and a severe clinical phenotype. gene therapy, we have also investigated the possibility of generating gene- Major clinical advances in treating CF symptoms (with mucolytics, antibio- corrected FA HSCs by conducting untargeted and also targeted gene additi- tics, etc) have significantly increased survival beyond the second decade on approaches on FA fibroblasts that were subsequently reprogrammed to (~25 years in Europe). However, to further increase CF patients life expec- generate induced pluripotent stem cells. An update of our preclinical and tancy, CF needs to be treated beyond its symptoms i.e., through treatments clinical studies will be presented. addressing the basic defect associated with each CFTR gene mutation [3,4]. One new drug, potentiator VX-770 (ivacaftor/Kalydeco) has hit the clinical 
S15 .2 setting but only for ~5% of all CF patients, i.e., those bearing G551D and 8 Antisense therapy in Spinal Muscular Atrophy other mutations causing a similar defect in the channel [5]. More recently, R. Finkel; a new drug (Orkambi), which combines corrector VX-809 (lumacaftor) Orlando, FL, United States. rescuing F508del-CFTR to the cell surface with potentiator ivacaftor, went into the clinic, following proven efficacy, albeit modest, in a phase III clinical trial for F508del/ F508del patients [6]. Classic spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), a progressive motor neuron disor- As these therapies correcting defective CFTR become available, we should der, is the most common fatal autosomal recessive disease of infancy, with quickly pre-assess how other CFTR mutations respond to such new drugs. an incidence of approximately 1:10,000 SaMnNd 1c)arrier frequency of 1:40 to This is the way forward to extend them more CF patients, namely to those 1:60. SMA is a monogenic disorder due to homozySgMoNus2 deletion or muta- with ultra-rare („orphan“) mutations in an effective and expedite way. Inde- tion in thSeM sNu2rvival of motor neuron 1 S(MN1 gene at 5q13. An inverted ed, for such mutations, „classical“ clinical trials are not possible due to low duplication of a nearly homologous “backup” gene, , is present only in numbers of patients and their geographic dispersion. It is thus crucial to humans. differs functionally from due to a c.840C>T substituti- use the above novel methods to pre-assess directly on patient’s cells/tissu- on which creates an exon splice inhibitor and results in alternative splicing es how each individual responds to these novel drugs. These can include a that largely excludes exon 7 and generates a non-functional SMN protein. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAsIwNe l|l iWng WassWay. EinS iHntGes.tOinRal Gorganoids [7] or measurement of CFTR Cl- 1cu3r- Approximately 10% of transcripts, however, are full-length and translate aABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index rents in polarized primary cultures of nasal cells [8]. Such pre-assessment nished, and parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) is dysregulated, may become a standard basis for a drug clinical use in a precision medicine potentially accounting for all phenotypic features. Untreated patients die approach. prematurely of stroke; however, hypertension-induced target-organ dama- Work in the author’s lab is supported by strategic grant PEst-OE/BIA/ ge is otherwise hardly apparent. Large-vessel and cardiac function is preser- UI4046/2011 centre grant (to BioISI) from FCT/MCTES, Portugal; and by ved in HTNB. The patients have normal platelet function. Cell-based studies research grants (to MDA): „INOVCF“ from CF Trust, UK (SRC Award No. 003), demonstrated that available PD
E3 A inhibitors inhibit the mutant isoforms. Gilead GÉNESE (Ref PGG/008/2015) and AMARA
L15 XX0, AMARA
L15 XX1, However, increasing cGMP to indirectly inhibit the enzyme appears to have AMARA
L16 I0 from CFF-Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, USA. particular utility. Since our report we have been referred additional families [1] Bell SC, De Boeck K, Amaral MD (2015) Pharmacol Ther 145: 19-34. with suspected HTNB. We identified a novel aspartic acid substitution at the [2] The CFTR Mutation Database. http://www.sickkids.on.ca/cftr. 2016. same site featured by one of our earlier families (p.G449D). We verified in- [3] De Boeck K, Amaral MD (2016) Lancet Respir Med, accepted. creased PD
E3 A phosphorylation at Ser438 with a peptide SPOT assay. Our [4] Amaral (2015) J Intern Med 277:155-66 results shed light on PD
E3 A activation and could be relevant to the treat- [5] Ramsey et al (2011) N Engl J Med 365:1663-72 ment of hypertension in the general population. [6] Wainwright et al (2015) N Engl J Med. Epub May 17. [PMID: 25981758]. EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS [7] Dekkers et al (2013) Nat Med 19: 939-45. [8] Beekman et al (2014) J Cyst Fibros 13: 363-72. 
E1  Novel genome sequencing technologies 
S16  Cardiovascular genetics (joint with ESC) 
E1 .1 Long-read sequencing of complex genomes 
S16 .1 E. Eichler; Update on the genetics of thoracic aortic aneurysms Department of Genome Sciences and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of B. Loeys; Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. University of Antwerp/Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium. The human genome is arguably the most-well assembled reference assem- Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAA) are often asymptomatic but predispose to bly yet many gaps remain and aspects of its structural variation remain aortic dissections, which are associated with high mortality rates. Thoracic poorly understood ten years after its finishing. The discovery and resolution aortic aneurysms and dissections (TAAD) can be subdivided into syndromic of this variation is critical to understanding disease. I will present our most (associated with systemic manifestations) and non-syndromic forms, alt- recent work sequencing human and non-human primate genomes using hough recent clinical observations are blurring this distinction. A positive single molecule sequencing (SMS) technology. We have developed methods family history occurs in circa 20% of all TAA individuals. Most commonly, to detect indel and structural variants from several bases up to 50 kbp. We familial TAADs segregate in an autosomal dominant manner, but rare auto- have closed or extended ~50% of the remaining interstitial gaps in the hu- somal recessive and X-linked families have been described. Non-syndromic man genome and find that 80% of these carry long polypyrimidine/purine forms of TAA are strongly associated with mutations in genes encoding tracts multiple kilobases in length. Comparing the single haplotype to the for proteins of the vascular smooth muscle contractile apparatus (ACTA2, human reference we resolve >35,000 structural variants and >500,000 in- MYH11) or its modifiers (PRKG1, MYLK, FOX
E3 ). Syndromic presentati- dels at the basepair level with 99.9% sequence accuracy. 92% of insertions ons can be linked to alterations in the extracellular matrix (FBN1, FBLN4, and 60% of deletions between 50-5000 bp in length are novel representing MFA
P5 , LOX) and the transforming growth factor beta signalling pathway large swaths > 15 Mbp of undiscovered genetic variation within human ge- (TGFBR1/2, SMAD2/3, TGFB2/3). Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal nomes. We find that such sequences vary extensively in copy number and dominant connective tissue disorder in which affected individuals present affect functional elements in the genome. In addition, the analysis uncovers with ocular, skeletal and cutaneous signs besides aneurysm and dissection. other categories of complex variation that have been difficult to assess in- Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is an aneurysmal connective tissue disorder cluding mobile element insertions (eg. SVA) as well as inversions mapping that can be distinguished from MFS by the unique presence of craniofacial, within more complex and GC-rich regions of the genome. Our results sug- skeletal, cutaneous, and/or vascular manifestations, prominently including gest a systematic bias against longer and more complex repetitive DNA that hypertelorism, cleft palate or bifid uvula and arterial tortuosity with aneu- can now be partially resolved. I will discuss the potential of this technology rysms distant from the aortic root. In addition, aneurysms in individuals to create accurate de novo assemblies of additional human genomes and with LDS tend to dissect at an earlier age and smaller diameter compared to non-human that more comprehensively capture the full spectrum of human individuals with MFS. Whereas MFS is caused by mutations in FBN1, coding genetic diversity and its importance to our understanding of genetic varia- for an extracellular matrix protein, LDS is caused by loss-of-function mu- tion and disease. tations in genes coding for components of the transforming growth factor beta signalling pathway. Significant clinical overlap exists between the phe- 
E2  Genetic Privacy and Data Sharing joint with notypes caused by mutations in the currently known LDS genes (TGFBR1/2, EMPAG SMAD2/3, TGFB2/3). Recent work has demonstrated that both MFS and LDS lead to dysregulation of the TGFbeta signalling pathway. The latter has 
E2 .1 opened interesting avenues for the application of new therapeutic strate- The hitchhiker’s guide to genome hacking gies. Current next generation sequencing based gene panel testing for TAAD Y. Erlich; individuals yields a molecular diagnosis in up to one third of the patients, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States. suggesting that several genes remain to be discovered. 
S16 .3 Molecular mechanisms responsible for inherited hypertension with We have entered to the era of ubiquitous genetic information for research, brachydactyly clinical care, and personal curiosity. Sharing these datasets is vital to reali- S. Bähring1, P. G. Maass2,3, A. Aydin2, C. Schächterle2, O. Toka4, E. Klussmann2, F. C. Luft1,2; ze the promise of the genetic revolution. However, one growing concern is 1Experimental and Clinical Research Center (ECRC), a joint cooperation between the the ability to protect the genetic privacy of the data originators. Here, I will Charité Medical Faculty and the Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the technically map threats to genetic privacy and emphasize the limitation of Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany, 2Max Delbrück Center for Molecular mitigation strategies for privacy-preserving dissemination of genetic data. Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany, 3Harvard University, As an alternative to the zero-sum game of privacy versus utility, I will pro- Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Children’s Hospital, Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. pose to focus on trust-enabling techniques to create partnerships between researchers and participants. Autosomal-dominant hypertension with brachydactyly (HTNB) is a salt- independent Mendelian syndrome caused by activating mutations in the gene encoding phosphodiesterase 3A (PD
E3 A). These mutations increase the protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of PD
E3 A resulting in enhanced cAMP-hydrolytic affinity and accelerated cell proliferation. The 14 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG phosphorylated vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) is dimi-ABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index 
E2 .2 The role of policy in navigating the privacy landscape and promoting responsible genomic data sharing disorders or in patients with mild disease. Insight into the possible of such E. S. Dove; DNA variants on metabolism and, as an extension thereof, on the individu- University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. al requires a multidisciplinary approach combining genetic, biochemical and molecular biological studies. I will briefly review clinical, biochemical and genetic aspects of the different human peroxisomal disorders known The world is more connected than ever as we craft far-reaching networks to date, with emphasis on some recently discovered defects and including of communication. A tangible effect of our networked world in the genomic examples of cases where functional assays have been imparitive in the final and personalized medicine context is the increased sharing of genomic and diagnosis. clinical data between professionals, laboratories, hospitals, organizations, patients, participants, and—increasingly—across national borders. Sharing 
E5  Ciliopathies data facilitates both translational and precision medicine, not to mention re- search discovery. As various stakeholders in biomedical research and clini- 
E5 .1 cal practice laudably move towards a data sharing culture, challenges arise. Cilia in human developmental anomalies In particular, privacy and data privacy regulation play a large role in defining E. Valente; the proper contours of global data sharing. Data sharing is a social activity, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy. and privacy is fundamentally a social consideration. Like any partnership, there are responsibilities on both sides. A central concern is that genomic (and clinical) data must be collected, used, and shared in ways that respect The primary cilium is a solitary organelle protruding from the surface of the fundamental rights and interests of individuals and society, as reflected almost all vertebrate cell types. Long considered a vestigial remnant, this in national and international laws, and most notably, privacy. Data sharing organelle has recently become the focus of intensive research, that demon- carries a spectrum of risks, particularly re-identification of individuals and strated its many roles in sensing the extracellular environment, and in coor- related others, and thereby represents a prima facie threat to their privacy. dinating key signaling pathways. In particular, during the embryonic deve- In this presentation, I outline the practices and benefits of genomic data sha- lopment, the primary cilium is known to critically regulate main pathways ring; the dimensions of privacy and data privacy regulation that challenge such as Sonic Hedgehog, Wnt and planar cell polarity, that are implicated in data sharing; and the ways in which one organization that I am familiar with, left-right axis formation, limb development and neurogenesis. Thus, it is not the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health, is addressing these challenges. surprising that mutations in genes encoding ciliary proteins underlie a wide spectrum of “ciliopathies”, that are characterized by substantial overlap 
E4  Peroxisomal disorders -still a need for among distinct conditions. Indeed, ciliopathies such as Joubert syndrome (JS), Meckel syndrome (MKS), Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), Senior-Loken metabolic assays? syndrome (SLS), some oral-facial-digital syndromes (OFD), Jeune asphyxia- ting thoracic dystrophy (JATD) and other short rib polydactylies, may va- 
E4 .1 riably share features such as retinal dystrophy, nephronophthisis or cystic Overview of peroxisomal disorders - diagnosis and management dysplastic kidneys, congenital liver fibrosis, polydactyly and other skeletal N. Braverman; abnormalities, situs inversus, occipital encephalocele and midline oral and McGill, Montreal, QC, Canada. facial defects. Clinical heterogeneity is mirrored by genetic heterogeneity, with each ciliopathy being caused by mutations in several genes and, on the other hand, mutations in one gene causing a wide phenotypic spectrum, The peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBD) include the Zelllweger spec- often encompassing different syndromes of variable severity. For instance, trum disorders (ZSD) and Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 1 JS and the lethal MKS ciliopathy are allelic at 9 loci. Similarly, mutations in (RCD
P1 ). These disorders are due to defects in anyone of 14 PEX genes, three genes (CSP
P1 , KIAA0586 and CE
P120 ) cause a spectrum of pheno- whose protein products, or peroxins, are required for the assembly of func- types with overlapping features of JS, MKS, JATD and OFD. The mechanism tional peroxisomes, which includes the process of matrix enzyme import, through which mutations in the same gene may cause such wide phenotypic new peroxisome membrane formation and division of existing peroxisomes. variability remains unexplained, with genotype-phenotype correlates only Defects in 13 genes result in a ZSD phenotype due to the common end-effect partly explaining this variability. The identification of genetic modifiers of reduced peroxisome enzyme functions and correlates best to the B-oxi- and other factors able to influence the penetrance and expression of ciliary dation defects and accumulation of toxic products. In contrast, the distinct mutations, represents one of the biggest challenges of current research on RCDP phenotype is due to a single pathway deficit in the synthesis of spe- ciliopathies. cialized membrane lipids, plasmalogens. In this lecture we will review per- oxisome clinical, biochemical and molecular pathways, their relation to ZSD 
E6  Cost-effectiveness in genetic testing and RCDP phenotypes, new information on these disorders, single enzyme defects of peroxisome function that relate to PBD and rational management 
E6 .1 approaches. We will emphasize how scientists, physicians and families have Cost-effectiveness of diagnostics in rare diseases worked together in a rare disease, to push the field forward. K. Payne; 
E4 .2 Manchester Centre for Health Economics, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. The value of functional assays in peroxisomal disorders H. R. Waterham; Academic Medical Center at the University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. The existence of finite healthcare budgets and the scarcity of healthcare re- sources mean that there is an opportunity cost for every decision made to Peroxisomes are dynamic organelles, which, in humans, play an essential introduce a new healthcare package, medicine, surgical procedure or dia- role in a variety of cellular catabolic and anabolic metabolic pathways, in- gnostic test into clinical practice. The decision to allocate resources to a par- cluding fatty acid alpha- and beta-oxidation, and plasmalogen and bile acid ticular healthcare intervention excludes those resources from alternative synthesis. Defects in genes encoding peroxisomal proteins can result in a possible uses within a healthcare system. Therefore, ideally, robust evidence large variety of peroxisomal disorders affecting either specific metabolic is required to inform decision-makers allocating healthcare resources about pathways, i.e. the single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies, or causing a ge- the potential costs and benefits of incorporating a healthcare intervention neralized defect in function, assembly and maintenance of peroxisomes, i.e. within clinical practice. Cost-effectiveness analysis offers a potential frame- peroxisome biogenesis disorders. Clinically, patients with peroxisomal dis- work to evaluate the relative costs and benefits of healthcare interventions orders may present with variable severity ranging from early lethality to compared with current practice. Performing cost-effectiveness analysis of subtle neurosensory aberrations. diagnostics for rare diseases may be problematic for many reasons. The Up till recently, laboratory diagnosis of peroxisomal disorders primarily aim of this presentation is to describe the key challenges (methodologi- relied on metabolite analysis followed by biochemical testing and esta- cal, practical, technical and organisational) when conducting robust cost blishment of the underlying gene defect. The increasing implementation of effectiveness analysis of diagnostic tests for rare diseases. The presentati- Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology as first choice of diagnostic on will begin by presenting an overview of methods of cost effectiveness evaluation is chancing the diagnostic landscape. While this approach should analysis and explain how they are used by decision-making bodies such as readily identify genetic defects in classical peroxisomal disorders, it may re- the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Diagnostic tests for sult in the identification of genetic variants with unknown consequences for rare diseases will then be described using the framework of a complex in- peroxisomal functioning and short- oE r S loH ngG -t e2 r0 m1 p6 a t| h B ogA enR icC itE yL iO n vN arA ia, n S t PA tI eN rv e| nW tioW n. W Th. eE kS eH y cG ha.O lleR ngG es of performing a cost-effectiveness analys1is5 ofABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index example diagnostic tests will then be described, and illustrated with applied scribe variants related to monogenic diseases. Variants are classified into examples, under the following four headings: methodological; practical; these five categories based on combinations of criteria of varying strength technical and organisational. The presentation will conclude by describing (e.g. supporting, moderate, strong, very strong) and type (e.g. population the further work required to ensure the methods and practical approaches data, computational data, functional data, segregation data, etc.) These gui- to perform cost effectiveness analyses of diagnostic tests for rare diseases delines have now been tested by the NIH Clinical Sequencing Exploratory are sufficiently robust to inform their introduction into clinical practice and Research Consortium and implemented by many clinical laboratories and maximise the potential benefits for patient populations. commercial platforms. In addition, clinical laboratories and expert working groups operating within the NIH funded Clinical Genome Resource Program 
E7  Cleaning the noise from Big Data (ClinGen) are applying the ACMG/AMP guidelines to resolve differences in variant interpretation identified in the NCBI’s ClinVar database and build 
E7 .1 more granularity into the criteria using gene and disease specific parame- Removing unwanted variation in RNA-seq data ters to enable expert review of variants in ClinVar. As of Apr. 2016, over T. Speed1,2; 500 laboratories had submitted over 125,000 unique interpreted variants 1Melbourne, Australia, 2Walter & Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, to ClinVar. Prior analyses in May 2015 showed that ~11% of variants had Australia. interpretations submitted by more than one laboratory, and of those ~17% were interpreted differently. Through pilot efforts the majority of these dif- ferences in variant interpretation appear to be resolvable and efforts are Like other kinds of ‘omic data, RNA-seq data can be affected by unwanted underway to resolve these differences using the ACMG/AMP guidelines. variation. This is often called batch effects, and includes variation due to CONCURRENT SESSIONS time, space, technology, reagents, operators, environmental conditions, and unwanted biological variation, such as between biological replicates. Stan- dard normalization methods for such data may not deal adequately with all unwanted variation. In this talk I will explain and illustrate how methods 
C01  Reproductive Genetics developed for microarray data can be modified to be effective at removing unwanted variation from RNA-seq data. We make use of negative controls and, when available, replicates. The methods will be illustrated with RNA- 
C01 .1 seq libraries made from brain tissue. The results discussed are all from joint Genome-wide haplotyping of preimplantation embryos in the clinic: work with Davide Risso, Lucia Peixoto and others to be named. principles guiding embryo selection in Leuven K. Van Den Bogaert1, E. Dimitriadou1, C. Melotte1, S. Debrock2, K. Devriendt1, T. de 
E8  Clinical interpretation of genetic variants Ravel1, T. D’Hooghe2, J. R. Vermeesch1; 1Centre for Human Genetics, UZLeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Leuven University Fertility Centre, UZLeuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
E8 .1 Methods for the assessment of variant pathogenicity in cardiac Recently, we developed haplarithmisis, a method enabling accurate con- diseases current haplotyping and copy number profiling and we demonstrated its S. Cook; validity in preimplantation genetic diagnosis for embryo analysis. The in- Singapore, China. troduction in a diagnostic setting raised novel ethical questions. Here we present the principles guiding embryo selection and prioritization that are applied at our center according to the chromosomal content and mutatio- The accurate interpretation of genetic variation in Mendelian disease genes nal load of the embryos. Our embryo selection principles are based not only has lagged behind data generation as sequencing has become increasingly on technical and biological, but also on ethical criteria and have a profound accessible. Ongoing large sequencing efforts present huge interpretive chal- impact on the organization of PGD operations and on the information that lenges, but also provide an opportunity to characterize the range and im- is transferred amongst the genetic unit, the fertility clinic and the patients. portance of rare variation. In this presentation I will discuss the analysis of Those principles are also important for the organization of pre- and post- sequence data from 7,855 clinical cardiomyopathy cases and 60,706 ExAC counselling and influence the way of interpreting and reporting preimplan- reference samples that we used to better understand genetic variation in tation genotyping results. cardiomyopathy that causes heart failure and sudden death. The analyses From June 2014 until November 2015, 314 embryos from 50 couples have show that in some genes previously reported as important causes of a gi- been tested in 82 cycles, leading to 16 clinical pregnancies (36% clinical ven cardiomyopathy, rare variation is not clinically informative whereas, in pregnancy rate per cycle for which embryo transfer has been finalized) and other genes, diagnostic laboratories appear overly conservative when asses- the birth of 5 healthy babies, so far. Thirty-one different indications, i.e. 27 sing variant pathogenicity. The impact of cardiomyopathy research studies for monogenic disorders, 3 chromosomal aberrations and 1 case of combi- in the era of comprehensive sequencing is also discussed. The data point to ned monogenic disorder with chromosomal aberration have been included. analytical approaches to evaluate which genes and variant classes are in- As novel genome-wide approaches for embryo selection are revolutionizing terpretable for cardiomyopathy and may be applied to other multi-allelic the field of reproductive genetics, national and international discussions to Mendelian diseases. set general principles are warranted. 
E8 .2 
C01 .2 Recommendations for the Interpretation of Genetic Variants from Mosaic embryos can achieve good IVF success rates the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the R. Morales1, B. Lledó1, J. Ortiz1, H. Blanca1, J. Llácer2, R. Bernabeu2; Association for Molecular Pathology 1Instituto Bernabeu Biotech, Alicante, Spain, 2Instituto Bernabeu, Alicante, Spain. H. Rehm; Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Partners Personalized Medicine; The Broad Institute Introduction: of Harvard and MIT; Brigham & Women‘s Hospital; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. Classification of mosaic embryos as aneuploid embryos is a controversial topic, since the association between mosaicism in trophoecto- derm cells and inner mass cells is unknown. Moreover, it seems that there With the plummeting cost of sequencing, genetic data is becoming increa- is a mechanism by which mosaicism could be corrected. To clarify this issue singly available for use in the diagnosis, treatment and prediction of disease. tMhae toeuritacol maneds oMf etrtahnosdfesr: cycles with mosaic and euploid blastocysts were However, robust and accurate use of genomics in the practice of medicine compared. requires high quality knowledgebases and the accurate interpretation of We retrospectively reanalyzed array-CGH results DNA variation. To address these needs, several efforts have been launched. from trophoectoderm biopsies of 816 blastocysts. We considered a mosaic The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), in colla- embryo when the percentage of mosaicism, calculated by the log2 ratio, was boration with the Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP), has published higher than 25%. Array-CGH analysis was performed using Agilent Sure- a guideline to enable a more systematic assessment of evidence for and Print G3 8x60K CGH microarrays with previous whole genome amplifica- against pathogenicity of DNA variants for Mendelian, or monogenic, disease. tRioensu olft sgenomic DNA. The main outcome measures were implantation rate, This includes recommendation for the use of standard terms: ‘pathogenic’, pregnancy rate and biochemical and clinical miscarriage rate. ‘l 1ik 6ely pathogenic’, ‘uncertain significance’, ‘likeElyS bHenGig n2’, 0an1d6 ‘ b|e BniAgnR’ tCoE dLe-ONA, SPA: IW Ne |d e Wte Wcte Wd c .h Er So Hmo Gso .Om Ral G mosaicism in 107 blastocysts (13.1%). Moreover, 49.4% of the analysed embryos were euploid, 30.9% aneuploidABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index and the remaining 6.6% without diagnosis. In the mosaic group, 57.9% were rental genomes into different cell lineages during the first post-zygotic clea- euploid embryos with mosaicism and 42.1% were also aneuploidy. The out- vage division. Importantly, we observed that parental genome segregation comes of the cycles were compared between cycles where only mosaic em- was not exclusively triggered by abnormal dispermic fertilization, but also bryos were transferred and cycles where euploid embryos were transferred. normally fertilized zygotes can spontaneously segregate entire parental ge- SCiognncifliucsainotn dsi:fferences were observed in the clinical pregnancy rate (20.6% nomes into distinct cell lineages during cleavage of the zygote. Preliminary in mosaic group vs 38.9% in euploid group; p=0.042). data show the mechanism to be conserved in humans as well. Our data show that the transfer of mosaic embryos affects the Conclusions: We discover a novel mechanism of aberrant cell division in outcomes of the IVF cycles. Even so, the mosaic embryos have a relatively the zygote culminating with the segregation of the parental genomes into good IVF success rate and therefore they should not be discarded in couples distinct cell lineages. We coin this “Heterogoneic” cell division. This mecha- that don´t have euploid embryos for transfer. nism is likely the main cause for chimaerism and mixoploidy in mammals. 
C01 .3 
C01 .5 Gonadic mosaicism and prenatal diagnosis options: insights from Differential expression of parental alleles of BRCA1 in human retinoblastoma preimplantation embryos C. Houdayer1, C. Dehainault2, L. Golmard2, A. Charpin2, A. Laugé2, I. Aerts3, N. Cassoux4, G. P. Tulay, 991381,2, A. Doshi3, P. Serhal3, S. B. SenGupta2; A. Millot5, D. Stoppa Lyonnet1, M. Gauthier Villars2; 1Near East University, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2UCL, Institute for Women‘s Health, London, 1Institut Curie, oncogenetics, INSERM U830 and Paris Descartes Sorbonne Paris Cité United Kingdom, 3The Centre for Reproductive and Genetic Health, London, United University, Paris, France, 2Institut Curie, oncogenetics, Paris, France, 3Département Kingdom. d‘oncologie pédiatrique, adolescents jeunes adultes, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 4Département d’oncologie chirurgicale, service d’Ophtalmologie, Institut Curie and Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 5Institut Curie, CNRS UMR Introduction: The expression of parental genomes is required for completi- 3244 and Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France. on of embryogenesis. Differential methylation of each parental genome has been observed in mouse and human preimplantation embryos. It is possible that differences in methylation affect the level of geBnReC tAra1nscripts from each Mosaicism impacts on the recurrence risk. In sporadic cases, a post-zygotic parental genome in early developing embryos. The aim of this study was to event signifies a somatic mosaicism in the affected child and thus parents investigate if therBeR iCs Aa parent specific pattern of expression in hu- and siblings are freed from follow up. On the other hand, a pre-zygotic mu- man embryos and to examine if this affects embryo developmAeCnTtB whSNenR PthNe tation transmitted by an unaffected mosaic parent implies recurrence risk Hem19bryo cBaRrrCiAes1 a mutation. in future offspring and thus prenatal diagnosis options might be discussed. Materials and Methods: Differential parental expression of , , To better estimate the contribution of pre- and post-zygotic events, we used and was semi-quantitatively analysed by mini-sequencing in 95 sporadic retinoblastoma as a model because 80% of Rb cases are due to de human p BreRiCmAp1lantation embryos obtained from couples undergoing preim- novo mutations. plantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). We analysed 124 consecutive bilateral retinoblastoma probands carrying Results: was shown to be differBenRtCiAal1ly expressed favouring the pa- a heterozygous RB1 mutation previously ascertained by Sanger sequen- ternal transcript in early developing embryos. Methylation specific PCR sho- cing and their unaffected, non-carrier parents. In order to evaluate soma- wBReCdA a variable methylation profile of promoter region at different tic mosaicism in blood, the deleterious mutation identified in the proband stages of embryonic developmeBntR. CEAmbryos carrying paternally inherited was searched for in the trios using targeted deep sequencing. Observed mutations were shown to develop more slowly compared to the em- recurrences, which should represent an estimate of germline and somatic bryos with maternally inherited mutations. mosaicism, were recorded for the 124 sibships. Conclusions: The reBsRuCltAs1 of this study suggest that differential gene ex- Deep sequencing evidenced one mosaic unaffected parent out of 124 tested pression can influence the early development of preimplantation embryos. couples, i.e a 0.8 % risk of mosaicism and thus a theoretical 0.4% risk of When the paternal transcript present in the embryo carries a mu- recurrence. Follow up in the sibships showed one recurrence out of 199 no- tation, the embryo may become more vulnerable to stress due to rapid de- vel births, i.e. an observed 0.5 % recurrence risk. Similar estimates were methylation of theB RpCaAte rnal genome and the gradual demethylation of the obtained by two independent methods, which is convincing. Consequently maternal genome. Further extrapolation of this data suggests that the risk a mean 0.5% risk could be used or, more cautiously, a maximum recurrence of transmitting a mutation may be modulated by the parental origin risk of 2 out of 124 i.e. 1.6%. We believe these results could be considered of the mutation. for genetic counseling in other diseases with a high de novo mutation rate. 
C01 .6 
C01 .4 Novel autosomal genes linked with male infertility Zygotes segregate entire parental genomes in distinct blastomere D. V. S. Sudhakar1, R. Phanindranath1, R. Singh2, N. J. Gupta3, M. Deenadayal4, Y. lineages causing cleavage stage chimaerism and mixoploidy Sharma1, K. Thangaraj1; A. Destouni*1, M. Zamani Esteki*2, M. Catteeuw3, O. Tšuiko1,4, E. Dimitriadou1, K. Smits3, 1Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India, 2Central Drug Research A. Kurg4, A. Salumets5,6, A. Van Soom3, T. Voet**2,7, J. R. Vermeesch**1, *Joint first-authors, Institute, Lucknow, India, 3Institute of Reproductive Medicine, Kolkata, India, 4Infertility ** Co-senior authors; institute and research center, Hyderabad, India. 1Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Center of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Laboratory of Reproductive Genomics, Center of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of Obstetrics, Reproduction and Herd Health, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 4Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Introduction: Approximately 15% of the couples are infertile worldwide. Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, 5Competence Centre on Health Technologies, Tartu, Impaired fertility of male partner is causative in approximately 50% of in- Estonia, 6Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, fertile couples. Earlier studies from our lab have shown that about 8.5% 7Sanger-EBI Single Cell Genomics Centre, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, infertility among Indian men is due to the Y chromosome microdeletions. Cambridge, United Kingdom. Further, autosomal and mitochondrial mutationsaccounted for 20.5% of the genetic factors responsible for infertility among Indian men. However, etiology of large proportion (71%) of infertile men still remained unknown. Introduction: Chimaerism and mixoploidy are defined by the presence of Therefore, we performed exome sequencing to identify novel genes respon- cell lineages with different parental genomes or different ploidy states in sible for male infertility. a single individual, respectively. However, our knowledge on their mecha- Materials and methods: we sequenced exome of 44 idiopathic infertile men nistic origin is limited, as it results from indirect observations, often when using Illumina Hiseq -2000 platform with 100X coverage. Using various bio- the cell lineages have been subject to rigorous selective pressure during de- informCaEtiTcNs 1tools, we have identified 32 novel and rare variants and they velopment. were furthCeErT gNen1otyped in 1000 cases and controls. Of the novel genes iden- Materials and Methods: We applied haplarithmisis on SNP genotype data to tified, was found to be a strong candidate; hence we have sequenced infer the haplotypes and the copy number of parental genomes in 116 single complete in 875 infertile and 552 ethnically matched fertile men. blastomeres comprising entire in vitro produced preimplantation bovine Identified variants were characterized using biophysical and cell biology embryos (n=23). Haplarithmisis uncovers copy number aberrations and approaches. CETN1 determines their mechanistic/segregational origin at the single-cell level in Results: We have identified a total of 32 novel, stop gain and missen- unprecedented detail, enabling reliable reconstruction of the each embryo’s se variants from 30 genes. Sequencing of revealed that one 5’UTR cleavage history back to the zygote stage. (rs367716858) and a missense (rs61734344) variant are associated with Results: We demonstrate that chromosome instability is comparable bet- male infertility. Functional studies have shown that rs61734344 (p. Met- ween bovine and human cleavage emb Ery So Hs. GWe 2 fu 0r 1th 6e r | u Bn Aco Rve Cr Ea Lno Ove Nl Afor , m S PA7IN2T h| rW) aWlteWrs .cEaSlcHiumG .bOinRdGing affinity, thermodynamic properties and 1su7r- of genomic instability whereby zygotes spontaneously segregate entire pa-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index face hydrophobicity. Functional analysis of 5’UTR variant (rs367716858) ptoms are caused by the decreased surface expression of GPI-APs or by revealed that mutation causes increased expression of Centrin-1 protein. structural abnormalities of GPI. Here we present five affected individuals Conclusion: Our study has identified novel autosomal genes linked with from three families, two consanguineous from Egypt and Pakistan and one male infertility. from Japan showing intellectual disability, hypotonia and early onset seizu- 
C02  Intellectual Disability res. We identified pathogenic variants in PIGG, a GPI pathway gene. In the consanguineous families, homozygous variants, c.928C>T:p.(Gln310*) and c.2261+1G>C were found, while the Japanese individual was compound 
C02 .1 heterozygous for c.2005C>T: p.(Arg669Cys) and a 2.4Mb deletion that in- FRR
S1 L Mutations link intellectual disability to altered priming of volved PIGG. PIGG is the enzyme that modifies the second mannose with AMPA-receptor biogenesis ethanolamine phosphate, which is removed soon after GPI is attached to the A. Brechet1, R. Buchert2, J. Schwenk3,4, S. Boudkkazi1, G. Zolles1, K. Siquier-Pernet5, D. protein. Physiological significance of this transient modification has been Loreth1, I. Schaber1, A. Saadi6, C. Bole-Feysot5, P. Nitschke5, A. Reis7, H. Sticht8, N. Al- unclear. Using B lymphoblasts from affected individuals of families from Sanna‘a9, A. Rolfs10, A. Kulik3, U. Schulte1,4, R. Abou-Jamra7,11, L. Colleaux12, B. Fakler1,4; Egypt and Japan, we revealed that PIGG activity was almost completely ab- 1Institute of Physiology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 2Institute of Human olished; however the GPI-APs were normally expressed on the surface with Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlanger, Germany, 3Institute of Physiology, University the normal structure, indicating that the pathogenesis of PIGG deficiency of Freiburg, freiburg, Germany, 4Center for Biological Signaling Studies (BIOSS), is not yet fully understood. The discovery of pathogenic variants in PIGG Freiburg, Germany, 5Institut IMAGINE INSERM U1163, PARIS, France, 6Department expands the spectrum of IGD, and further enhances our understanding of de Neurologie, Etablissement Hospitalier Specialisé de Benaknoun, Algers, Algeria, 7Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 8Institute of this etiopathogenic class of intellectual disability. Biochemistry, Emil-Fischer Center, Erlangen, Germany, 9Dharan Health Center, Saudi Aramco, Saudi Arabia, 10Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Medical 
C02 .3 University Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 11Institute of Human Genetics, University of De novo mutations in Histone 3 Family 3B are associated with a Leipzig Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany, 12Institut IMAGINE INSERM U1163, severe neurodegenerative disorder and brain atrophy Paris, France. A. Telegrafi1, E. F. Joiner2, M. T. Cho1, K. Retterer1, J. L. Schuette3, J. W. Innis3, B. Fregeau4, E. H. Sherr4, A. Pizzino5, A. Vanderver5, S. Lüttgen6, J. Denecke7, T. M. Strom8,9, D. Lessel6, J. Juusola1, K. G. Monaghan1, W. K. Chung10,11; Identifying causes of intellectual disability remains a considerable medical 1GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 2Department of Pediatrics, Columbia challenge. Here, we report on six patients from three unrelated consan- University Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, 3Departments of Human Genetics guineous Algerian, Syrian and Saudi Arabian families presenting with a core and of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 4Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San phenotype of moderate to severe intellectual disability, speech delay and Francisco, CA, United States, 5Children’s National Health System, Washington, DC, United seizures. High-throughput sequencing identified three distinct homozygous States, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, mutations in the FRR
S1 l gene: a missense variant (p.Lys155Glu), a one base- Hamburg, Germany, 7Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg- pair deletion (p.Val195Glufs*35) and a nonsense mutation (p.Gln321*). Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 8Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum FRR
S1 l encodes a previously uncharacterized peripheral constituent of München, Neuherberg, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität the AMPA glutamate receptors (AMPARs). AMPARs are key elements of the München,, Munich, Germany, 10Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical mammalian brain responsible for a variety of processes including fast exci- CenterDx, New York, NY, United States, 11Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, United States. tatory neurotransmission, postsynaptic plasticity, or synapse development. These macromolecular complexes assemble from more than 30 different constituents. The inner core determines the biophysical properties of the We describe four patients with a severe and progressive neurological phe- receptors while the periphery is involved in various aspects of synapse phy- notype characterized by developmental delays, seizures, and brain atrophy siology. due to de novo predicted pathogenic variants in the Histone 3 Family 3B To further characterize the physiological role of FRR
S1 L upon brain deve- (H3F3B) gene (MIM # 601058). H3F3B gene encodes histone variant H3.3, lopment and function, we used reverse proteomics, biochemical, morpho- a displacement histone critical to neuronal and glial development and tran- logical and functional analyses to identify and characterize FRR
S1 L-contai- scription as well as formation and maintenance of synaptic connectivity in ning AMPARs assemblies. the brain. Clinical whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on 3,235 We demonstrated that AMPAR complexes containing FRR
S1 l are restricted patients with developmental delay or intellectual disability. Four affected to the endoplasmic reticulum and lack the inner core constituents of AM- individuals from four unrelated proband-parent trios were heterozygous for PARs at the plasma membrane. Virus-directed deletion and overexpression a de novo missense H3F3B variant. All variants were absent from NHLBI of FRR
S1 l in adult rats alters the number of AMPARs in individual synapses Exome Sequencing Project, 1000 Genomes, Exome Aggregation Consortium resulting in markedly reduced or increased amplitudes of the EPSCs without public databases and our internal WES database of unaffected individuals. effects on their time courses All variants occurred within highly conserved domains, and were predicted Our data identify FRR
S1 L as a new neurodevelopmental-disease gene and to be damaging or possibly damaging from multiple in silico models. The highlight the key role of this gene in the priming step of AMPAR biogenesis patients range in ages from 22 months to 13 years old. The clinical pheno- and fast excitatory synaptic transmission. type is dominated by developmental delay, intellectual disability, seizures, 
C02 .2 with microcephaly and brain atrophy present in the three oldest children. PIGG: a novel gene causing intellectual disability, seizures and Brain abnormalities are characterized by cortical atrophy and white matter hypotonia abnormalities in all three; whereas thin corpus callosum in one child. Ad- P. Makrythanasis1,2, M. Kato3, M. Zaki4, H. Saitsu5, K. Nakamura6, F. A. Santoni1,2, S. ditional features include tone abnormalities, aspiration, gastroesophageal Miyatake5, M. Nakashima5, M. Y. Issa4, M. Guipponi2, A. Letourneau1, C. Logan7, N. reflux, vision or oculomotor disturbances. To our knowledge, the findings Roberts7, D. A. Parry7, C. A. Johnson7, N. Matsumoto5, H. Hamamy1, E. Sheridan8, T. presented in this case series are the first germline variants in this gene as- Kinoshita3, S. E. Antonarakis1,2,9, Y. Murakami3; 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, sociated with a neurological phenotype and may facilitate the identification Switzerland, 2Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, of additional affected patients to further characterize this novel neurodege- Switzerland, 3Department of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial nerative disorder. Diseases, and World Premier International Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, National Research Centre, 
C02 .4 Cairo, Egypt, 5Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate Autosomal recessive mutations of the neuron specific β3B subunit School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 6Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University of clathrin-associated adaptor protein complex 3 (A
P3 B2) cause an Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata, Japan, 7School of Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, early onset epileptic encephalopathy with optic atrophy United Kingdom, 8School of Medicine, University of Leeds, L, United Kingdom, 9iG
E3 , M. Assoum1, C. Philippe2, B. Isidor3, L. Perrin4, P. Makrythanasis5,6, N. Sondheimer7, C. Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Paris8, S. Antonarakis9,5,10, H. Hamamy11, T. Jouan1, Y. Duffourd1,12, M. Milh13,14, S. Auvin15, K. Mireskandari16, J. Rivière1,12,17, L. Faivre1,18,12, J. Thevenon1,18,12; 1Equipe d’Accueil 4271, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Université de Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is a glycolipid that anchors >150 various Bourgogne, dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, INSERM U954, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 3Service de Génétique Médicale, Inserm UMR-S 957,CHU Nantes, proteins to the cell surface. At least 27 genes are involved in biosynthesis Nantes, France, 4Département de Génétique, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris and transport of GPI anchored proteins (GPI-APs). To date mutations in (AP-HP) – CHU Paris - Hôpital Robert Debré, paris, France, 5Department of Genetic 13 of these genes are known to cause inherited GPI deficiencies (IGDs); Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 6Service of all inherited as recessive traits. IGDs mainly show intellectual disability, e1pi8lepsy, coarse facial features and multiple oErgSaHn Gan o2m0a1li6es .| TBhAosRe CsyEmL-ONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 7The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, canada, toronto, ON, Canada, 8Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Hôpital Jean Minjoz, besançon, France, 9Division of Genetic Medicine, pathway regulator genes RHEB and RA
C1  cause ID with opposite alterations Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 10iG
E3 , Institute of Genetics and in head and brain size, which reflect the functional effect of these mutations Genomics of Geneva, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 11Department of Genetic during vertebrate development. Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 12Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies du 
C02 .6 Développement (TRANSLAD); Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France, De novo germline mutations in exon 5 of PPM1D cause intellectual 13Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital de la Timone, Assistance Publique des disability. Hôpitaux de Marseille, marseille, France, 14Unité Mixte de Recherche 910, Institut S. Jansen1, R. Pfundt1, R. Brough2, J. C. Herkert3, E. J. Marco4, M. H. Willemsen1, T. National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, Kleefstra1, J. A. Veltman1,5, C. J. Lord2, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, B. B. A. De Vries1; France, 15Service de neurologie pédiatrique Inserm 1141, Hôpital Robert Debré, paris, 1Donders Centre for Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, France, 16The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Netherlands, 2The CRUK Gene Function Laboratory and Breast Cancer Now Research Sciences, toronto, ON, Canada, 17Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom, 3University Medical du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l’Interrégion Est, Centre Hospitalier Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4University of California, San Fransisco, CA, Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France, 18Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence United States, 5Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands. Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l’Interrégion Est, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France. PPM1D Wip1 (Protein phosphatase, Mg2+/Mn2+ dependent 1D), or , is a type 2C phosphatase that regulates stress response pathways including the Early-onset epileptic encephalopathies (EOEE) represent a heterogeneous DNA Damage Response, through inhibiting p53 and other tumour suppres- group of severe disorders characterized by severe seizures, interictal epi- sPoPrMs.1D leptiform activity on a disorganized EEG background, developmental re- Mosaic mutations in non-tumour cell lineages in the last exon (exon 6) of gression or retardation, and onset before one year of age. Among a cohort have been found in patients with breast and ovarian cancer. These of 50 patients with EE, we ascertained two unrelated patients with EOEE truncating mutations, which might have been chemotherapy-induced, reta- associated with severe developmental impairment and autosomal recessive ined the phosphatased cea tnaolyvoti c domain, leading to a gain-of-function effect. variants (namely missense changes and splice-site variants) of A
P3 B2 by We diagnosed 4 childrenP (
P2 M-114D years) with mild-moderate intellectual disa- means of whole-exome sequencing. The targeted sequencing of A
P3 B2 in bility (ID) who had germline frameshift, nonsense or splice site 86 additional unrelated individuals with EOEE led to the identification of mutations in exon 5 of . Various behavioral and neurological pro- an additional family with two affected children carrying a homozygous 4-bp blems were noted, such as ADHD, ODD, anxiety disorder, neonatal feeding deletion leading to a frameshift and premature stop-codon. Two additional problems, hypotonia, gait problems and a high pain threshold. Shared facial families with four affected individuals were gathered through the Matchma- dysmorphisms show a broad forehead, lateral hypoplasia of eyebrows, long ker Exchange initiative by matching on autosomal recessive mutations of palpebral fissures, upturned nose, short philtrum and broad mouth. A
P3 B2. This report presents eight individuals from five unrelated families In fibroblasts and lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from three patients, presenting with global hypotonia, an EOEE with stagnation or regression we tested p53 activation in response to ionizing radiation (IR) exposure. of psychomotor acquisitions with absent speech. Eye contact was poor and All three cell lines showed normal to increased p53 activation compared to associated with an optic atrophy when assessed (5/5). Patients presented controls, in contrast to the suppression of IR-induced p53 activation pre- with a post-natal microcephaly (7/8) and brain MRI identified a superior viously seen in HeLa cells andde U n2oOvSo cells transfected with cancer assoPcPiMat1eDd cerebellar vermis atrophy. A
P3 B2 encodes for a neuron specific subunit of truncated PPM1D cDNA alleles with exon 6 mutations. the AP-3B complex, which is involved in synaptic vesicles biogenesis and In conclusion, we show that germline mutations in exon 5 of transport. Conversely, a natural ap3b2 knockout mouse strain was reported cause syndromic ID. Notably, these mutations do not appear to cause gain- with neurodevelopmental disorders including tonic-clonic seizures. To con- of-function effects on p53 as has been shown for exon 6 mutations in breast clude, these genetic evidences support the implication of autosomal recessi- and ovarian cancer patients. ve mutations of A
P3 B2 in EOEE with optic atrophy. 
C02 .5 
C03  Mutational Mechanisms De novo germline mutations of mTOR pathway genes RHEB and RA
C1  cause developmental phenotypes with alterations in brain size 
C03 .1 M. R. F. Reijnders1, M. Kousi2, G. M. van Woerden3, G. M. Mancini4, T. van Essen5, C. Copy number variation morbidity map of congenital limb Marcelis1, M. Proietti-Onori3, M. van Gastel6, E. Smeets7, S. J. C. Stevens7, C. Gilissen1, R. malformations reveals that the majority of pathogenic variants affect Pfundt1, P. L. Tan2, T. Kleefstra1, Y. Elgersma3, N. Katsanis2, H. G. Brunner1; non-coding regulatory elements 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, M. Spielmann1,2, R. Flöttmann1, B. Kragsteen2, M. Socha2, S. Geuer2, L. Allou2, A. Netherlands, 2Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke University, Durham, NC, Sowińska-Seidler2, J. Wagner1, A. Jamsheer3, B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz4, D. de Silva5, I. Kurth6, I. United States, 3Department of Neuroscience and ENCORE Expertise Center for Maya7, F. Santos8, W. Hülsemann9, D. Horn1, S. Mundlos1,2; Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 1Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Sophia Children‘s Hospital, Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5University of Groningen, University Medical Center of University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 6Department of medical Homburg/Saar, BerlinHomburg, Germany, 5Department of Physiology, Faculty of care, SWZ zorg, Son, Netherlands, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht Medicine, University of Kelaniya, Ragama, Sri Lanka, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands. Jena University Hospital, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Jena, Germany, 7Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel, 8Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain, One of the pathways known to regulate cell growth is the mTOR pathway 9Handchirurgie Kinderkrankenhaus Wilhelmstift, Hamburg, Germany. through the MTOR
C1  and MTOR
C2  complex. Somatic mutations in genes within the mTOR pathway are a well-known cause of hemimegalencephaly in humans by upregulating mTOR activity. Subsequently, germline mutati- Congenital limb malformations can occur as part of a syndrome or as an ons in mTOR pathway genes might also affect brain size. Here, we report isolated form. Microarray studies in single affected families have previous- germline de novo missense mutations in the mTOR activators RHEB (2 fami- ly demonstrated the importance of copy number variations (CNVs) in limb lies, 3 patients) and RA
C1  (2 families, 2 patients). Mutations in both mTOR malformations, but no large scale study has been performed so far and the pathway genes cause an intellectual disability (ID) syndrome with aberrant majority of cases remain undiagnosed. Here we applied high resolution ar- head and brain size. Whereas patients with RHEB mutations show severe ray CGH to 300 patients with congenital limb malformations. We found 31 ID with hypotonia, epilepsy and macrocephaly, microcephaly was observed pathogenic CNVs in known disease loci and identified 6 new loci previously in patients with RA
C1  mutations. Concordant with the human phenotype, not known to be associated with limb malformations. The pathogenic CNVs we found that overexpression of mutant rheb in zebrafish embryos results affected non-coding cis regulatory elements more frequently than expected in megalencephaly and increased neural proliferation, while overexpression (21 non-coding vs 16 coding). We performed functional studies in transge- of mutant rac1 causes microcephaly, decreased neuronal proliferation and nic mice using the CRISPR/Cas9 system and/or segregation studies in these cerebellar defects. Intrauterine transfer of mutant Rheb into the brain of families to investigate the pathogenicity of 6 novel CNVs causing limb de- embryonic mice disrupted neuronal migration and caused epilepsy. Neuro- fects. Overall we reached a diagnostic yield of 12%, which is comparable to cognitive phenotypes observed in zebrafish carrying mutant RHEB peptides copy number studies in other cohorts such as intellectual disability. Howe- could be ameliorated through pharmacological treatment with the mTOR ver, the majority of the pathogenic CNVs (57%) were likely to result from pathway antagonist rapamycin, providing clues for potential future thera- changes in the non-coding cis regulatory landscape, while only 43% were peutic targets in patients with activating de novo RHEB mutations. Based due to gene dosage effects or haploinsufficinency. Additionally, we identi- on our genetic and functional data dEe SnoHvGo g2er0m1l6in e| BmAutRatCioEnsL Oof NmATO, RS PAfIiNed 
|2  W0 rWareW CN.EVSs oHf Gun.kOnRowGn clinical significance (7%) that were inher1it9edABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index from an unaffected parent. Due to reduced penetrance, a key feature of limb observed at breakpoints are driven by a non-canonical non-homologous end malformations, these rare CNVs might still have an important impact on the joining mechanism. skeletal phenotypes of our patients. Funding: Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology (IWT) (TBM- Our results suggest that CNVs affecting non-coding regulatory elements are 090878), KU Leuven, SymBioSys (PFV/10/016) and GOA (GOA/12/015) 
C03 .2 
C03 .4 a major cause of congenital limb malformations. Microhomology underlies the formation of balanced germline human Tissue-specific mutation accumulation in human adult stem cells translocations during life D. Nilsson1,2,3, M. Pettersson1, P. Gustavsson1,2, A. Förster1, W. Hofmeister1, J. Wincent1, F. Blokzijl1, J. de Ligt1, M. Jager1, V. Sasselli1, S. Roerink2, N. Sasaki1, M. Huch1, S. V. Zachariadis1, B. Anderlid1,2, A. Nordgren1,2, O. Mäkitie1,4,5, V. Wirta6,3, F. Vezzi7,3, J. R. Boymans1, P. Prins1, I. J. Nijman1, I. Martincorena2, M. Mokry3, C. L. Wiegerinck3, S. Lupski8,9, M. Nordenskjöld1,2, E. Syk Lundberg1,2, C. M. B. Carvalho8, A. Lindstrand1,2; Middendorp3, E. E. S. Nieuwenhuis3, M. M. A. Verstegen4, L. J. W. van der Laan4, J. de 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Jonge4, J. N. M. IJzermans4, R. G. Vries1, M. van de Wetering1, M. R. Stratton2, H. Clevers1, E. Sweden, 3SciLifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden, 4University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Cuppen1, R. van Boxtel1; 5Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 6KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 1Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, KNAW and Stockholm, Sweden, 7Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Baylor College of University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Cancer Genome Project, Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 9Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, United States. Kingdom, 3Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Introduction: Most apparently balanced translocations are thought to result mechanistically from non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) or, in rare cases of recurrent events, by nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR). Ho- Gradual accumulation of mutations in human adult stem cells during life is wever, few events have been studied with breakpoint resolution. associated with various age-related diseases, including cancer. The number Materials and Methods: Here, we use low coverage mate pair whole genome of stem cell divisions throughout life is believed to be a major determinant sequencing to identify and fine map rearrangement breakpoint junctions in for mutation accumulation and could explain the extreme variation of can- individuals with previously detected germ line translocations. In total, 46 cer incidence across different organs. Yet, mutation patterns and rates of junctions from 22 carriers of balanced translocations including both phe- healthy adult stem cells remain unknown. notypically normal individuals (n=8) and affected individuals (n=14) were Here, we determined genome-wide mutation patterns in primary adult stem characterized. cells of the small intestine, colon and liver of human donors with ages ran- Results: Genes were disrupted in 48% of the breakpoints; recessive genes ging from 3 to 87 years. in 50% of the normal carriers (inferring a risk of mendelian disease in the We find that the number of mutations increases linearly with age up to se- offspring) and known dominant intellectual disability genes in 21% of the veral thousand mutations per cell at 87 years of age, while mutation spectra affected carriers. Finally, seven disrupted candidate disease genes involved remain constant throughout life. Small intestine and colon stem cells have a in various cellular functions and pathways were identified. Microhomology 2-fold higher mutation rate per year compared with liver stem cells. These (2 to 6 bp) was observed in 69% of translocation events. Surprisingly, small differences could be exclusively attributed to the mutagenic action of spon- insertions (5 to 12 bp), originating from local genomic sequences, were ob- taneous deamination of cytosine residues and may reflect the high stem cell served in 23%. division rate in these tissues. Conclusions: Microhomology associated with templated-insertions is a cha- The genomic distribution of somatic mutations is non-random and predo- racteristic of breakpoint junctions for rearrangements mediated by the er- minantly associated with DNA replication dynamics in the small intestine ror prone replication-based repair mechanisms (RBMs). Our data therefore and colon, and with transcription in the liver. These results indicate that a indicate, that even though NHEJ likely underlie many of the balanced trans- stable balance, between various mutagenic and DNA repair processes, is locations reported here, RBMs contribute to the formation of at least 20% maintained throughout life and that the activity of these processes in adult of the cases. The involvement of RBM in these rearrangements supports the stem cells varies between tissues. contention that a significant portion of so-called germ line translocations Zenith grant, Netherlands Genomics Initiative, (935.12.003) to E.C. may have a mitotic origin. Translational Adult Stem Cell Research grant, Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development, (116005002) to R.B. 
C03 .3 A distinct class of chromoanagenesis events characterized by focal 
C03 .5 copy number gains Exome-wide evaluation of splice-disrupting mutations in 4,294 H. Masset1, M. S. Hestand1, H. Van Esch1, P. Kleinfinger2, J. Plaisancié3, A. Afenjar4, R. families with severe developmental disorders Molignier5, C. Schluth-Bolard6, D. Sanlaville6, J. R. Vermeesch1; J. Lord, J. McRae, M. Hurles, on behalf of the Deciphering Developmental Disorders study; 1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Laboratoire Cerba, Saint-Ouen l‘Aumône, France, 3Hôpital Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. Purpan, Toulouse, France, 4Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France, 5Clinique Saint Jean Languedoc, Toulouse, France, 6Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. Mutations affecting splicing are a significant contributor to human disease. Classification of splicing variants is often binary, with only those that fall Introduction: Chromoanagenesis is the process by which a single catastro- within the canonical splice site (CSS) assumed to affect splicing, and to be phic event creates complex rearrangements confined to a single or a few akin to other protein-truncating variants (PTVs). We performed both popu- chromosomes. It is usually characterized by the presence of multiple de- lation genetic and disease-burden analyses to better understand the distri- letions and/or duplications, as well as by copy neutral rearrangements. In bution of splice-disrupting variants in and around the CSS using 4,294 exo- contrast, an array CGH screen of patients with developmental anomalies me sequenced trios from the Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) revealed three patients in which a single chromosome carries from 8 to 11 study. We also used these data to compare the performance of several spli- large copy number gains confined to a single chromosome, but the absence cing prediction tools. of deletions. Surprised by this finding, we set out to further characterize the- We observed that a subset of positions outside the CSS (including the 5th se derivative chromosomes. base after the intron/exon boundary at the donor end, and the last base of Materials and Methods: Chromosome structure was evaluated using fluo- the exon) exhibited evidence of both high levels of purifying selection, and rescence in situ hybiridization (FISH), Illumina massive parallel sequencing, excess de novo mutations in patients. Additionally, within the two bases of and PacBio single-molecule sequencing. Breakpoints were validated by PCR canonical donor sites we observed strong evidence of discordant impact on and Sanger sequencing. splicing, with the base proximal to the exon showing significantly higher de Results: FISH and Illumina/PacBio sequencing revealed derivative chro- novo enrichment and singleton ratio. We observed high concordance of the mosomes maintain their original order, with inserted duplicons clustered splicing prediction tools with our observations, however they failed to cap- together in distinct locations. Breakpoint junction sequences showed both ture completely the landscape of splice-disrupting variation. microhomology and non-templated insertions of up to 40 bp. Taken together, these data suggest binary classification of variants as “spli- Conclusions: Here we present three patients with a single altered chromo- cing” only if they are in the CSS is oversimplified, and that this has a sub- some composed of clustered insertional duplications, no deletions, and bre- stantial impact on both the sensitivity and specificity of identifying genuine akpoint junction sequences showing microhomology and/or non-templated PTVs. insertions. These observations are difficult to reconcile with current mecha- nistic descriptions of chromothripsis and chromoanasynthesis. Therefore, we hypothesize those rearrangements to be of a mechanistically different o2ri0gin. In addition, we suggest that large untemEplSaHtedG i n2s0er1ti6on |a lB sAeqRuCenEceLsO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C03 .6 Proteome-wide expression and turnover analysis quantify genetic impact in Down Syndrome these include 270 rare and 258 low-frequency variants (allele frequency Y. Liu1, C. Borel2, L. Li3, T. Mueller1, P. Boersema4, P. Germain5, G. Testa5, A. Beyer3, S. <1% and 1-5% respectively), and 44 „high impact“ variants of large pheno- Antonarakis2,6, R. Aebersold1,6; typic effects. Significant enrichments of the corresponding gene sets within 1Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Department of relevant biological pathways, rare haematological and immune disorders, Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, and University mouse phenotypes, and human complex disease confirm their importance Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, for understanding of haematopoietic processes and pathogenesis. 4Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, This research was supported by MRC, BHF, NIHR, NHSBT and Cambridge- 5Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy, 6These labs contribute equally, Zurich and Geneva, Switzerland. B 
C0 R 4C .. 2 Genome-wide association study identifies 15 novel genetic variants contributing to variation in cytokine levels Introduction: Trisomy 21 (T21) is the cause of Down Syndrome. However, V. Kumar1, Y. Li1, M. Oosting2, I. Ricaño-Ponce1, S. Smeekens2, M. Jaeger2, L. Joosten2, C. how T21 impact human functional proteome remains unclear. We hypothe- Wijmenga1, M. Netea2; size that the proteome-wide turnover analysis is crucial to understand the 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Radboud University functional impact of T21. Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Materials and Methods: We investigated the effect of the extra chr21 at the levels of transcript quantity, proteome quantity and protein turnover rate. We analyzed the primary fetal skin fibroblasts derived from a pair of mono- Introduction: The genetic basis of human immune responses to pathogens zygotic twins discordant for T21, which uniquely allowed us to characterize has a profound effect on susceptibility to human infectious and immune- the proteome changes due to T21 without the noise of genomic variability. mediated diseases. A highly diverse set of immune cells is involved in produ- To validate, we also analyzed the fibroblasts from 11 unrelated T21 indivi- cing cytokines to regulate these immune responses. However, the impact of duals and 11 controls. We applied the cutting-edge SWATH mass spectrome- genetic variation on the production of these regulatory cytokines during the try to reproducibly measure the proteomes. course of infection is unknown. Results: We quantified 4056 unique proteins for expression and ~2200 pro- Materials and methods: In this study we profiled genome-wide SNP geno- teins by pulsed SILAC experiment for turnover analysis in both normal and types, FACS assessment of the cell-populations as well as cytokine respon- T21 fibroblasts from the twins. The proteome-wide T21/normal fold-change ses to major human pathogens (bacteria, virus and fungus) in whole blood, correlation was extremely low, indicating substantial post-transcriptional PBMCs, macrophages and T-cells of 500 healthy individuals. We performed regulation and buffering effects in T21. Overall, the protein degradation was a systematic study to reveal organization of cytokine responses to different faster in trisomy cells than the controls. Remarkably, those Chr21 encoded pathogens in different cell-types. We then correlated the cytokine levels to proteins that are members of heteromeric protein complexes in particular SNPs and performed integrative genomics analysis to identify genes that seemed to be exempt from responding to copy number alternations, like- control cytokine production in different immune cells. ly through accelerated protein degradation. Moreover, we found that both Results and conclusions: We have identified 15 novel loci significantly asso- mitochondrial and cytosolic ribosomal proteomes were degraded heavily ciated (P<5x10-8) with different cytokine levels in response to pathogens. in T21, but different degree of translational regulation shaped their final, We show that the cytokine-QTLs are under positive selection and are en- divergent expression levels. riched to be associated with human diseases. Furthermore, SNPs affecting Conclusion: Prevalent, organelle specific proteome remodeling was identi- monocyte-derived cytokines are enriched to be associated with infectious fied as the proteomic hallmark of T21 as compared to normal. diseases, whereas SNPs that affect T-cell derived cytokines are associated with autoimmune diseases. We show that the genetic variability in the im- 
C04  Complex Traits mune pathways is organized around a physiological response to specific pa- thogens. In summary, we show that upon stimulation genetic variation plays 
C04 .1 a C 0si 4g .n 3ificant role in influencing human immune responses and diseases. More than 1500 genetic variants regulate haematopoiesis in humans Genetic variants regulate adaptive and innate immune cell levels in revealing novel genes and pathways the healthy Dutch population W. J. Astle1,2, H. Elding3, T. Jiang1, D. Allen4, D. Ruklisa1,2, H. Bouman3, F. Riveros-Mckay3, A. R. Aguirre-Gamboa1, H. J. P. M. Koenen2, I. Ricano-Ponce1, R. G. van der Molen2, E. van L. Mann3, D. Mead3, M. A. Kostadima1, J. J. Lambourne1,5, S. Sivapalaratnam1,6, K. Downes1, Rijssen,3, B. van Cranenbroek3, V. MagadiGopalaiah1, C. Wijmenga1, M. Netea4, I. Joosten3, K. Kundu1,3, L. Bomba3, J. R. Bradley1,7, L. C. Daugherty1,5, O. Delaneau8, S. Garner1,5, L. Y. Li1; Grassi1,5, J. A. Guerrero1,5, M. Haimel1, M. Kamat1, B. Kim9, A. Mandoli9, J. Marchini10, S. 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Meacham1,5, K. Megy1,5, J. O’Connell10, R. Petersen1,5, N. Sharifi9, S. M. Sheard11, J. R. Staley1, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Department S. Tuna1, M. v. d. Ent9, S. Wang9, E. Wheeler3, S. P. Wilder12, V. Iotchkova1,3, C. Moore1, J. of Internal Medicine, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Sambrook1,5, E. Di Angelantonio1, S. Kaptoge1, T. W. Kuijpers13,14, M. Frontini1,5, J. Danesh1,3, Center, Laboratory Medicine, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Radboud University Nijmegen D. J. Roberts10,15, W. H. Ouwehand1,3,16, A. S. Butterworth1, N. Soranzo3,1; Medical Center, Department of Medicine and Nijmegen University Centre for Infectious 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Cambridge Institute of Public Diseases, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Health, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4NHS Blood and Transplant, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5National Health Service (NHS) Blood and Transplant, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Barts health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 7National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Levels of immune cell subpopulations vary greatly between healthy indivi- Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8University of Geneva, Geneva, duals, yet the origin of such variation is only partially known. In this study Switzerland, 9Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10University of Oxford, we explore the immune cell landscape for factors that influence cell abun- Oxford, United Kingdom, 11UK Biobank Ltd, Stockport, United Kingdom, 12European dance. We measured over 210 different absolute cell levels and cell per- Bioinformatics Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 13University of Amsterdam, centages from B, NK and T cells subpopulations from fresh blood samples Amsterdam, Netherlands, 14Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam, of 500 healthy Dutch individuals. We observed a consistent gender effect, Netherlands, 15Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 16Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom. where females have higher cell levels, an overall negative correlation with age and a considerable fluctuation with respect to season. In addition, we assessed the influence of hormones and circulating antibodies in the im- mune system and found no significant effect of these on cell variation. Next, Mature blood cells are essential for oxygen transport, haemostasis and im- we profiled the genotype of the 500 volunteers and searched for genetic mune response. We studied 36 haematological traits (relating to mature and associations to the absolute cell levels and proportions, these traits were immature red cells, platelets and myeloid and lymphoid white cells) in indi- controlled for gender, age effect and date of collection to evaluate for cell viduals of European ancestry selected from the UK Biobank, UK BiLEVE and count QTLs (ccQTL) on ~7 million variants. We identified 11 independent INTERVAL cohorts. For the genetic association study, we considered a total loci associated with at least one cell type. Of these, 5 previously reported of 173,480 individuals with phenotype and genotype data passing stringent loci were replicated. Additionally, we performed an integrative genomics quality control filters at 29.5 million genetic variants (MAF > 0.01%). Effect analysis to identify genes implicated to the variation of the cell levels, using size estimates and their standard errors were combined across the three RNA-seq data from blood of ~600 samples from an independent Dutch co- studies using inverse-variance weighted meta-analyses. hort, we performed cis-eQTL mapping and prioritized candidate genes for Overall, 182,105 variants were declared to be associated with at least one the novel loci. Furthermore, we detected that ccQTLs are enriched for SNPs blood cell trait, represented here by a set of 1,652 distinct sentinel variants. associated with immune-related diseases. These results link genetic infor- Of these 148 corresponded to previously reported GWAS hits thereby va- mation with cellular and molecular phenotypes and explore its involvement lidating almost all the blood trait associations previously reported in Eu- in immune diseases. ropean samples. Associations with theE SreHmGain 2in0g1 16,5 0| 4B vAarRiaCnEtsL aOreN nAov,e Sl, PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 21 augmenting the number of known associations by over 10-fold. Remarkably,ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C04 .4 Capture Hi-C reveals a novel causal gene, I
L20 RA, in the pan- FAD
S1 -2 CP
S1  REV3L, NTAN1 PNLIPR
P2  autoimmune genetic susceptibility region 6q23 SM 
C18 :0; SM (OH) 
C22 :2/SM 
C16 :1. Previously known variants are located A. J. McGovern1, P. Martin1, S. Schoenfelder2, P. Fraser2, S. Eyre1, G. Orozco1; in , , and . Four replicated common 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The Babraham Institute, variants (rs3204953, rs174550, rs499974, rs7157785) showed nominally Cambridge, United Kingdom. significant associations with type 2 diabetes in DIAGRAM. Conclusion: We identified eight new associations between genetic variants and diabetes-related metabolic traits providing insights into metabolic pa- Introduction: The majority of complex disease associations are with single thways underlying the development of type 2 diabetes. 
C04 .6 nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in non-coding enhancer regions, StatinGWAS: A genome-wide association study demonstrating the which may regulate transcription through long-range interactions with research potential of nationwide prescription drug registries their target genes. The 6q23 locus, associated with several autoimmune P. Helkkula1, I. Surakka1,2, P. Häppölä1, V. Salomaa3, A. Palotie1,4,5, M. J. Daly6, S. Ripatti1,2,7; diseases including RA, contains many intergenic SNPs situated a large di- 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Unit of Public Health stance from any gene. The aim of this work was to identify causal disease Genomics, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of genes at the locus by studying long range chromatin interactions in human Health, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 4Psychiatric and T and B cell lines. Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United Materials and Methods: Capture Hi-C (CHi-C) targeting both the disease States, 5The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Analytic intergenic region and all promoters within 500kb of associated SNPs was and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 7Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. used to investigate potential interactions between RA associated variants and their functional targets. Targeted 3C-qPCR analysis in B-cell lines con- taining the appropriate SNP genotype was used to study genotype-specific National prescription drug registries are a potential wealth of insight interactions. I
L20 RA IF- into the clinical status of large populations. While hospitalization records RNeGsRu1lts: CHi-C identified numerous lTooNpFiAnIgP i3ntIeLr2a0cRtiAon s beTtwNeFeAnIP r3estriction (e.g. ICD codes) may provide complete ascertainment of serious diseases, fragments containing intergenic SNPs and the gene, upstream of prescription registries may provide insights into the onset and severity and lncRNAs downstream of . and interac- of chronic disease not available solely through hospitalizations - parti- ted with the same lncRNAs, and with IeLa2c0hR oAther. 3C-qPCR showed that the cularly in populations with complete and relatively homogeneous access risk allele of the most likely causal ISLN2
P0 ,R rAs6927172, was correlated with a to medical care. We took this approach using the FINRISK cohort studies higher frequency of interactions with . The risk allele was also asso- (N=19,678) with registry data from the Finnish social insurance prescrip- ciated with increased expression of mRNA, and increased binding of tion medicine purchase database by studying genetic associations to statin enhancer histone marks and transcription factors in T-cells. use, defined as more than two purchases of statins or ezetimibe during the Conclusions: Complex looping interactions within the 6q23 region bring RA follow-up period 1995-2011. Using logistic regression, we detected associa- associated SNPs, genes and regulatory elements together. This work shows tions in five loci, including well-known LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) loci: LDLR that GWAS associated SNPs cannot simply be assigned to the nearest gene, (rs141787760, p=1.95e-14), PCSK9 (rs11591147, p=1.78e-14) and APOE potentially identifying novel targets for new therapies. 
C04 .5 (rs7412, p=6.13e-22). Additionally, we saw strong association to the statin Variants from the exome chip and metabolic pathways of type 2 target gene HMGCR (rs10045497, p=1.38e-9). Our results validate the statin diabetes use data and the drug registry for various genome-wide association study S. Jäger1,2, S. Wahl3,4,2, J. Kröger1,2, P. Hoffmann5,6,7, A. Floegel8, T. Pischon9, J. Adamski10, designs. Furthermore, we demonstrate that by combining a scan for LDL-C M. Müller-Nurasyid11,12,13, M. Waldenberger3,4, K. Strauch11,14, A. Peters3,13,2, C. Gieger3,4, K. in the untreated population with the independent case-control analysis of Suhre15, H. Grallert3,4,2, H. Boeing8, M. B. Schulze1,2, K. Meidtner1,2; statin use vs non-statin use, we obtain a more powerful statistical scan for 1Department of Molecular Epidemiology, German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Nuthetal, Germany, 2German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), LDL-C loci. Retrospective drug use data enables us to extend our study into Neuherberg, Germany, 3Institute of Epidemiology II, Helmholtz Zentrum München, other statin-related outcomes, such as switching medications and disconti- German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Research nuation for possible identification of genetic markers associated with side- Unit of Molecular Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research effect sensitivity. We will also pursue this study approach into other drug Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 5Division of Medical Genetics, categories, including antihypertensive drugs. Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 6Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, 
C05  Cancer Predisposition University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 8Department of Epidemiology, German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Nuthetal, Germany, 9Molecular Epidemiology Group, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin-Buch, Germany, 10Institute of Experimental Genetics, Genome Analysis Center, Helmholtz Zentrum 
C05 .1 München, Neuherberg, Germany, 11Institute of Genetic Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum Germline and somatic FGFR1 abnormalities in dysembryoplastic München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, neuroepithelial tumors 12Department of Medicine I, University Hospital Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians- Universität, Munich, Germany, 13DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), B. Rivera1, T. Gayden1, J. Carrot-Zhang1, J. Nadaf1, T. Boshari1, D. Faury1, M. Zeinieh1, R. partner site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany, 14Institute of Medical Informatics, Blanc1, D. Burk1, S. Fahiminiya1, E. Bareke1, U. Schüller2, C. Monoranu3, R. Sträter4, K. Biometry and Epidemiology, Chair of Genetic Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians- Kerl5, T. Niederstadt4, G. Kurlemann6, B. Ellezam7, Z. Michalak8, M. Thom8, P. Lockhart9, Universität, Munich, Germany, 15Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell R. Leventer9, M. Ohm10, D. MacGregor11, D. Jones12, J. Karamchandani1, C. Greenwood1, Medical College in Qatar, Qatar Foundation-Education City, Doha, Qatar. A. Berghuis1, S. Bens13, R. Siebert13, M. Zakrzewska14, P. Liberski14, K. Zakrzewski15, S. Sisodiya8, W. Paulus16, S. Albrecht1, M. Hasselblatt16, N. Jabado1, W. D. Foulkes1, J. Majewski1; 1McGill uiversity, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Background: The unexplained heritability of type 2 diabetes is high, sugge- Germany, 3University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 4University Children’s sting that low frequency or rare genetic variants might explain additional Hospital, Münster, Germany, 5University Children’s Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany, proportions. Diabetes-related metabolites may aid the identification of no- 6University Children‘s Hospital, Münster, Germany, 7CHU Sainte-Justine,, Montreal, vel risk variants for type 2 diabetes. QC, Canada, 8UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 9The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 10VUMC School of Medical Sciences, Amsterdam, Material and Methods: We used the Illumina HumanExome v1.1 Bead Ar- Netherlands, 11Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 12German Cancer ray to genotype individuals from the German EPIC-Potsdam study. Within Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 13University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany, a representative subsample (n=2500) we explored the association between 14University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland, 15Polish Mother‘s Memorial Hospital Research single genetic variants and diabetes-related metabolites measure-7d by a Institute, Lodz, Poland, 16University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany. targeted metabolomics platform (Biocrates). Findings (p<1.64×10 ) were replicated within the German KORA F4 study. For the replicated genetic va- riants associations with type 2 diabetes risk were investigated within the Introduction: Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (DNETs) are benign EPIC-Potsdam case-cohort (n=2891; ncases=758) and by look-up in DMIAOGGRATA2M brain tumors associated with intractable, drug-resistant epilepsy. Distin- and other consortia. guishing DNETs from other low-grade glioneuronal tumors is challenging Results: We identified one new association between rs499974 ( ) for neuro-pathologists. We set out to identify the genetic causes of DNETs and a diacyl-phosphatidylcholine ratio (PC aa 
C40 :5/PC aa 
C38 :5) and and to clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying this condition. identifiedA PsOevEen associations of loci which have been previouslyS GdPePsc1ribed Methods: We studied a family with multinodular DNETs together with 100 with regard to metabolites, but found new ratios including sphingolipids: sporadic tumors referred to us as DNETs. Whole-exome sequencing was per- rs7412 ( ) and SM (OH) 
C22 :2/SM (OH) 
C22 :1; SrPs7T1
L5 C73785
 ( ) and formed on 46 tumors and targeted sequencing for hotspot FGFR1 mutations SM  C16
:1/PC aa  C28
:1; SM (OH)  C22
:2/SM  C24
:0; SM (OH)  C22
:2/SM (OH) and BRAFp.V600E was used on the remaining samples. Blind neuropatholo-  C2142
:1; SM (OH)  C22
:2/SM (OH)  C22
:1; rs3645E 8S 5 H (G 201 ) 6 an | d B SA M R  C1
C 6E :1L /ON gA y , r S evP ieA wI ,N FI S| HW , cW opW y n. uE mS bH erG v. aO riR atG ion assays and Sanger sequencing wereABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C05
.3 Refining the clinical classification of mismatch repair gene variants used to validate the findings. Supporting evidence for functional defects was M. Genuardi1, R. Tricarico2, M. Kasela3, C. Mareni4, B. A. Thompson5, A. Drouet6, obtained by in silico modelling, Flow Cytometry and β-galactosidase stai- G. Gorelli7, F. Crucianelli7, L. Staderini7, V. Ingrosso7, J. Kantelinen3, L. Papi7, M. De ning. Angioletti4, M. Berardi4, D. Turchetti8, A. Martins9, A. B. Spurdle10; Results: We identified a novel germline FGFR1 mutation (p.R661P) and 1Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Tuscan Tumor Institute, Florence, somatic activating FGFR1 mutations (p.N546K or p.K656E) in a father and Italy, 5Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, his two children with DNETs. Pathology review distinguished DNETs (WHO 6Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Rouen, France, 7University of Florence, Florence, grade I) (45%) from non-DNETs (55%). FGFR1 alterations, mainly intrage- Italy, 8University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 9I, Rouen, France, 10QIMR Berghofer Medical nic tyrosine kinase duplication and multiple mutants in cis, characterized Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia. DNETs (58.1%) whereas FGFR1 mutations (19%) (p=3.698e-05) and hot- spot BRAFp.V600E (22.6%) (p=0.00046) were identified in non-DNETs. Phospho-ERK overexpression in FGFR1p.R661P and p.N546K cells support Classifying DNA sequence variants to explain their clinical consequences is enhanced MAPK/ERK activation in this condition. an integral component of clinical molecular testing. The International Socie- Conclusions: This study identifies constitutional and somatic FGFR1 altera- ty for Gastrointestinal Hereditary Tumors (InSiGHT) has developed criteria tions and hotspot BRAF-V600E as key events in DNETs and non-DNET tu- for clinical interpretation of mismatch repair (MMR) gene variants and sub- mors respectively. The integrated pathology and molecular characterization sequently performed a comprehensive assessment of the variants present in performed reveals the key role of the MAP-Kinase pathway in these seizure- their database. To assess the value of the components of the InSiGHT classi- prone tumours, pointing the way towards existing targeted therapies. fication system, and of additional points of evidence not considered in their Funding: FRQS to WDF, NJ, JM approach, we have performed a systematic investigation of 24 MSH2 and  C05
.2 MLH1 variants identified in a single institution, six of which had not been Germline ESR2 mutation predisposes to medullary thyroid carcinoma previously classified. The data used for evaluation included: population fre- and causes up-regulation of RET expression quency, co-segregation, tumor molecular characteristics (including loss of J. Smith1, M. Read2, R. Brown3, J. Hoffman4, B. Bradshaw5, C. Campbell6, T. Cole4, J. Dieguez heterozygosity), RNA analyses, and in vitro functional assays. In addition, Navas7, F. Eatock8, J. Gundara9, E. Lian10, D. McMullan5, N. V. Morgan2, L. Mulligan10, evaluation of the variants with multiple in silico programs was performed. P. Morrison11, M. Robledo12,13, M. Simpson14, V. Smith2, S. Stewart4, R. Trembath15, S. Overall, previous classifications of 18 variants were confirmed based on no- Sidhu9, F. Togneri5, N. Wake1, Y. Wallis5, J. C. Watkinson3, E. R. Maher16, C. McCabe2, E. R. vel lines of evidence, supporting the utility of the InSiGHT approach. Among Woodward6,4,1; the in silico programs, PON-MMR2 and MAPP-MMR had the best overall ac- 1Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalised Medicine, University of Birmingham, curacy when assessed versus classifications according to InSIGHT criteria. Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University Since one of the major problems associated with InSiGHT classification is of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Queen Elizabeth Medical Centre, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4West Midlands Regional the need of independent replication of functional results due to lack of cli- Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5West Midlands Regional Genetics nically validated in vitro assays, we propose that concordance of the two Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, programs in predicting deleterious effects might be used as a surrogate for Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic the functional MMR test. In sum, we propose an improved strategy for MMR Health Sciences Centre (MAHSC), Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Human Biomaterials gene variant interpretation, which can serve as a model for other disease Resource Centre, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, genes. Birmingham, United Kingdom, 8Department of Endocrine Surgery, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, 9Kolling Institute of Medical Research, Royal North  C05
.4 Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 10Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Cancer Chromosomal mosaicism in peripheral blood and cancer risk in Research Institute, Queen‘s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, 11Centre for Cancer Fanconi Anemia Research and Cell Biology, Queen‘s University of Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom, J. Reina1,2,3, R. Pujol3,4, M. López-Sánchez1,2,5, B. Rodríguez-Santiago1,2,6, M. Aza- 12Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre Carmona3,4, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,2,3, J. Surrallés3,4; (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 13Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 1Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Raras, Madrid, Spain, 14Division of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, King’s College Barcelona, Spain, 2Neuroscience Program, Institut Hospital del Mar d’Investigacions London School of Medicine, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 15Queen Mary Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de University of London, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 4Department of Genetics and United Kingdom, 16Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge and NIHR Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 5Centre de Recerca Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom. en Epidemiologia Ambiental (CREAL), Barcelona, Spain, 6qGenomics Laboratory, Esplugues, Spain. Introduction: Familial medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) and its precursor, C cell hyperplasia (CCH), is associated with germline RET mutations causing Introduction. Clonal mosaicism for chromosomal rearrangements, detec- multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. However, some rare families with ap- table by SNP array of DNA from any tissue, has been associated with aging parent MTC/CCH predisposition do not have a detectable RET mutation. and cancer risk. Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disorder characterized by Materials and Methods: To identify novel MTC/CCH predisposition genes we congenital defects, bone marrow (BM) failure and cancer susceptibility. FA undertook exome resequencing studies in a family with apparent predispo- patients require strict follow-up including periodic BM testing. We have stu- sition to MTC/CCH and no identifiable RET mutation. died the prevalence of clonal mosaicism in FA patients and whether it could Results: We identified a novel ESR2 frameshift mutation, c.948delT, which be an early marker for cancer. segregated with histological diagnosis following thyroid surgery in family Methods. Retrospective blood DNA samples of 129 FA patients (0-50yo) members and demonstrated loss of ESR2 encoded ERβ expression in the were analyzed by SNP array. Mosaic events were detected with MAD softwa- MTC tumour. ERα and ERβ form heterodimers binding DNA at specific estro- re and experimentally validated by microsatellite and MLPA analyses. gen response elements (ERE) to regulate gene transcription. ERβ represses Results. We detected and validated 45 mosaic events in 14/129 patients, ERα mediated activation of the ERE and the RET promoter contains three including 7 uniparental disomies, 15 deletions, 13 duplications, 3 complex ERE. In vitro, we showed that ESR2 c.948delT results in unopposed ERα me- rearrangements, 2 monosomies and 5 tri/tetrasomies. We detected 6 gains diated increased cellular proliferation, activation of the ERE and increased in 3q in 5 patients where 4 of them developed hematologic cancer and 3 RET expression. In vivo, immunostaining of CCH and MTC using an anti-RET events whose intestitial BP was within HLA loci. Compared to age-matched antibody demonstrated increased RET expression. population controls, FA individuals had a 110-250X rate of detectable mo- Conclusions: Together these findings identify germline ESR2 mutation as a saicism. Cancer was more frequently diagnosed (4X) in cases with detectab- novel cause of familial MTC/CCH and provide important insights into a novel le mosaicism during a 0-10 year follow-up. mechanism causing increased RET expression in tumourigenesis. Conclusions. In FA, clonal mosaicism prevalence is increased and related to Funding: Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham Charity and The Get A-Head higher cancer risk. 3q gain, typically related to leukemia, is the most com- Charitable Trust, Affymetrix UK Limited, the Technology Strategy Board mon rearrangement found in mosaicism in our cohort and in those patients (now Innovate-UK) Stratified Medicine Innovation Platform (#101032), the with leukemia. Therefore, mosaicism detection in blood by SNP array could Canadian Institutes for Health Research (#142303), the Terry Fox Research be used as an early marker for cancer in FA. Institute Transdisciplinary Training Program in Cancer Research and the Grant Support: FPU13/00782, FIS-PI1302481 co-funded by FEDER & National Institute for Health Research. 2014SRG1468 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 23ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C05
.5 Parent inheritance of RB1 hypomorphic mutations and somatic mosaicism can explain low penetrance in retinoblastoma. nic APC mutation was identified as underlying cause of the disease. In 2/5 V. Imperatore1, A. Pinto2,1, S. Amitrano2, S. Somma1,2, M. Bruttini1,2, T. Hadjistilianou3, S. cases, the mosaic level in leukocyte DNA was slightly below the sensitivity De Francesco3, P. Toti4, E. Gusson5, M. Mencarelli1,2, F. Mari1,2, A. Renieri1,2, F. Ariani2,1; threshold of Sanger sequencing; while in 3/5 cases, the allelic fraction was 1Medical Genetics, Department of Medical Biotechnology, University of Siena, either very low (0.1-1%) or no mutations were detectable. The majority of Policlinico ‚Santa Maria alle Scotte‘, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliera mosaic mutations were located outside the somatic Mutation Cluster Regi- Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Unit of Ophthalmology, and Retinoblastoma on of the gene. Conclusions: The present data indicate a high prevalence of Referral Center, Department of Surgery, University of Siena, Policlinico ‚Santa Maria pathogenic mosaic APC mutations below the detection thresholds of routine alle Scotte‘, Siena, Italy, 4Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, Section of Pathology, University of Siena, Policlinico ‚Santa Maria alle Scotte‘, Siena, Italy, 5Unit of diagnostics in adenomatous polyposis, even if high-coverage sequencing of Ophthalmology, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, Verona, Italy. leukocyte DNA alone is taken into account. This has important implications for both routine work-up and strategies to identify new causative genes in this patient group. Retinoblastoma (RB) represents one of the most extensively studied ped- iatric cancers but many questions still remain unsolved, including incom-  C06
 Carrier and Newborn Screening (joint plete penetrance. In 2009, it has been demonstrated a ~3 fold excess of the with EMPAG) RB1 maternal canonical transcript due to an imprinting mechanism. As a consequence, maternally inherited hypomorphic mutations may retain suf- ficient suppressor activity to prevent tumor development. Here, we change  C06
.1 the perspective of retinoblastoma field demonstrating a differential allelic Responsible implementation of expanded carrier screening - expression of hypomorphic variants that significantly influence the phe- Recommendations of the European Society of Human Genetics notyipic outcome in families at risk for RB onset. In one family, the father L. Henneman1, P. Borry2, D. Chokoshvili3, M. C. Cornel1, C. G. Van El1, F. Forzano4, A. Hall5, who presented with retinoma and the two children who developed retino- H. C. Howard6, S. Janssens3, H. Kayserili7, P. Lakeman8, A. Lucassen9, S. A. Metcalfe10, L. blastoma were all identified harboring an hypomorphic splicing variant Vidmar11, G. De Wert12, W. J. Dondorp12, B. Peterlin11; (c.2663+2T>C). RT-PCR quantitative analysis showed a higher expression 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Centre for Biomedical Ethics of the abnormally spliced product in the father along with an inversion of and Law, Leuven, Belgium, 3Centre for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 4Medical the ratio between the two differentially spliced isoforms. A parent-of-origin- Genetics Unit, Genova, Italy, 5PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Centre for effect was demonstrated for another hypomorphic mutation (p.Arg661Trp) Research Ethics and Bioethics, Uppsala, Sweden, 7Koc University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9University of able to induce RB in a child of a male carrier with an anamnestic history Southampton and Wessex Clinical Genetic Service, Southampton, United Kingdom, positive for osteosarcoma. For the first time, here we also identified somatic 10Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Department of Paediatrics, Melbourne, mosaicism as importanant factor that can impact the phenotypic expres- Australia, 11Ljubljana University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 12Department of sion. Indeed, segregation analysis performed by high-depth NGS assay in Health, Ethics & Society, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. another family, showed a ~50% of mutated molecules in the proband with retinoblastoma in comparison with a ~30% in the father with retinoma, ac- cordingly with a somatic mosaicism. These findings completely change the Carrier screening is the detection of carrier status of recessive diseases in genetic and prenatal counselling and the clinical management of the fami- persons who do not have an a priori increased risk of being a carrier based lies. They also underline the importance of performing high-sensitivity NGS on his/her personal or family history. Carrier screening aims to identify for RB diagnosis. couples who have an increased risk of having an affected child to facilitate informed reproductive decision-making. Expanded carrier screening offers  C05
.6 screening for multiple recessive disorders, facilitated by new genetic testing Low-level APC mutational mosaicism is the underlying cause in a technologies. Expanded carrier screening panels that have been introduced substantial fraction of unexplained colorectal adenomatous polyposis to date have been advertised and offered on a commercial basis. In 2014, re- cases I. Spier1,2, D. Drichel3, M. Kerick4,5, J. Kirfel6,2, S. Horpaopan1,7, A. Laner8,9, S. Holzapfel1,2, S. commendations regarding responsible implementation of expanded carrier Peters1, R. Adam1,2, B. Zhao10, T. Becker3,11, R. P. Lifton10, S. Perner12,13, P. Hoffmann1,14,15, G. screening were developed by the Public and Professional Policy Commit- Kristiansen6,2, B. Timmermann16, M. M. Nöthen1,14, E. Holinski-Feder8,9, M. R. Schweiger4,5, tee (PPPC) of the European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) and posted S. Aretz1,2; on the ESHG website (Feb-March 2015), for membership consultation. The 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Center for recommendations address the challenges that expanded carrier screening Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3German Center might pose in the context of the lessons learnt from decades of population- for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Vertebrate based carrier screening. The final recommendations include e.g. the follo- Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 5Epigenomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, wing: priority should be given to carrier screening panels that include (a Bonn, Germany, 7Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medical Science, Naresuan comprehensive set of) severe childhood-onset disorders; the main focus University, Phitsanulok, Thailand, 8Medizinische Klinik - Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum should be on reporting sequence variants that clearly affect function; eva- der LMU, Munich, Germany, 9MGZ - Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany, luation of new models of consent (e.g. ‘generic consent’) in this context is 10Departments of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of required; and, governments and public health authorities should adopt an Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, 11Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics, active role in discussing the responsible introduction of expanded carrier and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 12Section for Prostate screening. With these recommendations we aim to contribute to the public Cancer Research, Institute of Pathology, Center for Integrated Oncology Cologne/ Bonn, University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 13Pathology Network of the and professional discussion and to arrive at better clinical and laboratory University Hospital of Luebeck and Leibniz Research Center Borstel, Borstel, Germany, practice guidelines. 14Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,  C06
.2 15Division of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel and Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 16Next Generation Sequencing Group, Max Planck Setting the scope of screening: ethical reflections on the offer of Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. reproductive choice G. Stapleton; Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. Background: In 30-50% of patients with colorectal adenomatous polyposis, no germline mutation in the known genes APC, causing familial adenoma- Introduction: International normative guidelines recommend that prena- tous polyposis (FAP); MUTYH, causing MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP); tal screening for the purpose of reproductive choice should only be offered or POLE or POLD1, causing Polymerase-Proofreading-associated polyposis for serious medical conditions that affect childhood. Whilst this position is (PPAP) can be identified, although a hereditary etiology is likely. This study widely endorsed, ethical concerns have been raised that such limitations aimed to explore the impact of APC mutational mosaicism in unexplained to the scope of screening may challenge health services in maintaining a polyposis. Methods: To comprehensively screen for somatic low-level APC position of non-directivity with respect to couples’ reproductive choices. mosaicism, high-coverage next-generation sequencing of the APC gene was In view of near future opportunities for whole genome sequencing with performed using DNA from leukocytes and a total of 53 colorectal tumors non-invasive prenatal testing this concern should be addressed. This pa- from 20 unrelated patients with unexplained sporadic adenomatous poly- per examines whether the proposed limitations conflict with principles of posis. APC mosaicism was assumed if the same loss-of-function APC mu- non-directivity. Methods: A normative discourse analysis was performed in tation was present in ≥ two anatomically separated colorectal adenomas/ order to identify the aims of offering screening in line with proposed limita- carcinomas per patient. All mutations were validated using diverse me- tions. An integrated model for ethical reflection was then used to assess the th 2o 4ds. Results: In 25% (5/20) of patients, somEatSicH mGos 2ai0ci1sm6 o| fB aA paRtChoEgLe-ONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG consistency of each aim with respect to maintaining the non-directivity ofABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index health services. Results: Three aims of the proposed scope were identified: Conclusions: While having the potential to overcome some moral limits in- to avoid suffering of the future child, to avoid suffering of the prospective herent in traditional carrier screening, EUCS comes with moral challenges parents, and to reduce the burden of care on society. All three aims conflict of its own. More research is needed to (further) anticipate the moral and with the principle ethical requirement that health services should maintain practical implications of EUCS. a position of non-directivity with respect to couples’ reproductive choices.  C06
.5 Discussion: The aim of avoiding the suffering of prospective parents may be Clinical utility of expanded carrier screening: reproductive behaviors acceptable provided additional criteria are met relating to the wider social of at-risk couples context of screening: i) is private access available for other screening opti- C. Ghiossi1, K. Ready2, C. Lieber2, J. D. Goldberg2, I. S. Haque2, G. A. Lazarin2, K. K. Wong2; ons, ii) are services provided equitably following the outcomes of reproduc- 1California State University Stanislaus, Turlock, CA, United States, 2Counsyl, South San tive choice, and iii) is screening also offered prior to conception? Francisco, CA, United States.  C06
.3 Factors for successful implementation of population-based expanded carrier screening: what can we learn from existing initiatives? Introduction: Expanded carrier screening panels analyze dozens or K. C. A. Holtkamp1, I. B. Mathijssen2, P. Lakeman2, M. C. Van Maarle2, W. J. Dondorp3, L. hundreds of recessive disease genes for couples planning to have children, Henneman1, M. C. Cornel1; but literature on the clinical utility of screening conditions beyond profes- 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Academic Medical Center, sional guidelines is scarce. We surveyed at-risk couples for this purpose. Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. Methods: Patients used an expanded carrier screen for up to 110 genes. At-risk couples were those whose partners were also carriers for the same autosomal recessive diseases. We invited 465 consecutive at-risk couples to Background: Carrier screening for autosomal recessive disorders aims to participate in an IRB-approved survey. enhance reproductive decision making by identifying couples at a 1-in-4 Results: 70 completed the survey; 13 that reported a family history were risk in every pregnancy of having an affected child. Except for few countries excluded from analysis. 41 were not pregnant at time of screening. Of tho- or regions, carrier screening is not widely offered, and is mostly ancestry- se that were not pregnant, 63% indicated that they would choose IVF with based. Technological advances enable carrier screening for multiple di- PGD, prenatal diagnosis, gamete donation, adoption, or no reproduction. seases simultaneously. This allows universal screening regardless of ance- 27% indicated that they were not planning to alter reproductive plans. The stry (population-based expanded carrier screening). It is important to study remainder did not indicate clear plans. Participants who do not plan to pur- how this can be successfully implemented, and what can be learned from sue alternative options indicated perceived severity as a major reason. already existing initiatives. Of pregnant participants, 43% elected fetal diagnosis. Two reported interest Methods: Factors associated with successful implementation were identi- in testing, but miscarried before the procedure could be done. Seven did not fied by: 1) a literature review, and 2) two case studies; studying experiences consider the condition sufficiently severe to consider pregnancy terminati- with carrier screening in two high-risk communities (a Dutch founder po- on. Of 7 pregnancies that underwent prenatal diagnosis, 5 were unaffected pulation, and the Ashkenazi Jewish population), including a survey among and 2 were affected. One of the affected pregnancies was terminated and community members. one was continued. Results: Factors identified were: familiarity with (specific) genetic diseases Conclusion: Most at-risk couples altered reproductive planning, demonstra- and (the availability of) testing, high perceived benefits of screening (e.g. ting clinical utility of this information. Perceived severity of the condition screening avoids much suffering), acceptance of reproductive options, per- factored into decision making with milder diseases less likely to change ceived risk of being a carrier, and low perceived social barriers (e.g. stig- planning. matization). In contrast to the Jewish community, the initial demand for  C06
.6 screening in the Dutch founder population did not entirely come from the Genetic counseling in an oocyte donation program: knowledge, community itself. However, the large social cohesion of the community faci- satisfaction and psychological impact of the expanded carrier litated the implementation process. screening Conclusion: In order to ensure successful implementation of population- J. Pla1, E. Clua2, M. Boada2, B. Coroleu2, P. N. Barri2, A. Veiga2, X. Estivill1, G. Lasheras3, A. based expanded carrier screening, effort should be made to increase know- Abulí1; ledge about genetic diseases, create awareness and address personal bene- 1Unit of Medical Genomics, Department of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Reproduction, fits of screening in a non-directive way. Dexeus Women’s Health, Barcelona, Spain, 2Service of Reproduction Medicine, Grant: The Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development Department of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Reproduction, Dexeus Women’s Health, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Psychiatry, Psychology and Psychosomatics, Quirón-  C06
.4 Dexeus University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. Advantages of expanded universal carrier screening: What is at stake? S. van der Hout1, K. Holtkamp2, L. Henneman2, G. De Wert1, W. Dondorp1; 1Department of Health, Ethics and Society, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, NGS technologies have allowed to test the carrier status of a large number Section of Community Genetics, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU of diseases in a cost-effective manner and some reproductive centres call University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. for the implementation of an Expanded Carrier Screening (ECS) test in oo- cyte donation (OD) programs. One of the main arguments against ECS in reproductive medicine is that its results may turn out to be psychosocially Background: Expanded universal carrier screening (EUCS) entails a twofold harmful to the donors. Hence, this study aims to assess the emotional and expansion of long-standing (preconception) screening protocols: it not only psychological impact of ECS in an OD program. allows the simultaneous screening of a large list of diseases (‘expanded’), but Our studied population consisted of 100 oocyte donors assessed in the fra- also refers to a pan-ethnic screening offer (‘universal’). Advocates of EUCS mework of an OD program at Dexeus Women’s Health in Barcelona. We eva- mention three main moral advantages of this new proposition as compared luated participant’s acquired knowledge, satisfaction with genetic counsel- with traditional (targeted and/or ancestry-based) forms of carrier scree- ling, perceived usefulness of ECS, and emotional and psychological impact ning: EUCS will (1) further enhance the autonomy of prospective parents (anxiety and depression measured by STAI and HADS-D scales) at three dif- by providing them with more information relevant for making reproductive ferent moments: before pre-test genetic counselling session, after post-test choices; (2) provide equal access to carrier testing services; (3) reduce the genetic counselling session and after post-donation follow-up appointment. risk of stigmatisation. Our empirical ethics study aims to widen this account Although carriers’ donors scored higher in the emotional and psychological and provide a balanced picture of the potential pros and cons of EUCS. impact questionnaires than those who were not carriers, none of the sub- Methods: Semi-structured interviews with 17 health (policy) professionals jects had HADS-D and STAI scores considered pathologic at baseline, imme- and representatives of patient organisations about their views on carrier diate or follow-up surveys. No correlation was found between the remaining screening including a possible EUCS-scenario. variables and the psychological impact. Results: Stakeholders acknowledged the potential benefits of EUCS, but Our findings suggest that ECS results in oocyte donors do not seem to have also expressed five main moral concerns: (1) Does EUCS respond to an ur- a meaningful emotional and psychological impact and seems to be well to- gent problem or population need? (2) Is it possible to offer couples both lerated and accepted by our participants. Genetic counselling at different understandable and sufficient information about EUCS? (3) How will socie- stages of the clinical process is essential in order to achieve the purposes of tal views on ‘reproductive responsibility’ change as a result of EUCS? (4) Is decreasing anxiety in the gamete donors. EUCS the best way to reach high-risk populations? (5) Will EUCS reinforce disability-based stigmatisation? ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 25ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C07
 Genome Technology in the Clinic  C07
.3 Detection of clinically relevant copy number variants by exome sequencing in a large cohort of genetic disorders J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, R. Pfundt1, M. del Rosario1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, M. P. Kwint1, I. M.  C07
.1 Janssen1, N. de Leeuw1, H. G. Yntema1, M. R. Nelen1, D. Lugtenberg1, E. Kamsteeg1, N. Rapid screening of severely ill newborns and infants using whole Wieskamp1, A. P. A. Stegmann2, S. J. C. Stevens2, R. J. T. Rodenburg1, A. Simons1, A. R. genome sequencing Mensenkamp1, T. Rinne1, C. Gilissen1, H. Scheffer1,2, J. A. Veltman1,2; B. Sikkema-Raddatz1, C. van Diemen1, W. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, T. de Koning2, R. Sinke1, 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Maastricht University Medical Centre, J. Jongbloed1, K. Abbott1, J. Herkert1, P. Neerincx1, G. de Vries1, M. Meems-Veldhuis1, M. Maastricht, Netherlands. Viel1, A. Scheper1, K. de Lange1, J. Dijkhuis1, J. van der Velde1, M. de Haan1, M. Swertz1, K. Bergman2, C. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1, I. van Langen1, R. Sijmons1, C. Wijmenga1; 1University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, Copy number variation (CNV) is a common source of genomic variation and 2University Medical Center Groningen, Beatrix Children’s Hospital, Groningen, Netherlands. an important genetic cause of disease. Microarray based CNV analysis has become a first tier diagnostic test for patients with intellectual disability, with a diagnostic yield of 10-20%. However, for most other genetic disor- For severely ill newborns quick molecular diagnoses are of utmost impor- ders the role of CNVs is less clear and genetic studies are generally limited tance for clinical decision-making and can prevent unnecessary and someti- to the study of single nucleotide variations (SNVs) and other small variants. mes invasive diagnostics. To date, immediate molecular testing is not a rou- With the introduction of exome and genome sequencing it is now possible to tine procedure for all patients since this is available only for few diseases. detect both SNVs and CNVs in a single test. Here, we have performed exome Here we present a procedure to analyze 2800 genetic disorders in severely based CNV screening on data from 2,603 patients affected by a range of 14 ill newborns and infants by rapid whole-genome sequencing (WGS), and different genetic disorders for which exome sequencing was performed in completed in approximately 2 weeks. WGS is carried out in parallel to stan- a diagnostic setting. Using read depth analysis we identified 131 clinically dard diagnostic procedures. The final evaluation of the results is done by a relevant CNVs ranging in size from 729bp – 8.4Mb. This results in 53 conclu- multidisciplinary team. Thus far we have included 22 patients in the study sive diagnoses, an overall diagnostic yield of 2%. CNVs were found exerting and have provided a diagnosis of a monogenic disease for four patients. The- both dominant and recessive effects, as well as CNVs unmasking a recessive se patients presented with different clinical characteristics and that could mutation that results in pathogenic compound heterozygous events. This be explained by mutations in the EIF2B5, EPG5, KLH L41
 and RMND1 genes. study shows that CNVs play an important role in a broad range of genetic One patient was diagnosed with a 1p36 microdeletion upon routine diagno- disorders and nicely illustrates how these CNVs can be readily detected from stic testing. exome sequencing, without the need for additional genetic tests. This brings In 12 patients without a diagnosis we got informed consent from the parents us closer to single test genomics. for further analysis in research setting. We prioritized genes using Network Funding: NWO 016.166.015 and ERC DENOVO 281964 analysis based on gene co-expression and patient- specific Human Pheno-  C07
.4 type Ontology (HPO) terms. In addition RNA sequencing has been perfor- Ultra-sensitive mosaic mutation detection for clinical applications med in a subset of child- parent trios to assess whether aberrant expression A. Hoischen1, M. Steehouwer1, M. Kwint1, R. Acuna Hidalgo1, E. Mersy2, C. Gilissen1, J. A. patterns can help interpreting possible pathogenic variants. This research Veltman1,2, J. Shendure3, A. Goriely4; follow up has led to three potential new diagnoses. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Currently we are evaluating the procedure. We will emphasize on pheno- Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, type selection, technical aspects of coverage and filtering methods. Seattle, WA, United States, 4Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of  C07
.2 Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Image analysis of patients with dysmorphic facial features boosts diagnostic yield in exome studies M. A. Mensah1, N. Hajjir1, N. Ehmke1, F. Alisch1, C. Ott1, R. Flöttmann1, M. Spielmann1, Despite the great advances in the next generation sequencing field there is A. Thorwarth1, D. Korinth1, P. N. Robinson1, S. Köhler1, T. Zemojtel1, P. Lorini2, K. Dathe1, still room for improved targeted re-sequencing assays that combine high S. Dölken3, M. Schülke-Gerstenfeld1, S. Mundlos1, L. Graul-Neumann1, D. Horn1, P. M. throughput with ultra-high sensitivity. We have now further optimized a Krawitz1; single-molecule mole1cular inversion probe (smMIP) based targeted re1-0 1Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik , Charité - Universitätsmedizin sequencing approach. Single-molecule tracing is enabled using up to 4 - Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Institut für Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät - Martin-Luther- Universität - Halle, Halle, Germany, 3Medizinische Genetik Klein und Rost - München, (1,048,576) molecular tags. Consensus calling of respective PCR-duplicates München, Germany. allows correction for PCR and sequencing errors. The improved assay allows low-frequency or sub-clonal variant detection with variant levels of <0.05%. This assay provides very robust genotyping accuracy, high throughput, fast The combination of phenotype and genotype-based prioritization-strate- turnaround and cost-effectiveness. We anticipate that this or similar assays gies proved to be highly effective for detecting disease-causing mutations allow novel applications in which mutations are present in very low relative in high-throughput sequencing studies. However, the performance of these abundance in any given DNA sample with important new applications bey- approaches also depends on the precision of the clinical description and re- ond cancer genetics. de novo quires some expert knowledge. Facial recognition technology, that detects Here we present first successful applications that include: 1.) Accurate de- dysmorphic features from two-dimensional photographs, holds the pro- termina2tion of the fraction of mutated alleles for post-zygotic mu- mise to assist in deep phenotyping of syndromic patients. Therefore, we tations. 2.) Detection of previously unrecognized mosaic disease causing evaluated the syndrome predictions of image analyses in a cohort of more mutations for rare clinical syndromes. 3.) Detection of known ‘paternal age than 100 patients with a diverse spectrum of confirmed molecular diagno- effect dis3orders’ causing mutations as small clonal events in dissected testis ses of monogenic disorders with the Facial dysmorphology Novel Analysis material. 4.) First evidence for presence or absence of parental alleles in (FDNA) technology. Automated facial recognition yields the correct diagno- cell free DNA from plasma of pregnant women. sis amongst the first ten suggested syndromes in more than two thirds of References: the cases and shows a high correlation with syndrome predictions that were 1) Hiatt JB, et al. Genome Res. 2013 based on expert annotated features. Hereby, we could confirm the diagnosis 2) Acuna-Hidalgo R, et al. Am J Hum Genet. 20153) Goriely A, Wilkie AO. Am in cases with only subtle facial features amongst them patients with Roth- J Hum Genet. 2012 mund-Thomson syndrome, Mowat-Wilson syndrome, Ectodermal Dyspla- sia, Fragile X syndrome, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome and Mabry syndrome.  C07
.5 When exome data of patients was filtered for rare sequence variants and Enrichment of unamplified DNA and long-read SMRT Sequencing to intersected with genes that were associated with the likeliest syndromes unlock repeat expansion disorders according to image analysis, the pathogenic mutations could be identified in Y. Tsai, D. Greenberg, T. A. Clark; Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States. all cases with few false positives. Our results show that computer-assisted facial recognition is not only a promising technology that could be applied in the routine diagnostic workflow, but also a technology that allows diagnosis in cases with non-typical clinical presentation. Nucleotide repeat expansions are a major cause of neurological and neuro- muscular disease in humans, however, the nature of these genomic regions makes characterizing them extremely challenging. Accurate DNA sequen- cing of repeat expansions using short-read sequencing technologies is dif- 26 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONfAic,u lSt,P aAs sINho r|t W-reWad Wtec.EhnSoHloGgie.Os oRftGen cannot read through regions of lowABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index sequence complexity. Additionally, these short reads do not span the entire obesity-associated genes are only partly shared between tissues indicating region of interest and therefore sequence assembly is required. Lastly, most tissue-dependent pathophysiologies. Gene set enrichment analyses further target enrichment methods are reliant upon amplification which adds the reveal the plethora of BMI-related alterations and between-tissue interplay, additional caveat of PCR bias. including the previously documented downregulation of mitochondrial pa- We have developed a novel, amplification-free enrichment technique that thways in adipose tissue, which contrarily appear to be activated in adre- employs the CRISPR/Cas9 system for specific targeting of individual human nal gland. We also find a strong signature pointing to DNA damage in small genes. This method, in conjunction with PacBio’s long reads and uniform intestine. Highlighting the disease-relevance of these BMI-associations, coverage, enables sequencing of complex genomic regions that cannot be we observe an overlap between genes discovered in the BMI-GE analysis investigated with other technologies. Using human genomic DNA samples and genes implicated in genome-wide association studies (GWAS). E.g. GE- and this strategy, we have successfully targeted the loci of Huntington’s alterations in adipose tissue significantly overlap with immune-GWAS loci, Disease (HTT; CAG repeat), Fragile X (FMR1; CGG repeat), ALS ( C9
orf72; underlining the role of inflammation in obesity and supporting epidemio- GGGGCC repeat), and Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 (SCA10; variable AT- logical observations of potential link between obesity and immune system TCT repeat) for examination. With this data, we demonstrate the ability to function. Further, we provide evidence, utilizing a Mendelian randomization isolate hundreds of individual on-target molecules in a single SMRT Cell and framework, for BMI causally driving several of these associations. accurately sequence through long repeat stretches, regardless of the extre- Comparison of BMI-associated expression changes of dozens of human tis- me GC-content. The method is compatible with multiplexing of multiple tar- sues simultaneously provides an unprecedentedly extensive view into the gets and multiple samples in a single reaction. This technique also captures pathophysiology of obesity. The pathways and causal links identified provi- native DNA molecules for sequencing, allowing for the possibility of direct de potential avenues for the treatment of the complications of obesity. detection and characterization of epigenetic signatures.  C08
.2  C07
.6 Identification of novel low frequency variants associated with Detection of AGG interruptions in FMR1 premutation females by susceptibility with a variety of cancers through the re-analysis of single-molecule sequencing publicly available genome-wide association studies S. Ardui1, V. Race2, G. Matthijs2, J. R. Vermeesch1; M. Guindo-Martínez1, F. Sánchez1, S. Bonàs-Guarch1, P. Cortés-Sánchez1, S. González1, C. 1Laboratory for Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Centre for Human Genetics , KU Díaz1, R. M. Badia1,2, J. M. Mercader1, D. Torrents1,3; Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Laboratory for Molecular Diagnosis, Centre for Human 1Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain, 2Artificial Intelligence Research Genetics , KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Institute, Bellaterra, Spain, 3Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona, Spain. The FMR1 contains an unstable CGG repeat in the 5’ untranslated region. This repeat is expanded from around 30 (normal) to a range of 55-200 re- Introduction: The overall contribution of shared and specific genetic factors peats in female premutation carriers. Premutations occur in the population involved in cancer is still poorly understood. The reanalysis of available Ge- with an estimated frequency of about 1 in 200 and are at risk for developing nome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) data with novel sequencing-based FXTAS and POF. Furthermore, the germline transmission of the repeat is reference panels is a promising and cost-effective approach to unravel and highly unstable, and therefore premutation females will often transmit a full to better characterize the genetic factors that give susceptibility to tumor mutation to their offspring. related processes. The risk that a premutation female will transmit a full mutation is variab- Materials and Methods: We developed GWImp-COMPSs, an integrated fra- le. The larger CGG repeats expand faster to full mutations. In addition, AGG mework that performs imputation and association testing, to re-analyze 9 triplets interrupting the CGG repeat reduce the risk for expansions. Despite different cancer data, comprising around 80,000 subjects, through imputa- its importance, AGG measurement is not yet a standard feature of FMR1 dia- tion with UK10K, 1000 Genomes phase 3 and Go-NL. Tlooc idate, we have ana- gnostic work-up. If determined, AGG interruptions are detected by a Triplet- lyzed 9,124 samples for blolacdider cancer and 11,209 samples for lungZ cCaCnHcCe7r. Primed PCR. Unfortunately, those AGG interruptions can be obscured becau- Results: Beyond confirming and fine-mapping known for these cancers, se the normal and premutated allele camouflage each other’s interruptions. we iGdReInNti2fBied two novel associated with bladder cancer in the Here, we explore single-molecule sequencing (Pacific Biosciences) to deter- gene (MAF= 0.01, OR=0.2l8oc, ups=5.7e-11, regulatoryT rEeCgRioLn variant) and in mine the AGG interruptions in a cohort of premutation females. We demon- the gene (MAF= 0.01, OR=4.77, p=9.1e-11, intron variant). For lung strate that single-molecule sequencing correctly determines the size of both cancer, a novel asZsCoCciHaCte7d was found near the gene (MAF=0.01, the normal and premutated allele for each female of the cohort. More intere- OR=3.16, p=2.4e-8). stingly, the single-molecule sequencing also allows the unambiguous sepa- Importantly, the intragenic variant is highly conserved and, accor- ration of the normal from the premutated allele which enables the detection ding to ENCODE and TRANSFAC, is a DNase I hypersensitive site with open of the location and number of AGG interruptions for each allele. We foresee chromatin histone marks (H3K4Me1, H3K4Me3 and H3K27Ac), anBdR CitA 1is that this technology will replace current tests and has the potential to im- predicted to disrupt the transcription factor binding site for several tran- prove risk estimates allowing for improved genetic counseling. IWT 131787 scription factors, including the binding of the tumor suppressor gene . Conclusions: By reanalyzing existing GWAS data with newer sequencing-  C08
 Sharing and Mining Omics Data based reference panels, we identified novel low-frequency variants asso- ciated with cancer risk. These findings, will ultimately allow the develop- ment of prognosis, diagnosis and therapeutic protocols.  C08
.1  C08
.3 Multi-tissue transcriptome analysis reveals disease-relevant and Summary statistic imputation method enables conditional causal links between obesity and gene expression analysis across meta-analysis studies: Application to GIANT height T. Tukiainen1,2, T. H. Pers2, F. Aguet2, A. Rissanen3, K. Ardlie2, C. M. Lindgren4, K. associations from exome-chip & HapMap Pietiläinen5, S. Ripatti1,6,7; S. Rüeger1,2, A. R. Wood3, E. Marouli4, M. Graff5, C. Medina-Gomez6,7, K. Sin Lo8, GIANT 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland, 2Broad Institute consortium, Z. Kutalik1,2; of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Obesity Research Unit, Research 1Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Programs Unit, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Wellcome Trust Centre for Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Obesity Research Unit, Research Programs Switzerland, 3Genetics of Complex Traits, University of Exeter Medical School, University Unit, University of Helsinkii, Helsinki, Finland, 6Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 7Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, University of London, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Epidemiology, Finland. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 6Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Montreal Heart Obesity is a world-wide epidemic with severe health consequences. To ela- Institute, Montréal, QC, Canada. borate the mechanisms linking obesity to its many sequelae, we investigated the association of body mass index (BMI), a common measure for adiposity, with gene expression (GE) assessed via RNA-sequencing in 44 tissue types, Last year the GIANT consortium established 697 height-associated HapMap including the rarely accessible ones (e.g. brain and internal organs), in 450 SNPs through a meta-analysis of ~250,000 individuals. Recently, the con- genotyped donors from the GTEx project. sortium combined exome-chip association results from 381’600 individuals Significant (FDR<0.05) BMI-GE-associations are seen in several tissues, in- to provide more insight into the role of coding regions in human stature cluding expectedly adipose tissue andE SlivHerG, b 2ut0 a1ls6o |s kBinA aRnCdE luLnOg.N TAhe,s Se PArIeNgu |l aWtioWn. WW.hEilSe HthGis. OneRwG (unpublished) study revealed 99 height-a2ss7o-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Moléculaire et Chromosomique, PTB, Dijon, France, 3EA4271-Génétique des Anomalies du développement, Dijon, France, 4Centre de référence maladies rares, Strasbourg, ciated exome-chip variants (mapping to 74 loci) that are not present in the France, 5Laboratoire de génétique Moléculaire, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 6Service HapMap panel it remained unclear which variants represent truly novel as- de génétique, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 7Service de Neuropédiatrie, Montpellier, France, 8Service de Neuropédiatrie, Marseille, France, 9Service de génétique, APHP La sociation signals. Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France, 10Centre de référence maladies rares, Montpellier, France, To ensure that the newly discovered height-associated exome-chip variants 11Service de Neuropédiatrie, Lille, France, 12Service de génétique, Saint Etienne, France, are independent of the 697 known height SNPs the conditional effect sizes 13Service de génétique, Caen, France, 14Service de Dermatologie, Dijon, France. derived from the same sample have to be calculated. To this end, the associa- tion summary statistics for exome-chip variants ought to be imputed using published HapMap association results. Many families with a child having a developmental disorder are facing major We improved on existing methods for summary statistics imputation by delays in reaching a diagnosis. Families often have to cope with the difficul- more accurate calculation of the imputation quality, accounting for variati- ties of having a disease without a name, lacking a precise genetic counselling ons in available sample size, and using UK10K sequencing data for LD esti- hampering parenthood projects and inappropriate clinical management. mation with optimized shrinking. Our approach yielded a 10% reduction in Whole exome sequencing (WES) offers an unprecedented tool for genetic te- root mean square error compared to standard methods. Variants with poor sting without a priori hypotheses, specifically appropriated for undiagnosed imputation quality (r2 0.8) markers, we additionally performed conditional patients with a developmental disorder. For patients with negative results summary statistic analysis to derive the effect of each (imputed) top exome of a diagnostic interpretation, a genotype-first approach may be fruitful in variant conditional on all previously reported HapMap SNPs. assessing whether a genotype, or variants in a candidate gene, can recur- Three of those 45 variants were found to be independent of HapMap SNPs rently be responsible for clinically recognizable phenotypes. International (SERPINA1, SNRPC, TSGA10IP). data sharing allows the identification of similar patients with ultra-rare dis- Financial support: Swiss National Science Foundation (31003A-143914). orders. Here we present the results of a data sharing of candidate variants  C08
.4 affecting putative disease-causing genes. This was proposed to families after RD-Connect: data sharing and analysis for rare disease research a clinical WES performed in a regional centre in a diagnostic setting. By com- within the integrated platform and through GA4GH Beacon and bining several methods for data sharing, and participating to the ‚Match- Matchmaker Exchange maker Exchange‘ initiative, new disease-causing genes were identified and S. Beltran1,2, D. Piscia1,2, S. Laurie1,2, J. Protasio1,2, A. Papakonstantinou1,2, A. Cañada3,4, could ultimately lead to a diagnosis for the families. From approximately J. Fernández3,4, M. Thompson5, R. Kaliyaperumal5, S. Lair6, P. Sernadela7, M. Girdea8, M. 400 negative clinical WES, we have participated to the description of 20 new Brudno8, A. Blavier6, R. Thompson9, H. Löchmuller9, M. Bellgard10, J. Paschall11, M. Roos5, disease-causing genes for developmental disorders. Some examples will be P. ‚t Hoen5, A. Valencia3,4, D. Salgado12,13, C. Béroud12,13,14, I. Gut1,2, RD-Connect Consortium; given including: 1) candidate genes in a recognized ultra-rare disease, with 1Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-CRG), Center for Genomic Regulation, no national clinical replication; 2) previously unrecognized syndromes ari- Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas sing as homogeneous disorders; 3) identification of recurrently mutated ge- (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 4Instituto Nacional de Bioinformática (INB), Madrid, Spain, nes in clinically heterogeneous conditions that could be demonstrated by a 5Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, sum of genetic results and clinical reports. 6Interactive Biosoftware, Rouen, France, 7DETI/IEETA, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal, 8Centre for Computational Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children and University  C08
.6 of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 9Institute of Genetic Medicine, MRC Centre for DNA.Land: A community-wide platform to study millions of genomes- Neuromuscular Diseases, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 10Centre phenomes for Comparative Genomics, Murdoch University, Perth, Australia, 11European Molecular Y. Erlich; Biology Laboratory , European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust New York Genome Center/Columbia University, new york, NY, United States. Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 12Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France, 13Inserm, UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 14APHM, Hôpital TIMONE Enfants , Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Marseille, France. Understanding the genetic architecture of complex traits is a key challenge for personalized medicine. But obtaining the genomes and phenomes of lar- ge cohorts using traditional ascertainment methods are logistically challen- RD-Connect (rd-connect.eu) is an EU F P7
 funded project building an inte- ging and cost-prohibitive. As of today, two million individuals have already grated platform to narrow the gaps in rare disease research, where patient obtained genome-wide information on their DNA using Direct to Consumer populations, clinical expertise and research communities are small in num- (DTC) genomics companies. These individuals are usually driven by self-in- ber and highly fragmented. The RD-Connect platform securely integrates terest in genealogy and ancestry research. In our previous studies, we built -omics data with biosample and clinical information, providing not only a a 13-million member family tree by crowdsourcing information from the centralised data repository but also a sophisticated and user-friendly online same vibrant citizen genealogy community. analysis system. Raw Whole Genome, Exome or gene panel NGS data are We developed a web-platform called DNA.Land (https://DNA.Land) whe- deposited at the European Genome-phenome archive and processed by RD- re anyone can securely contribute her or his own DTC-generated genome Connect‘s standardised analysis and annotation pipeline. The correspon- data for research and connect phenotypes using questionnaires and his/her ding clinical information is recorded in a connected PhenoTips instance streams of social media information. using the Human Phenotype Ontology, OMIM and Orpha codes. The results A critical concept of DNA.Land is reciprocation. To serve participants’ curio- are made available to authorised users through the highly configurable and sity in their genomes and family histories, our platform is built to efficiently efficient platform, which runs on a Hadoop cluster and uses ElasticSearch offer analyses unavailable through DTC companies, including whole-genome (platform.rd-connect.eu). The user-friendly interface enables filtering and imputation, refined ancestry inference, and kin-matching across company prioritization of variants using the most common quality, genomic locati- cohorts. We hope to work closely, trustworthily, and fruitfully with partici- on, effect, pathogenicity and population frequency annotations. Additional pants, to apply the platform for scientific benefit. We will discuss our efforts tools, such as Exomiser, DiseaseCard, Alamut Functional Annotation (ALFA) to collect family trees and phenotype streams using social media, while re- and UMD Predictor (umd-predictor.eu) are integrated at several levels. RD- specting individuals’ preferences according to our data sharing guidelines. Connect has lit a GA4GH Beacon within the Beacon Network (www.beacon- Our vision is that this platform will serve the human genetics-wide commu- network.org) and is actively involved in the development of the Matchmaker nity to reach the massive scale of data needed to understand complex traits. Exchange (www.matchmakerexchange.org) 1-sided match prototype. The latter will be useful to locate, without disclosing personal information, si-  C09
 Prenatal Decision Making (joint with milar patients (by phenotype and genotype) in other databases which store unfiltered genomic data. EMPAG)  C08
.5 The « genotype-first » approach and international matchmaking:  C09
.1 An efficient approach for disease-causing gene identification in Introduction of non-invasive prenatal testing as a first-tier screening undiagnosed disorders with developmental anomalies. J. Thevenon1, P. Kuentz2, A. Bruel3, T. Jouan3, C. Poe3, M. Chevarin3, D. Lehalle1, A. test: A survey among Dutch midwives about their role as counselors Masurel-Paulet1, N. Jean-Marçais1, S. El Chehadeh-Djebbar4, C. Philippe5, L. Lambert6, A. L. Martin1,2,3, J. Gitsels-van der Wal1,2,3, L. Henneman3,2; Roubertie7, M. Milh8, A. Jaquette9, C. Mignot9, D. Héron9, D. Geneviève10, M. Willems10, B. 1Midwifery Science, AVAG, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2EMGO Institute for Health and Delobel11, F. Prieur12, M. Gérard13, P. Vabres14, Y. Duffourd3, J. Rivière3, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, L. Faivre1; Netherlands. 1Centre de référence maladies rares, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique 28 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Background: In the Netherlands, non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) is cur- Choice. Three categories of informed decision-making were formed, 1) com- rently only available for women at high-risk for fetal aneuploidy based on pletely informed, 2) partly informed and 3) completely uninformed. the first-trimester combined test (FCT, >1:200) or medical history. Should Results: 87% chose NIPT, 12% chose invasive PND. Twenty-six percent of NIPT become available as a first-tier screening test, the role of midwives will the NIPT group made completely informed choices, versus 85% of the par- become even more important as 80% of pregnant women are counseled in ticipants who opted for PND. In the NIPT group, 60% of choices were based primary care. We assessed midwives’ attitudes, knowledge and educational on sufficient knowledge, but were inconsistent with attitude, versus 32% in needs regarding NIPT. the PND group. Scrutinizing the attitudes, we found that 25% of participants Methods: Online survey completed by 436 (of the 2106) Dutch midwives, choosing NIPT did prefer broader testing, but were held back by risks of an April-June 2015. invasive procedure. Results: The majority (68%) of midwives were in favour of replacing FCT Conclusions: Most women and their partners highly valued the avoidance by NIPT, although 40% preferred to maintain nuchal translucency measure- of a miscarriage risk over invasive PND. Their attitudes indicate they would ment. Only 2% preferred to implement NIPT after FCT with a lower risk cut- prefer results comparable to whole genome testing, but safely, i.e. perfor- off (>1:1000). Midwives were worried that women would not want to (74%) med by NIPT. For informed decision-making during counselling, we advo- and/or cannot (65%) pay the estimated costs of NIPT (~530 euros). In total, cate more focus on attitude-consistency as compared to only a strong focus 63% had followed training on NIPT. Overall knowledge was good, although on knowledge. 52% did not know fetal DNA originates from the placenta, and 35% did not know an increased (NT) is no indication for NIPT. Most midwives (87%) felt  C09
.4 confident about counseling for NIPT; 60% believed counseling will become Attitudes, decision-making and experiences of preimplantation easier. genetic diagnosis (PGD) users Conclusions: Midwives’ attitudes towards NIPT as first-tier screening test S. Zuckerman1, S. Gooldin2, G. Altarescu1; are positive, but many prefer to maintain NT measurement. Midwives worry 1Hebrew University; Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Hebrew University, that many women will not or cannot pay for NIPT which may lead to inequa- Jerusalem, Israel. lity. Knowledge seems good but can be improved in some aspects. Education should continue to focus on counseling competences in order to facilitate women’s informed reproductive decision-making. PGD is an accepted procedure for prenatal diagnosis (PND), worldwide. The psychosocial aspects of the technology has been discussed among experts  C09
.2 and were evaluated among various population groups but only paucity of Should we be worried about children born after PGD for Huntington’s empirical data focused on PGD users‘ expectations, concerns, decision-ma- Disease? king and experiences, involved in the process. M. den Heijer1, A. Tibben2, G. de Wert3, W. Dondorp3, M. van der Sangen3, C. de Die3; In order to evaluate Israeli PGD users‘ attitudes we used mixed methods: 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Semi-structured in-depth interviews of 37 users (carriers of various gene- Netherlands, 3Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands. tic disorders) were performed. Fifty seven questionnaires, based on themes emerged in the interviews, were filled by people in various stages of PGD procedure. Introduction: In the Netherlands, there is broad societal and political sup- Seventy nine subjects (84%) consider performing PND for a transmissible port for preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) if one of the parents is genetic disorder, yet 43 (46%) were not sure PGD should be the first choice. a carrier of HD. However, policymakers and funders expressed concerns Once being involved in the procedure, 71 people (76%) thought PGD is the about facilitating reproductive options that lead to children who will inevi- best option comparing to CVS and amniocentesis, and 54 (57%) view PGD as tably be confronted with a parent with HD, and grow up in potential distres- the preferred option for future pregnancies. Interestingly, all others adopted sing circumstances with consequently impairment of the quality of their life. to avoid PND or would perform CVS, but not amniocentesis. To meet those concerns, we examined psychological functioning, coping and PGD users viewed as advantages: the reassurance of the unaffected embryo dynamics in these families. status from the beginning of pregnancy (65%), avoiding pregnancy termi- Methods: We conducted 10 semi-structured interviews with 7 couples and nation (65%) and invasive prenatal tests (29%). The disadvantages inclu- 3 single parents who gave birth to at least one child after PGD. None of the ded the medical actions involved (57%), the need for hormonal treatment carriers were symptomatic at the time of testing (1994 - 2011). At the time (56%) and long waiting lists for the procedure (42%). of the interview, 2 parents were symptomatic, one was deceased. Interviews Understanding attitudes and experiences of couples who already performed were audio-taped, transcribed verbatim and analyzed thematically. PGD will deepen the insights of the special needs of this particular group, Results: PGD met parents’ expectations regarding relief from guilt feelings and should play a crucial role in developing programs for counseling, direc- towards their child(ren). Those who had previous prenatal diagnosis repor- ting and accompanying future PGD users. ted that termination of pregnancy was extremely psychological burdening, whereas for PGD the procedure was more physically distressing. As long as  C09
.5 the carrier-parent was asymptomatic, the couple’s focus was mainly on the What do pregnant women think of prenatal whole-exome sequencing? individual future disease process. When the carrier-parent becomes sym- A cross-cultural comparison ptomatic, the family becomes insidiously aware of the far-reaching impact C. Richards1, S. Dheensa1, A. Newson2, Z. Deans3, S. Shkedi-Rafid4, J. Hyett2, Z. Richmond2, on all involved, which may initially have been underestimated. A. Fenwick1; Conclusions: We did not observe specific issues related to PGD. However, it 1University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Hebrew University of is of uttermost importance that parents have access to specific health care Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. supporting the family system in issues related to (future) HD.  C09
.3 Informed choice in prenatal genetic testing: the choice between non- Introduction: Prenatal whole-exome sequencing (PWES) is suggested to invasive and invasive prenatal testing have a greater diagnostic yield than chromosomal-microarray analysis for S. L. van der Steen1, K. E. M. Diderich1, I. M. Bakkeren1, M. M. F. C. Knapen1, A. T. J. I. Go1, diagnosing fetal anomalies. Despite falling costs and increasing speeds, A. Tibben2, M. I. Srebniak1, D. Van Opstal1, M. G. Polak3, R. J. H. Galjaard1, S. R. Riedijk1; clinical practice has not incorporated PWES because its clinical validity is 1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical disputed and it produces a huge range of results, some of which could influ- Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ence decisions to terminate (potentially healthy) pregnancies. As almost no research explores what pregnant women think about PWES, we are compa- ring opinions between the UK, Australia, and Israel. Background and aims: In case of an increased risk at first trimester scree- Methods: We created a questionnaire by first developing a pool of questions ning, most centers offer further testing by non-invasive prenatal testing from the literature about genome tests; refined questions and thus content (NIPT), or invasive prenatal diagnosis (PND) with rapid aneuploidy de- validity through discussion with experts; and conducted cognitive intervie- tection. In contrast, we offer whole genome SNP array analysis at 0.5 Mb wing with pregnant women to increase the questionnaire’s sensitivity, relia- resolution, which has a broader scope. We aimed to investigate whether bility, and validity. Piloting (n≈150) and administration of the final question- pregnant women and their partners made informed choices between NIPT naire (n≈600) will soon be underway across the three countries. and array testing after routine pre-test counselling. Results: We are illuminating views about what ‘incidental findings’ should Methods: 330 women and 103 partners participated. Informed choice was be reported, when, and why; the meaning of variants of uncertain signi- defined as a behaviorally implementEedS HchGoi c2e 0th1a6t |is B aAttiRtuCdEe-LcOonNsisAte,n St PAfIiNca n|c We aWndW wh.EetShHerG th.OeyR arGe grounds to terminate pregnancies; the ac2ce9p- and based on sufficient knowledge, measured with the Measure of InformedABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Créteil, France, 3current address : Centre d‘Etude des Cellules Souches (CECS), I-Stem, AFM, Evry, France, 4current address : Institut Imagine, INSERM UMR 1163 Embryologie tability and feasibility of trio or family-sequencing during pregnancy to cla- et génétique des malformations, Paris, France, 5Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, rify uncertain results; and acceptable turnaround times for results and who Rotterdam, Netherlands. should communicate them. Conclusions: We will contribute to international debates about whether clinical care should integrate PWES and highlight what women need from Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is characterized by the absence of enteric genetic counselling to make informed decisions. Results will also provide ganglia along a variable portion of the distal gastrointestinal tract, which the first step in identifying cultural norms, ethical frameworks, and political results in functional intestinal obstruction. This rare developmental disor- landscapes that could affect whether and how different countries translate der (1/5,000 live births) is attributed to a failure of the neural crest cells this technology into clinical care. (NCC) to migrate, proliferate, differentiate or survive and to form the enteric nervous system (ENS). Isolated or syndromic forms of HSCR have a complex  C09
.6 genetic etiology with a dozen factors involved, including EDN3, its receptor Why do pregnant women accept or decline prenatal diagnosis for EDNRB and the transcription factors SOX10 and ZEB2. Down syndrome? Over the last ten years, we have studied the role of these factors during C. Ingvoldstad1, E. Ternby2, O. Axelsson2,3, G. Annerén4, P. Lindgren1; ENS development and characterized the genetic and functional interactions 1Dept of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology , Division of Obstetrics and among them. We showed that genetic interactions between Sox10 and Zeb2 Gynaecology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, or Edn3/Ednrb are essential for enteric NCC survival and differentiation. Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Centre for Clinical Research Sörmland, Uppsala However, the cellular and molecular contribution of Zeb2 remains unclear. University, Eskilstuna, Sweden, 4Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, Uppsala, Sweden. Here, the generation and characterization of the double-mutant mice Zeb2- Edn3 and Zeb2-Ednrb revealed a genetic interaction between these three genes in ENS development. Indeed, double-mutants present with increased Objective: To investigate if knowledge of Down syndrome (DS), influences distal aganglionosis as compared to single mutants. In parallel, gene regu- the decision to accept or decline prenatal diagnosis (PND). Secondary aims lation studies combined with enteric progenitor culture and rescue experi- were to elucidate reasons for accepting or declining PND and investigate ments allowed us to demonstrate the transcriptional regulation of EDNRB differences between the accepting and declining group in perceived infor- by SOX10 and ZEB2 and the essential role of the SOX10/ZEB2/EDN3 “tria- mation, knowing someone with DS and thoughts about decision-making. de” in controlling the differentiation status of enteric NCC. Method: A questionnaire was completed by 76 pregnant women who under- With these results, we can now integrate ZEB2 in the genetic interaction went invasive testing and 65 women who declined tests for chromosomal network known to be involved in ENS development, leading to a better un- aberrations. derstanding of the cellular bases of HSCR. Results: Apart from one question no significant differences were found in  C10
.3 knowledge of DS between women declining or accepting PND for DS. Both Knockout of the zinc finger protein ZNF274 in PWS-specific stem cell groups had varying and in several aspects low levels of knowledge about DS neurons activates expression of repressed maternal 15q11.2-q13 and its consequences. Most common reasons to accept PND were ‘to ease transcripts my worries’ and ‘to do all possible tests to make sure the baby is healthy’. M. Langouet; Corresponding statements declining PND were ‘termination of pregnancy is Uconn Health, Farmington, CT, United States. not an option’ and ‘because invasive tests increase the risk of miscarriage’. More women declining PND knew someone with DS. Conclusion: Knowledge of DS at these levels is not a major factor when wo- Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is characterized by neonatal hypotonia and men decide to accept or decline PND for DS. Their choice is mostly based on failure to thrive during infancy, and, subsequently, by obesity, hyperphagia, opinions and moral values. cognitive disability and behavioral abnormalities. This neurobehavioral dis- order of genomic imprinting is caused by the lack of expression of genes on  C10
 Epigenetic mechanisms in development the paternally inherited chromosome 15q11.2-q13 region. The detailed ge- and disease netic basis of PWS is complex involving the loss of active copies of a cluster of non-coding box C/D class small nucleolar RNAs, the SNORD116 snoRNAs. In stem cell models of PWS, we previously identified a new epigenetic com- plex, composed of the zinc-finger protein ZNF274 and the SET domain, bi-  C10
.1 furcated 1 (SETDB1) histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methyltransferase, that is Evolving skeletal traits by cis-regulatory changes in bone involved in silencing the maternal copy of the PWS critical region (PWS-CR) morphogenetic proteins encompassing the SNORD116 cluster. V. Indjeian; Here, using genome editing approaches, we have knocked out ZNF274 ex- MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, London, United Kingdom. pression in PWS-specific iPSC lines from mulitni pvliet rPoWS patients with di- verse genetic abnormalities and showed that the extent of transcriptional re-activation of PWS-CR genes varies during neurogenesis. While Changes in bone size and shape are defining features of many vertebrates, PWS-CR gene expression in ZNF274 knockout (KO) iPSCs is ~5 % of normal and underlie many of the traits that make us uniquely human. To uncover levels, wild-type mRNA levels are completely restored in neurons derived the genomic changes that control species-specific skeletaGl raolwtetrha/tDioinffse,r ewne- from PWS ZNF274 KO iPSCs. Surprisingly, the DNA methylation at the PWS- tdiiadt ihoing hF-arcetsoorl u6tiGonD Fm6apping of dermal bone traits in sticklebacks. We iden- IC remains unchanged upon ZNF274 KO, suggesting that the ZNF274 com- tified the gene for a secreted bone morcpishogenetic protein, plex acts as a second imprinting mechanism regulating the PWS-CR gene GDF6 ( ), as a major locus controlling flat bone size in natural expression during the course of neurogenesis. Our data further support the populations. Freshwater fish have a -acting regulatory change that in- finding that ZNF274 may represent a potential target for future therapeutic creases GD eFx6pression, and transgenic overexpression phenocopies evo- applications to rescue the PWS phenotype. lutionary changes in dermal bone size. Comparative genomics revealed that the human locus also has undergone distinctive regulatory evolution,  C10
.4 including complete loss of an enhancer that is highly conserved in other Features of FMR1 hypermethylation and CGG instability in FXS mammals. Functional tests show that the ancestral enhancer drives expres- pluripotent stem cells sion in hindlimbs but ncoist forelimbs, in locations that have been specifically H. Mor-Shaked1, M. Avitzour1, G. Altarescu2, T. geva-eldar2, S. Epsztejn-Litman1, R. Eiges1; modified during the human transition to bipedalism. These results add to 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center affiliated with the Hebrew University School of Medicine, jerusalem, Israel, 2Shaare Zedek Medical Center, jerusalem, Israel. growing evidence that -regulatory modifications of BMP genes represent a common mechanism for evolving specific skeletal changes in humans and other vertebrates. Our research focuses on when and how FMR1 gains aberrant methylati-  C10
.2 on, and whether hypeFrMmRe1thylation is mechanistically associated with CGG Genetic and functional interactions between SOX10, ZEB2 and EDN3/ somatic instability. Taking advantage of a large set of FXS HESC lines (9 in EDNRB during mouse enteric nervous system development total), we show that epigenetic gene silencing commonly occurs in Y. Watanabe1,2, L. Stanchina1,3, L. Lecerf1,2, V. Baral1,2, V. Pingault1,4, D. Huylebroeck5, N. the undifferentiated cells and that FXS HESC lines are heterogeneous for re- Bondurand1,2; peat size and methylation levels. By monitoring single cell lineages of FXS 1INSERM U955 IMRB Team 6, Créteil, France, 2Université Paris Est, Faculté de Médecine, HESCs and patient-derived iPS cells over time in culture, we demonstrate 30 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONtAha, tS CPGAG IinNst |a bWiliWty iWn f.aEcSt eHxiGst.sO inR thGese cells, and is largely correlated withABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C11
 Neurogenetic and Neuromuscular disorders transcriptional activity of FMR1. Furthermore, we provide evidence for the existence of R-Loops near the CGG repeats in FXS HESCs/iPS with an active FMR1, and demonstrate their co-existence with single strand DNA slip-outs from the G-rich non-template DNA. Taken together, we propose that the  C11
.1 variability in methylation levels within undifferentiated FXS HESC lines re- Deciphering phenotypic variability of genomic disorders using the flects a widespread event within mutant FMR1 embryos, where methylation 16p11.2 syndromes as a paradigm state is initially set. In accordance with our findings, we put forward a model K. Männik1,2, A. M. Maillard3, B. Kolk2,4, K. Popadin1, S. Pradervand1,5, M. Kals2,6, B. that relies on R-loop formation to explain how epigenetics and gene tran- Rodriguez-Herreros3,7, A. Pain3, S. Martin-Brevet3, J. Kosmicki8,9, S. Lebon10, M. Noukas2,4, scription are mechanistically associated with CGG somatic instability in FXS. 16p11.2 European Consortium, Simons VIP Consortium, M. M. van Haelst11, A.  C10
.5 Metspalu2,4, N. Katsanis12, M. J. Daly8,9, J. S. Beckmann5,3, S. Jacquemont3,13, A. Reymond1; Fractal nature of chromatin modules of the human genome 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, K. Popadin1, O. Delaneau2, M. Zazhytska1, S. Kumar3,4, A. Giovanna3,4, A. R. Gschwind1, C. 2Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Service of Medical Borel2, D. Marbach5, D. Lamparter5, P. Bucher3,4, S. E. Antonarakis2, E. T. Dermitzakis2, A. Genetics, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Institute of Molecular Reymond1; and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 1University of Lausanne, Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Tartu, 2University of Geneva, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Geneva, Tartu, Estonia, 7Laboratory for Research in Neuroimaging, Department of Clinical Switzerland, 3Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 8Analytic and Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), EPFL, Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital Lausanne, Switzerland, 5University of Lausanne, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 9Program in Medical and Department of Computational Biology, Lausanne, Switzerland. Population Genetics and Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States, 10Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 11Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 12Center for Human It has been recently shown that the chromatin landscape of the human ge- Disease Modeling and Department of Cell Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, United nome is organized into non-uniformly distributed chromatin modules - re- States, 13CHU Sainte-Justine Research Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada. gions of coordinated behavior of multiple chromatin marks. These modules may represent either active elements of regulatory transcription units or their passive chromatin footprints. To describe the structures of these units, Reciprocal 16p11.2 CNVs are characterized by considerable variance in find the patterns of their location, decipher the main factors driving these their impact on cognition, behavior, head size and BMI suggesting that yet coordinated behaviors and ultimately reveal their functions, we need to be unidentified modifying factors may contribute to the patients’ phenotypic able to define and reconstruct these modules with high precision. Towards outcome. Our recent findings indicated a possible contribution of ciliary this we have annotated genome-wide inter-individual variation in sever- dysfunction to the phenotypes of the 16p11.2 CNVs. To potentially identify al chromatin modifications representing active marks (i.e. enrichment of driver and modifier genes of the 16p11.2 endophenotypes we have sequen- H3K27ac histone modifications), promoter marks (H3K4me3), enhancer ced the exomes and the transcriptomes of 250 deeply phenotyped individu- marks (H3K4me1), genetic polymorphisms (>7.5M SNPs) and expression als from 16p11.2 families. To avoid ascertainment bias and better represent level (RNA-seq) in lymphoblastoid cell lines of 200 individuals. Using this the phenotypic spectrum, we recruited carriers among unselected popu- high resolution data-set we discovered a fractal structure of the chromatin lation cohorts, as well as in clinical settings. We are cataloging potentially interactions. To uncover main factors and mechanisms maintaining these deleterious variants in the 16p11.2-altered pathways, and performing cor- chromatin interactions along the human genome we analyzed their distri- relative analyses between quantitative traits (e.g. BMI, IQ) and transcript bution upon stratification for evolutionary (i.e. density and properties of levels. Our results will be replicated with 306 exomes of 16p11.2 trios from genes involved in the interactions), topological (i.e. variation in DNA topo- the Simons VIP Consortium. logy between different cell lines and species) and replication (i.e. variation The pilot phase of data analysis identified slightly deleterious variants in in replication timing) constraints. We consider the fractal network of the 16p11.2-interacting genes that potentially contribute to vertebral and Mül- chromatin interactions as a meta-phenotype which can explain better the lerian duct defects recurrently seen in a subset of 16p11.2 patients. We have links between genotype and higher level phenotypes such as transcriptome also identified, for example, an individual carrying a 16p11.2 deletion and variation.  C10
.6 a heterozygous loss-of-function variant in the pan-ciliopathy gene CE P290
, Hotspots of aberrant enhancer activity punctuate the colorectal and an individual with a 16p11.2 duplication and a non-synonymous mu- cancer epigenome tation in the rasopathy gene PTPN11. Compatible with our “two-hit” hypo- P. Scacheri1,2, A. Cohen1, O. Corradin1, J. Luppino1, C. Bartels1, J. Morrow1, S. Mack2, G. thesis these patients present alleviated and aggravated phenotype spectra, Dhillon1, M. Kalady2, J. Willis1, R. Keri1, N. Berger1, S. Markowitz1; respectively. Our study will have potential implications for precise clinical 1Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States, 2Cleveland Clinic, management of 16p11.2 CNV carriers, and will shed light to the mechanisms Cleveland, OH, United States. contributing to the complex etiologies of genomic disorders.  C11
.2 In addition to somatic mutations in genes, aberrant enhancer activity The power of protective modifiers in human genetics: Plastin3 and at non-coding regions of the genome is a key driver of tumor formation Coronin1C unravel endocytosis as an essential cellular mechanism across cancer types. Through ChIP-seq of the characteristic enhancer hi- disturbed in spinal muscular atrophy L. Torres Benito1,2,3, S. M. Hosseinibarkooie1,2,3, M. Peters1,2,3, R. Rastetter4, K. stone marks, H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, we mapped putative gene enhancer Hupperich1,2,3, A. Hoffmann1,2,3, N. Mendoza Ferreira1,2,3, A. Kaczmarek1,2,3, E. Janzen1,2,3, T. elements across the epigenomes of a cohort of more than forty colorectal Lamkaemeyer5, C. Guschlbauer6, A. Büschges7, M. Hammerschmidt2,5,8, M. Riessland1,2,3, M. cancer (CRC) cell lines, primary CRC tumors, and normal colon epitheli- J. Kye1,2,3, C. Clemen9, B. Wirth1,2,3; um samples, representing the most comprehensive characterization of 1Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for Molecular Medicine enhancer elements in a single type of cancer to date. We identified sets of Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Institute for Genetics, University of enhancers that are recurrently commissioned and decommissioned in CRC, Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Center for Biochemistry, Institute of Biochemistry, Cologne, including 75 and 67, respectively, present in every CRC sample analyzed, Germany, 5Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging Associated Diseases (CECAD), Cologne, Germany, 6Biocenter, Institute for Zoology University of Cologne, regardless of clinical stage. Multiple lines of evidence support the patholo- Cologne, Germany, 7Biocenter Cologne, Institute for Zoology, University of Cologne, gical relevance of the recurrently altered enhancers, particularly those that Cologne, Germany, 8Institute for Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Cologne, acquired enhancer activity. Many activate known and novel oncogenes and Germany, Cologne, Germany, 9Center for Biochemistry, Institute of Biochemistry, Medical most are constituents of super enhancers. Nearly half of all GWAS CRC risk Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. loci identified to date map to the recurrently acquired enhancers. CRC grow- th can be mitigated through pharmacologic inhibition or targeted knockout of genes activated by the recurrent enhancers. The majority of the recur- Paradoxically, mutations in some ubiquitously expressed housekeeping ge- rently acquired enhancers originate from primed chromatin, suggesting nes impair only a specific cell type. A particularly remarkable example is that activation of primed chromatin is the mechanism for their formation. spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), one of the most common autosomal reces- Overall, these findings indicate that the CRC epigenome is defined by highly sive disorders in humans. Twenty years after SMN1 has been discovered as recurrent epigenetic alterations at enhancer elements, or “hotspots”. These the SMA determining gene, a major unsolved question is still which cellular hotspots activate a common aberrant transcriptional program necessary for mechanism leads to motoneuron dysfunction and ultimately to SMA. CRC tumor growth and survival, and therefore represent promising targets Here we demonstrate the power of the protective genetic modifier, plastin for anti-cancer therapies. 3 (PL S3
) to answer this question. Homozygous loss of SMN1 causes SMA. (NIH Grants R01CA160356,  P50
CA150E 9S 6H 4)G 2016 | BARCELONA, SPA SI MN N | 2 W prW odW uc. eE s S ~H 10G %.O fuR nG ctional SMN protein, insufficient to counte3 ra1 ctABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index INSERM UMR S974
, CNRS FR E3617
, Center for Research in Myology, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 7Centre de référence de Pathologie Neuromusculaire Paris-Est, Institut de SMA. In contrast, elevated PL S3
, an F-actin -bundling protein fully protects Myologie, GHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, against SMA in SMN1-deleted individuals, carrying 3-4 SMN2 copies. We 8Rare Neurological Diseases Group, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. prove here that PL S3
 rescued survival (>250 days) and motoric abilities in an intermediate SMA mouse model. Since PL S3
 knock-out in yeast impairs endocytosis, we hypothesized that disturbed endocytosis might be a key cel- lular mechanism underlying impaired neurotransmission and NMJ mainte- Background: Congenital myopathies are a heterogeneous group of diseases nance in SMA. Indeed, SMN deficit dramatically reduced endocytosis, which characterized by early childhood hypotonia and muscle weakness. They was restored to normal levels by PL S3
 overexpression. Under low frequency are sub-classified in seven distinct types based on clinical presentation and electro-stimulation, endocytic FM-143 uptake at NMJ level was restored to characteristic features on biopsy. To date, more than 30 genes have been control levels in SMA-PL S3
 as compared to SMA mice. Moreover, proteomics associated with congenital myopathies and a large number of patients are and biochemical analysis unraveled CORO1C, another F-actin binding pro- still without a diagnostic. tein, to directly bind to PL S3
 in a calcium-dependent manner. As PL S3
, CO- Methods: In order to identify the causative gene, three consanguineous RO1C overexpression restored fluid-phase endocytosis in SMN knockdown families, from different ethnic backgrounds, were exome sequenced inde- cells by elevating F-actin levels and rescued the axonal truncation and bran- pendently. RNA-sequencing was also performed on muscle biopsy from one ching phenotype in Smn-depleted fish. affected. Supported by: DFG, SMA-Europe, EU-F P7
 NEUROMICS, AFM-Telethon and Results: Whole-exome sequencing identified homozygous truncating muta- CMMC tions in ZAK, encoding for the sterile alpha motif and leucine zipper con- taining kinase. RNA-sequencing confirmed a decreased expression of ZAK  C11
.3 in muscle, suggesting mRNA decay. Transcriptome analysis showed simi- Mutations in the ICF gene DNMT3B modify the epigenetic repression larities of affected pathways with other muscle diseases including the up- of the D4Z4 repeat and the penetrance of facioscapulohumeral regulation of extracellular matrix components as well as a down-regulation dystrophy of sarcomeric genes. M. L. van den Boogaard1, R. J. L. F. Lemmers1, J. Balog1, M. Wohlgemuth2, M. Auranen3, Conclusion: In this study, we linked a loss-of-function mutation in ZAK with S. Mitsuhashi4, P. J. van der Vliet1, K. Straasheijm1, R. F. P. van den Akker1, M. Kriek1, M. E. congenital myopathy. Although transcriptome analysis was performed on Y. Laurense-Bik1, V. Raz1, M. M. van Ostaijen - ten Dam1, K. B. M. Hansson1, E. L. van der Kooi5, S. Kiuru-Enari3, B. Udd6, M. J. D. van Tol1, I. Nishino4, R. Tawil7, S. J. Tapscott8, B. G. only one patient, we obtained results suggesting affected pathways common M. van Engelen2, S. M. van der Maarel1; to other myopathies. The identification of mutations in ZAK will allow ac- 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Medical curate genetic counseling and potentially lead to the identification of novel Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, therapeutic targets. Helsinki, Finland, 4National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Funding: INSERM, CNRS, University of Strasbourg, Collège de France, Agence Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan, 5Medisch Centrum Leeuwarden, Leeuwarden, Netherlands, Nationale de la Recherche, GIS maladies rares, Association française contre 6Tampere University Hospital and University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 7University les Myopathies, MDA, Myotubular Trust, Medical Research Council UK the of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, United States, 8Fred Hutchinson Cancer European Union Seventh Framework Programme and Fondation GO. MT re- Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States. ceived a post-doctoral fellowship from the CIHR. DUX4  C11
.5 Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is associated wDiUthX 4the Expanding the allelic and locus heterogeneity of tRNA synthetase- partial chromatin relaxation of the encodingD4Z4 macrosatellite re- related neuromuscular disease peat located on chromosDoUmXe4 4, and transcriptional derepression of in A. Antonellis1, L. Griffin1, S. Oprescu1, M. Shy2, M. Meisler1, J. Kitzman1, A. Beg1; skeletal muscle. D4Z4 chromatin relaxation is consistently marked by CpG 1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 2University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, hypomethylation at the promoter. United States. In the most common form, FSHD1, D4Z4 chromatin relaxation is caused by a D4Z4 repeat array contraction to 1-10 units (normal range 8-100 units). In the rare form of FSHD, FSHD2, D4Z4 chromatin relaxation occurs on all Four genes encoding aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (ARSs) cause dominant, D4Z4 arrays and is most often caused by mSMuCtaHtDio1n s in the D4Z4 chromatin axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease, which is characterized by impai- repressor SMCHD1. red motor and sensory function in the distal extremities. ARS genes impli- Not all FSHD S2
M cCaHsDes1 can be explained by mutations, thus we per- cated in dominant CMT disease thus far are glycyl-(GARS), tyrosyl-(YARS), formed wholeD eNxoMmTe3 Bse, quencing in FSHD families with D4Z4 hypomethyla- alanyl-(AARS), and histidyl-tRNA synthetase (HARS). Functional analyses tion lacking mutations. In two DfaNmMilTie3sB we identified heterozygous revealed that CMT-associated ARS mutations reduce enzymatic activity, sug- mutations in which segregated with D4Z4 hypomethylation and gesting that impaired tRNA charging is a component of disease pathogene- increased FSHD penetrance. Recessive mutations were previous- sis. Currently, ARS variants of unknown pathogenicity are being discovered ly shown to cause Immunodeficiency, Centromeric instability and Facial rapidly, making it important to proactively determine the subset of variants anomalies syndrome type 1 (ICF1). These FSHD patients don’t have immu- relevant to CMT disease. We performed a forward mutation screen in yeast nodeficiency, but ICF1 patients might be at risk of expressing DUX4 and de- that revealed 17 novel loss-of-function GARS and AARS mutations, one of veloping FSHD. We propose that the effect of DNMT3B mutations on DUX4 which was subsequently found in a patient with CMT disease. These func- expression and disease preDsUenXt4ation, like for SMCHD1, depends on several tional data contributed to a rapid patient diagnosis. We are expanding the- aspects associated with the FSHD locus including D4Z4 repeat size, and the se efforts via programmed allelic series (PALS) in allelically heterogeneous presence of a polymorphic polyadenylation signal. This study suggests yeast growth assays. If impaired tRNA charging causes CMT disease, then that multiple factors are involved in the epigenetic state at D4Z4 and the mutations in other ARS genes may cause this phenotype. To test this, we regulation of DUX4. identified loss-of-function missense mutations in an ARS not yet associated Grant references: with disease [threonyl-(TARS)] and evaluated them for dominant toxicity in Neuromics, Prinses Beatrix Spierfonds, NIH NINDS, FSH society, Spieren C. elegans. This revealed two classes of mutations: those toxic to neurons voor Spieren, Friends of FSH Research. and those not toxic to neurons. These “separation of function” mutations will be essential for determining the molecular pathology of ARS-associated  C11
.4 CMT disease, which we are pursuing in mouse. Combined, our data suggest Homozygous mutations in the sterile alpha motif and leucine zipper that mutations in a broader panel of ARS genes cause dominant CMT disease containing kinase, ZAK, is associated with congenital myopathy with and that improving ARS function is a relevant therapeutic strategy. fiber type disproportion M. Tetreault1,2, E. Harris3, N. Vasli4, J. Karamchandani5, E. Bareke1,2, J. Majewski1,2, N.  C11
.6 B. Romero6,7, R. Barresi3, E. Malfatti6,7, K. Choquet1,8, M. Dicaire8, Y. Shao8, A. Topf3, E. De novo mutations in PD E10
A cause childhood-onset chorea with O‘Ferrall5, V. Straub3, H. Lochmüller3, J. Laporte4, B. Brais1,8; bilateral striatal lesions 1Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2McGill N. E. Mencacci1,2, E. Kamsteeg3, K. Nakashima4, L. R‘Bibo1, D. S. Lynch1, B. Balint1,5, M. A. University and Genome Quebec Innovation Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3John Walton A. P. Willemsen3, M. E. Adams6, S. Wiethoff1,7, K. Suzuki4, C. H. Davies8, J. Ng9, E. Meyer9, Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, Institute L. Veneziano10, P. Giunti1, D. Hughes1, F. L. Raymond11, M. Carecchio12, G. Zorzi12, N. of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, Nardocci12, C. Barzaghi12, B. Garavaglia12, V. Salpietro1, J. Hardy1, A. M. Pittman1, H. 4IGBMC (Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France, Houlden1, M. A. Kurian9,13, H. Kimura4, N. W. Wood1, K. P. Bhatia14, L. E. L. M. Vissers3; 5Department of Pathology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal Neurological 1UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 2IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Institute Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, 6Université Sorbonne, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Italiano, Universita` degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Radboudumc, Nijmegen, 32 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Netherlands, 4Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Fujisawa, Japan, 5University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 6National hospital for neurology and FLNA. neurosurgery, London, United Kingdom, 7Eberhard-Karls-University, Tubingen, Germany, dings show dysregulation of the TAK1 signalling complex produFcLeNsA a close 84CNS Drug Discovery Unit, Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical phenocopy of FMD caused by mutations in Furthermore they suggest Company Limited, Fujisawa, Japan, 9UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United that the pathogenesis of some of the filaminopathies caused by muta- Kingdom, 10National Research Council, Rome, Italy, 11University of Cambridge, tions may be mediated by misregulation of signalling co-ordinated through Cambridge, United Kingdom, 12IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy, 13Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 14Institute of Neurology, the TAK1 signalling complex. London, United Kingdom. Supported by the Marsden Fund (Royal Society of NZ), Cure Kids NZ and a University of Otago Scholarship.  C12
.2 Mutations in MYT1, encoding the myelin transcription factor 1, are a Chorea is a hyperkinetic movement disorder resulting from dysfunction of rare cause of Goldenhar syndrome within the RA signaling pathway striatal medium spiny neurons (MSNs), which form the main basal ganglia M. Berenguer1, E. Lopez1, A. Tingaud-Sequeira1, S. Marlin2, A. Toutain3, F. Denoyelle4, A. output projections. Here we used whole exome sequencing to unravel the Picard5, S. Charron1, G. Mathieu1, H. de Belvalet1, B. Arveiler1,6, P. J. Babin1, D. Lacombe1,6, underlying genetic cause in three unrelated individuals with a very similar C. Rooryck1,6; and unique clinical pdree sneonvtoation of childhood-onset choPrDeaE 1a0nAd characteri- 1Univ. Bordeaux, Maladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme (MRGM),U 1211 INSERM, stic brain MRI showing symmetrical bilateral striatal lesions. All cases were Bordeaux, France, 2Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants-Malades, Département de Génétique, Centre de Référence des Surdités Génétiques, Paris, France, 3Hôpital identified to carry a heterozygous mutation in (c.898T>C; Bretonneau, Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Tours, France, p.Phe300Leu in two cases and c.1000T>C; p.Phe334Leu in one case), enco- 4Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants-Malades, Service d‘ORL pédiatrique et de ding a phosphodiesterase highly and selectively expressed in MSNs. PD E10
A chirurgie cervicofaciale, Centre de Référence des malformations ORL rares, Paris, contributes to the regulation of the intracellular levels of cyclic adenosine France, 5Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants Malades, Service de chirurgie maxillo- monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). faciale, Paris, France, 6CHU de Bordeaux, Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre de Both substitutions affect highly cIno nssileicroved amino acids located in the re- Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Bordeaux, France. gulatory GAF-B domain, which, by binding to cAMP, stimulates the activity of the PD E10
A catalytic domainI.n vitro modeling shows that the mutated residues are located deep into the binding pocket, where they are likely to Goldenhar syndrome (GS) or Oculo-Auriculo-Vertebral Spectrum (OAVS) is a alter cAMP binding properties. functional studies showed that both developmental disorder involving first and second branchial arches, charac- substitutions do PnDoEt 1a0ffAect the basal PD E10
A activity, but severely disrupt terized by asymmetric ear anomalies, hemifacial microsomia, ocular defects, the stimulatory effect mediated by cAMP binding to the GAF-B domain. The and vertebral malformations. Although numerous chromosomal abnormali- identification of mutations as a cause of chorea further motivates ties have been associated with OAVS, no causative gene has been identified the study of cAMP signaling in MSNs, and highlights the crucial role of stria- so far. Among other environmental factors, Retinoic Acid (RA) has already tal cAMP signaling in the regulation of basal ganglia circuitry. Pharmacologi- been described as a teratogenic agent leading to OAVS features in humans. cal modulation of this pathway may offer promising aetiologically-targeted As sporadic cases ardee m noosvtoly described in GS, we have performed whole treatments for chorea and other hyperkinetic movement disorders. exome sequencing on selected affected individuals aMndY Tt1heir unaffected parents, looking for mutations. Consequently, we identified a he- terozygous nonsense mutation in one patient in the gene. Further,  C12
 Molecular Dysmorphology we detected one heterozygous missense mutation in another patient from a cohort of 169 OAVS patients. This gene encodmesy tt1hae, Myelin TransMcrYipTt1i on factor 1 which is highly expressed in the developing central nervous system.  C12
.1 Functional studies by transient knockdoswoxn1 o0f homolog of in Mutations in MA P3
K7 and TAB2 that alter the activity of the TAK1 zebrafish, led to specific craniofacial cartilages alterations and to the up- signalling complex cause frontometaphyseal dysplasia regulation of Neural Crest Cells marker . Moreover, cells studies con- E. M. Wade1, P. B. Daniel1, Z. A. Jenkins1, A. McInerney-Leo2, P. Leo2, T. Morgan1, M. C. firmed closeM liYnTk1s between MYT1, RA and the RA receptor MbeYtTa1 (RARB). Addor3, L. C. Adès4, D. Bertola5, A. Böhring6, E. Carter7, T. Cho8, R. Conway9, H. Duba10, E. Indeed, All-trans RA (ATRA) treatmenRt AleRdB to an upregulation of cellular Fletcher11, C. A. Kim5, D. Krakow12, T. Neuhann13, A. Superti-Furga14, I. Veenstra-Knol15, D. endogenous expressio n. Additionally, celMluYlaTr1 wild-type overex- Wieczorek16, L. C. Wilson17, R. C. M. Hennekam18, A. J. Sutherland-Smith19, T. M. Strom20, A. pression induced a down-regulation of leading to a negative feedback O. M. Wilkie21, M. A. Brown2, E. L. Duncan2,22, D. M. Markie1, S. P. Robertson1; 1University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, 2University of Queensland, Woolloongabba, of the RA signaling MpaYtTh1way,whereas mutated did not, confirming the Australia, 3Service de Genetique Medicale Maternite, Lausanne, Switzerland, pathogenic effect of the mutations. 4University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 5Unversidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, Overall, we report as a candidate gene implicated in Goldenhar syn- 6Universitatsklinikum Munster, Munster, Germany, 7Hospital for Special Surgery, drome, within the RA signaling pathway. New York, NY, United States, 8Seoul National University Children‘s Hospital, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 9Detroit Medical Center, Detroit, MI, United States, 10Kepler  C12
.3 Universitatsklinikum, Linz, Austria, 11Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United A novel gene responsible for Treacher Collins-Franceschetti Kingdom, 12UCLA Medical Centre, Santa Monica, CA, United States, 13Medical Genetics syndrome. Center, Munich, Germany, 14University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 15University F. Tran Mau Them1, B. Laplace-Buihle2, C. Collet3, A. Goldenberg4, M. Ricquebourg3, Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 16Heinrich Heine University, Dusseldorf, M. Girard5, E. Sanchez1, M. Vincent6, T. Guignard5, C. Blanchet7, A. Boland-Auge8, M. Germany, 17Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 18University of Bihoreau8, J. Deleuze8, J. Rivière9, J. Laplanche3, G. Captier10, F. Djouad2, D. Geneviève1; Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 19Massey University, Palmerston North, New 1Département de Génétique Médicale et Inserm U1183, CHRU Montpellier et Institute Zealand, 20Helmholtz Zentrum Munchen, Munich, Germany, 21John Radcliffe Hospital, of Regenerative Medicine and Biotherapies (IRMB), Montpellier, France, 2Unité Inserm Oxford, United Kingdom, 22Royal Brisbane and Women‘s Hospital, Brisbane, Australia. U1183, Institute of Regenerative Medicine and Biotherapies (IRMB), Montpellier, France, 3UF de Génétique Moléculaire, Service de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, AP-HP Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, 4Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 5Département de Génétique Médicale, CHRU Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, Frontometaphyseal dysplasia (FMD) is a sclerosing skeletal dysplasia affec- France, 6Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 7Service ting the long bones and the skull, however individuals present with a range d‘ORL, CHRU St Eloi, Montpellier, France, 8Centre National de Génotypage, Institut de of developmental FaLbNnAormalities. Approximately 50% of instances of FMD Génomique, CEA, Evry, France, 9Équipe GAD - Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, are allelic to the otopalatodigital spectrum disorders caused by gain-of-func- Université de Bourgogne - Plateau technique de Biologie - CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, tion mutations in FLNA, the mechanism by which these mutations result in 10Service de Chirurgie Plastique Infantile, CHRU Lapeyronie, Montpellier, France. hyperostosis is unknown. Using whole-exome and targeted Sanger sequen- cing in 20 cases of -negative FMD, we found three mutMatAioPn3sK i7n genes encoding two components of thdee nToGvFoβ -activated-kMinAaPse3 K(7TAK1) complex. Treacher Collins/Franceschetti syndrome (TCFS; MIM 154500) is a rare Fifteen individuals had the same mutation, c.14TA54B C2
>T, in which genetic disorder. The TCFS is the most common cause of mandibulo-facial encodes TAK1 kinase. A second mudtea ntioovno i n , c.502G>C was dysostosis in human with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 10,000 to 50,000 discovered in a single individual. A second gene, which encodes TAK1- births. The TCFS is characterized by craniofacial features with bilateral in- binding-protein-2, was shown to have the mutation, c.1705G>A in a volvement of the first arc brachial responsible for microtia associated with single instance. TAK1, a MAP-3-kinase, is activated via autophosphorylation hearing loss, malar and mandibular hypoplasia, cleft palate and other facial within its kinase domain. We show the TAK1 mutations are gain-of-function, abnormalities. To date three genes have been identified as responsible for resulting in a hyper-phosphorylated protein when expressed with TAB2. All TCFS, namely TCOF1, POLR1C and POLR1D. These genes are involved in the three mutations variably alter the activity of more than one signalling pa- synthesis of ribosomal RNA and are also important for the differentiation thway regulated by this kinase comple Ex S. T Hh Gis i 2nc 0lu 1d 6es | i n Bc Are Ras Ced E Lp3 O8 N M AA ,P K S PAaInNd |m WigrWatiWon. EoSf nHeGur.aOl cRreGst cells which lead to the formation of the 3 c 3ra- activation, a key pathway which regulates osteoblastogenesis. These fin- niofacial massif. After working for genotyping a large French cohort of TCFSABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index patients, we realized trio exome in four patients suffering from TCFS and pathic facial profile with malar hypoplasia, short palpebratlh fissures, unusual negatives for the three known genes. We identified two different de novo ear helicest,h and small oral stoma. Birthth weight was <10 centile in 8/10; non-sense mutations in the same gene. We achieved a morpholino against height <10 t hin 4/10; and weight <10 t hin 8/10. Head circumference varied the RNA of this gene in zebrafish models with a reporter of derived neural widely: <10 centile in 4/10 and ≥90 in 3/10. Some had minor skeletal crest cells (FOXD3) and cartilage structures (CO L2
A1). We observed cranio- anomalies, including three with kyphosis/scoliosis and/or formation ano- facial malformations mimicking the human phenotype namely a significant malies of the spine. All have global developmental delay, speech delay (two decrease of the mandible and gills and the impression of a decrease in the non-verbal), hypotonia, poor feeding, constipation, and thin hair to a variab- migration of cells from the neural crest. In conclusion we have identified a le degree. Neuroimaging, available in 7/10 patients, showed extensive areas 4th gene in STCF inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This discove- oPfC aGbFn2ormal white matter; in the MZ twins and 1 other patient this was as- ry extends the number of ribosomopathies. sociated with polymicrogyria. PCGF2 encodes a polycomb group ring finger protein. Polycomb group pro-  C12
.4 teins form multimeric complexes and repress target gene expression. Loss of a non-coding regulatory element on chromosome 9 in a family has a known role as a tumour suppressor; however, this is the first report with a Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS)-like phenotype of a consistent, syndromic neurodevelopmental phenotype in humans with J. Pozojevic1, E. Watrin2,3, B. Geidner1, I. Parenti1, K. S. Wendt4, R. Siebert5, A. Rakovic6, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach7, F. J. Kaiser1; neuroimaging anomalies caused by germline mutations in the gene. 1Sektion für Funktionelle Genetik am Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität zu  C12
.6 Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 2Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR 6290, Genetic and functional comparison of identical germline and somatic Rennes, France, 3Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Université de Rennes 1, SFR BIOSIT, Rennes, France, 4Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, SETB P1
 mutations Netherlands, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel and R. Acuna-Hidalgo1, P. Deriziotis2, G. M. Findlay3, C. Gilissen1, International Schinzel- Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 6Institute of Neurogenetics, Giedion syndrome collaboration, J. A. Veltman1,4, S. E. Fisher2, J. Shendure3, A. Hoischen1, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 7Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu B. W. van Bon1; Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, CdLS is a dominantly inherited malformation syndrome caused by mutati- Netherlands. ons in genes encoding subunits (SM C1
A, SM C3
, RAD21) or regulators (NIP- BL, HDA C8
) of the cohesin complex. This DNA-bound complex regulates chromatin-related processes like chromosome segregation, DNA-damage Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS) is a rare severe developmental disorder repair, transcription and chromatin structure. Here we report on a family characterized by malformations in multiple organ systems. SGS is caused with two children and a mother with clinical features reminiscent of CdLS. by de novo germline mutations clustering within a 12-bp exonic region in While gene panel sequencing approaches failed to identify the disease- SETB P1
. Interestingly, identical mutations in SETB P1
 occur somatically in causing mutation, an 87 kb spanning deletion co-segregating with the phe- myeloid leukemia, leading to increased cell proliferation. The aim of our notype was identified by array-CGH. Besides the coding region of CYL C2
, study is to analyze comparatively germline and somatic SETB P1
 mutations encoding a sperm head protein, no other genes were affected. Subsequent to gain insight into genotype-phenotype correlations for SGS and into the in-silico analyses predicted the existence of a ~3 kb tissue-specific regula- molecular basis of SGS. tory element within this region, approximately 1 Mb distant from the next We have gathered clinical information from over 45 SGS patients, constitu- protein-coding gene SM C2
, which encodes a subunit of the cohesin-related ting the largest SGS cohort yet. Comparing SETB P1
 mutations in SGS and in condensin complex. leukemia shows that, despite sharing an overlap, the distribution of muta- Significant reduction of SM C2
 expression was verified in patient´s fibro- tions within the hotspot differs between both conditions. Overexpression blasts by qPCR analysis. Accordingly, a strong dysregulation of SM C2
 was experiments confirm that mutations in the SETB P1
 hotspot destroy a de- observed in SH-SY5Y cells deficient for the putative 3 kb regulatory element, gron and lead to increased SETB P1
 protein, with different mutations having that was deleted by CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. Reporter gene assays varying effects on SETB P1
 stability and protein levels. Furthermore, we further highlighted the functional relevance of the identified regulatory ele- perform saturation genome editing (Findlay et al. Nature 2014) to analyze ment in regulating the SM C2
 gene promoter. Interestingly, dysregulation of the effect of all theoretically possible mutations in the SETB P1
 hotspot and SM C2
 correlated with the dysregulation of another condensin subunit SM C4
 surrounding region. In silico modeling and functional studies substantiate in patient’s samples as well as CRISPR/Cas9-generated cells. Furthermore, that mutations seen more frequently in SGS are functionally weaker than siRNA-mediated reduction of SM C2
 in different cell types also resulted in a those more prevalent in leukemia. Clinical data supports this finding; SGS decreased SM C4
 expression. patients with germline SETB P1
 mutations shown to be functionally stron- Our data indicate for the first time a putative relevance of condensin for hu- ger and more prevalent in leukemia show increased cell proliferation in vi- man disease, which might be dosage-sensitive and/or tissue specific. tro, increased incidence of malignancy and decreased survival.  C12
.5 Our results support a correlation between the genotype, molecular and cel- PCGF2 syndrome—distinctive facies,hypotonia, poor feeding, lular consequences and the phenotype in germline SETB P1
 mutations. constipation, thin hair, and global developmental delay with deep  C13
 Prenatal Genetics and carrier screening cerebral white matter changes—due to de novo missense mutations affecting the same conserved proline residue in PCGF2 P. D. Turnpenny1, M. Wright2, C. Tysoe1, T. van Essen3, R. Pfundt4, S. White5, N. Lotan6, L. Carpenter7, B. Schaefer8, W. K. Chung9, H. McLaughlin10, L. B. Henderson10, A. Roberts11, R.  C13
.1 Gjergja-Juraški12, K. Forbes13, A. E. Fry14, D. T. Pilz13; Validation of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of multiple 1Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Norther Regional Clinical single gene disorders for clinical implementation Genetics, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 3University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, M. Parks, S. Court, S. Cleary, S. Clokie, J. Hewitt, D. Williams, T. Cole, F. MacDonald, M. 4Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Victorian Griffiths, S. Allen; Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia, 6Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Birmingham Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom. Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 7St Francis Genetics, Tulsa, OK, United States, 8Arkansas Children‘s Hospital, Little Rock, AR, United States, 9Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, 10GeneDX, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 11Boston Children‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 12Children‘s Hospital Srebrnjak, Zagreb, Croatia, 13Queen In an effort to implement NIPD for single gene disorders (SGDs) into clini- Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 14University Hospital of Wales, cal practice (NIPSIGEN project), we have recently developed and validated Cardiff, United Kingdom. an NIPD test for Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD). Building on this experience, we have now designed an improved method for the NIPD of multiple SGDs, namely DMD/BMD, spinal muscular atrophy We report 10 subjects, 4 males and 6 females aged 3-18 years with ‘PCGF2 (SMA) and congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). This was achieved through syndrome’, ascderet naionveod worldwide following the identificaPtCioGnF 2of 2 cases targeted enrichment of 9054 highly heterozygous SNPs in total (800 Kb of through the DDD Study by whole exome sequencing of family trios. All indi- captured genomic region across 6 Mb windows on ChrX, Chr5, and Chr6) viduals have a missense mutation in a novel gene, , affecting and massively parallel sequencing of cffDNA followed by relative haploty- the same highly conserved proline residue; eight with p. P65
L and MZ twins pe dosage (RHDO) analysis. Maternal, paternal and proband genomic DNA with p. P65
S. The range of features and intellectual disability, including MRI samples were also tested alongside cfDNA for haplotype phasing and to b3ra4in imaging, is now evident. Most have a higEhSlyH dGist i2nc0t1iv6e f|la Bt AanRd CmEyLo-ONmAe,a SsuPrAe ItNhe |f eWtaWl frWac.tEioSn.H TGhe.O teRstG achieved 100% sensitivity and speci-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C13
.4 A prenatal targeted exome sequencing approach - Fetalis - designed ficity on patients tested so far, which included four pregnancies at risk of specifically for fetuses with ultrasound abnormalities reveals an DMD/BMD, five at risk of SMA, and nine healthy control pregnancies (where important fraction of cases with associated gene defects the fetal DNA obtained from the CVS was used to simulate the proband DNA C. Pangalos1, B. Hagnefelt1, K. Lilakos2, C. Konialis1; in seven cases for DMD/BMD testing, and in two cases for SMA and CAH 1InterGenetics-Diagnostic Genetics Center, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Haematology, testing). Our improved method is capable of testing 2-3 patients on a single University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece. MiSeq run for any of these three SGDs, thus increasing the multiplexing ca- pacity and decreasing testing costs for clinical laboratories. This leads us to believe that NIPD for the most common SGDs might soon become available Introduction: The underlying genetic cause of fetal malformations and as a clinical service to patients in the UK and elsewhere. other fetal structural abnormalities is often elusive, leading to an inability Funded by: Health Innovation Challenge Fund (DoH, Welcome Trust). to provide a precise diagnosis and accurate reproductive and fetal risk as- sessment. We report the development and first clinical applications of an  C13
.2 expanded exome sequencing-based test, coupled to a bioinformatics-driven Non-invasive prenatal testing of single-gene disorders: fact or fiction? prioritization algorithm, targeting gene disorders presenting with abnormal Y. Rozenholc1, L. Orhant2, F. Leturcq2,3, E. Girodon2, C. Costa2, D. Vidaud2,4, M. Vidaud2,4, D. prenatal ultrasound findings. Desaulle1, T. Bienvenu2,5, J. Nectoux2,5; Materials and Methods: We applied the testing strategy to14 euploid fe- 1MERIT - UMR IRD 216, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de tuses, from 11 on-going pregnancies and 3 products of abortion, all with Pharmacie de Paris, Paris, France, 2Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, HUPC Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 3Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, INSERM various ultrasound abnormalities. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was fol- UMR S974
, CNRS FR E3617
, Centre de recherche en Myologie, Paris, France, 4EA7331, lowed by variant prioritization, utilizing a custom analysis pipeline (Fetalis Faculté de Pharmacie Paris, Université Paris Descartes Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, algorithm), targeting 758 genes associated with genetic disorders which France, 5INSERM, U1016, Institut Cochin, CNRS UMR8104, Université Paris Descartes, may present with abnormal fetal ultrasound findings. Paris, France. Results: A definitive or highly-likely diagnosis was made in 6 of 14 cases (43%), involving 3 abortuses and 3 on-going pregnancies. In the remaining 8 on-going pregnancy cases (57%), a ZI C1
 variant of unknown clinical signi- Background. In recent years, the deployment of technologies for the analy- ficance was detected in one case, while 7 cases did not harbor pathogenic sis of cell-free fetal DNA, such as digital-PCR and NGS, allowed for the im- variant(s). Pregnancies were followed-up to birth, resulting in one neonate plementation of various non-invasive prenadtea ln toevsots in clinical practice and harboring the PROKR2 mutation and presenting with isolated minor struc- opened the way to the diagnosis of single-gene disorders. However, to date, tural cardiac abnormalities, and in 7 apparently healthy neonates. it has only being offered for paternal and mutation exclusion, the Conclusions: The expanded targeted exome sequencing-based approach study of the maternal inheritance remaining challenging because of the high described herein (Fetalis), provides strong evidence suggesting a definite levels of maternal background. and beneficial increase in our diagnostic capabilities in prenatal diagnosis Methods. We collected 190 plasma samples from women that underwent a of chromosomally balanced fetuses with troubling ultrasound abnormali- classic invasive prenatal diagnosis for Achondroplasia, Cystic-Fibrosis, Du- ties. Furthermore, the proposed strategy, overcomes many of the problems chenne Myopathy, Hemophilia or Neurofibromatosis Type 1. Digital-droplet and limitations associated with clinical wide-scale WES testing in a prenatal PCR assays specifically designed for wild-type and mutant alleles were used setting. to evaluate the observed allelic balance in maternal plasma. A precisely de-  C13
.5 rived Likelihood Ratio Test, taking account of the inheritance pattern, the Exome sequencing of parental samples is a powerful strategy for the nature of the mutatiodne annodvo the observed fetal fraction, was used to infer the diagnosis of lethal recessive disorders fetal genotype. K. L. Stals1, J. Baptista1, A. Bussell1, R. Caswell2, M. Johnson2, G. Jones1, H. Lango Allen2, A. Results. Concerning and paternally-inherited mutations, fetal geno- Parrish1, C. Tysoe1, M. Wakeling2, S. Ellard1,2; type was determined correctly in 100% of the tested cases (49 samples) 1Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Institute of with fetal fraction >1%. About maternally-inherited mutations, we showed Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom. that the percentage of conclusive results highly depends both on the avai- lable amount of cell-free DNA and the fetal fraction, thus leading us to pro- pose recommendations in terms of blood volume to collect, for each type of Rare disorders resulting in prenatal or neonatal death are both phenotypi- single-gene disorder. cally and genetically heterogeneous, making these disorders difficult to dia- Conclusion. This proof-of-concept study of non-invasive droplet-digital PCR gnose. Some affected fetuses can be diagnosed by ultrasound scan but often technology for the analysis of both paternally and maternally inherited fetal not until mid-gestation of a pregnancy and there is generally only a limited alleles demonstrates that NIPT for single-gene disorders is now becoming quality and quantity of fetal DNA available for genetic testing. We previously achievable. reported a novel strategy of sequencing parental DNA samples to identify Financial Support. AgenceBioMedecine-R13188KK, VaincreLaMucoviscido- potential causative heterozygous mutations that were confirmed as biallelic se-R C2013500852
 in the affected fetuses of two couples. We now report exome analysis in a  C13
.3 further 19 couples (total cohort 21 couples) who had previous pregnancies Maternal incidental findings during non-invasive prenatal testing for affected with a lethal disorder. Likely or definitely causative mutations were fetal aneuploidies identified in 14/21 couples (67%) andR YwRh1ere twGoL oEr1 more fMetRuPsSe2s2 wCeEreN aPfJ- N. Brison1, K. Van Den Bogaert1, J. M. E. Van den Oever2, L. Dehaspe1, K. Janssens3, B. fLeRcPte4d BaB gSe9neBtBicS 1d0iagSnAoSsSi6s wDYasN Co2bHta1inBed3 GiAn  L1
T1L/1F4R A( S718
%) cIaTsGesA.8 Mutations Blaumeiser3, H. Peeters1, H. Van Esch1, G. Van Buggenhout1, A. Vogels1, T. de Ravel1, E. were identified in 12 different genes ( n=2, n=2, , , Legius1, K. Devriendt1, J. R. Vermeesch1; , , , , , RYR1, L RaPn4d ). In most 1Centre for Human Genetics, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Leiden University Medical cases the reported phenotypes associated with these genes are consistently Center, dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Centre for Medical Genetics, lethal, but the mutations identified in the and genes represent University and University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. the most severe form of a variable phenotypic spectrum. Eight referrals in- volved an ongoing pregnancy, with five diagnoses reported in time to inform management. At least one couple has had prenatal testing in a subsequent Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for common fetal aneuploidies by eit- pregnancy. Exome sequencing of parental samples is a highly effective strat- her targeted or whole genome sequencing of circulating free DNA (cfDNA) egy for the diagnosis of lethal recessive disorders in outbred couples where has become standard prenatal care. Random genome-wide cfDNA sequen- there is limited fetal DNA available for testing. cing enables not only the detection of fetal chromosomal imbalances but also of maternally derived copy number variants (CNVs). Following routine clinical analysis of over 10.000 prospective pregnancies using an accredited in-house developed analysis pipeline we identified five different clinically relevant constitutional CNVs and imbalanced translocations of maternal origin which were reported back to the mother because they (i) were either relevant for the pregnancy management, (ii) had potential consequences for the fetus or (iii) could have consequences for future reproductive choice. Hence, genome wide cfDNA profiling of maternal plasma improves not only fetal but also more general pregnancy management. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 35ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C13
.6  C14
.2 Application of a NGS assay for the identification of individuals Frameshift mutations in microsatellite unstable colorectal cancers: carrying recessive genetic mutations in reproductive medicine from immune signature to personalized immunotherapy B. Rodríguez-Santiago1, A. Abulí2, M. Boada3, M. García1, S. Carbonell1, B. Coroleu3, A. P. Maby1,2, H. Kora1, M. Hamieh1,3, D. Tougeron1,4, G. Bindea2, B. Mlecnik2, H. Angell2,5, T. Veiga3, P. N. Barri3, X. Estivill2,4,5, L. A. Pérez-Jurado4,6,7, L. Armengol1; Fredriksen2, N. Elie6, J. Leprince7, J. Mauillon8,9, F. Le Pessot10, R. Sesboüé1, T. Frebourg1,8, J. 1qGenomics, Esplugues del Llobregat, Spain, 2Unit of Medical Genomics, Department Galon2, J. Latouche1,8; of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Reproduction, Dexeus Women’s Health, Barcelona, 1Inserm U1079-IRIB, Normandy Centre for Medical Genomics and Personalized Spain, 3Service of Reproduction Medicine, Obstetrics, Department of Obstetrics, Medicine, Rouen University, Rouen, France, 2Inserm U1138, Paris Descartes University, Gynaecology and Reproduction, Dexeus Women’s Health, Barcelona, Spain, 4Genetics Pierre et Marie Curie University, Paris, France, 3The Center for Cell Engineering, Unit, Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, United States, 4Department Barcelona, Spain, 5Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of of Gastroenterology, Poitiers University Hospital and EA 4331, Poitiers University, Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, 6Hospital del Mar Research Institute (IMIM), Poitiers, France, 5AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Imaging Barcelona, Spain, 7CIBER in Rare Disorders (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. Core Facility, Caen University Hospital, Caen, France, 7Inserm U982-IRIB, Cell Imaging Platform of Normandy PRIMACEN, Rouen University, Mont-Saint-Aignan, France, 8Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 9Department of Gastroenterology, Le Havre Hospital, Le Havre, France, 10Department of Pathology, Introduction: One of the main challenges of current genetic medicine is to Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. provide preventive actions. Utilisation of next-generation sequencing tech- nologies (NGS) for screening carriers of recessive mutations has the capa- city of providing information to make medical interventions in gamete do- Microsatellite instability (MSI), due to DNA mismatch repair (MMR) machi- nation programs. nery deficiency, is found in 15% of all colorectal cancers (CRCs), including Methods: We have developed and validated a NGS carrier-screening test Lynch syndrome, the most frequent hereditary form of CRC. In MSI-CRCs, (qCarrier test) that includes 200 genes associated with 218 autosomal re- overall tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) density and survival rate are cessive and 22 X-linked diseases. Carrier screening is performed to oocyte known to be higher than in microsatellite stable CRCs (MSS-CRCs). Indeed, donation candidates and the male partner of oocyte recipient. Carriers of X- frameshift mutations within coding repeat sequences could lead to the syn- linked conditions are discarded from the program, while donors are chosen thesis of immunogenic neo-antigens recognized by anti-tumor CD8+ T lym- not carrying mutations for the same gene/disease as the recipients. phocytes. However, the clear links between MMR machinery deficiency, TIL Results: The validation phase showed a high sensitivity (>99%) detecting density and prognosis remain to be established. all single nucleotide variants, 13 indels and 25 copy number variants in- Starting from 141 MSI-CRCs, we showed by gene expression profilinign asintdu cluded in the validation set. A total of 1,301 individuals were analysed with immunohistochemistry, that these cancers, compared to MSS-CRCs, ex- the qCarrier test, including 483 candidate oocyte donors and 635 receptor pressed more immune-related genes and were infiltrated with more couples, 105 females receiving sperm donation and 39 couples seeking proliferative T cells, functional CD8+ T cells, B cells and macrophages, which pregnancy. We identified 56% of individuals who are carriers for at least one correlated with prolonged survival. Moreover, we found that CD8+ TIL den- genetic condition and 1,7% of female donors who were discarded from the sity was associated wASitThE 1th eH NtoFt1aAl numTbCeFr7 Lo2f tumor frameshift mutations program due to a carrier state of X-linked conditions. Globally, 3% of a priori (FSMs), characterized by multiplex PCRs, and was especially higher when a assigned donations had a high reproductive risk that could be minimized FSM was present in , or gene. Finally, usinin vgi tarortificial after testing. Genetic counselling at different stages is essential in helping to antigen presenting cells developed in the laboratory, starting from periphe- a successful and healthy pregnancy. ral blood of HLA-A2+ MSI-CRC Lynch patients, we could mount effici- ent CD8+ T cell responses against neo-antigens derived from FSMs present  C14
 Cancer Genetics: From modeling to in their tumor. profiling Altogether, we describe, for the first time to our knowledge, the precise im- mune signature of MSI-CRCs, and our results pave the way for developing personalized immunotherapy strategies in these cancers, especially for  C14
.1 young Lynch patients. LYNCH SYNDROME MOUSE: A MODEL FOR COLON CARCINOGENESIS  C14
.3 M. Pussila1, P. Törönen1, E. Einarsdottir2,3, S. Katayama2, J. Linden4, J. Kere2,3, M. Studying the functionality of the homologous repair pathway in Nyström1; zebrafish embryos: heading for an in vivo functional test to evaluate 1Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden, 3Folkhälsan the pathogenicity of BRCA2 variants identified in breast/ovarian Institute of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Basic cancer patients Veterinary Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. K. B. M. Claes1, J. Vierstraete1, A. Willaert1, K. Vleminckx1, P. Vermassen1, P. Coucke1, A. Vral2; 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 2Dept Basic Medical Sciences, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium. Western-style diet (WD), which is rich in fat and scarce of fiber and vitamin D, predispose to colorectal cancer (CRC). We performed a long-term diet ex- periment with WD in the mouse to address putative cancer-predisposing Aims: Currently, one of the major challenges in genetic testing is determi- events in colonic mucosa. Transcriptome-wide gene expression profiles ning the functional effect of (rare) variants. Here, we propose a novel in vivo were studied for 12 and 18 month old mice analogous to human Lynch approach to study the functionality of BRCA2 missense variants in zebrafish. syndrome (LS) (Mlh1+/-), and their wild type littermates (Mlh1+/+). Fur- We propose an in vivo functional assay to measure in embryos the capacity thermore, tumor phenotypes, microsatellite instability (MSI) and mismatch of homologous recombination for human BRCA2 mRNA containing variants repair protein (MMR) loss, linked to LS were characterized. Altogether 6 of unknown clinical significance (VUS). CRCs were detected and 5 of them in WD fed mice. Interestingly, our results Methods: We create DNA double strand breaks (DSB) in zebrafish embryos show that expression profiles of histologically normal mucosa from mice by irradiation. We use yH2AX and RAD51 foci assays as markers for DSB and which developed CRC form a distinct cluster compared to healthy controls HR repair respectively. We generated zebrafish brca2 knockdown models in MDS plot created with 100 most regulated genes in the CRC developing by morpholino injection and Crispr-Cas9. After synthesis of human BRCA2 samples. The genes were selected with shrinkage-T test. This kind of cluste- mRNA, rescue experiments will be performed with wild type mRNA and ring clearly indicates a colon-wide field effect of CRC-predisposing events mRNA containing the VUS of interest. in the normal colon mucosa. It is assumed that MMR gene inactivation and Results: We developed a protocol for visualising and quantifying RAD51 foci consequent tumor initiation follows the classical two-hit model. Our results, in tissues of wild type zebrafish embryos. Knockdown of brca2 by a mor- however, suggest that already decreased amount of Mlh1, when MMR is still pholino results in almost complete absence of RAD51 foci in irradiated em- intact, may be sufficient to initiate tumorigenesis. Lynch syndrome mice did bryos. Similar results are currently being generated in the Crispr-Cas9 brca2 not lack Mlh1 or show MSI in their tumors, although Mlh1 RNA expression knockout model. In a next step we will rescue the phenotype by microinjec- was already significantly decreased in their mucosa. tion of wild type human BRCA2 mRNA and mRNA containing VUS to study The study was supported by grants from European Research Council (2008- the effect of these VUS on the HR capacity. AdG-232635), Jenny and Antti Wihuri foundation. Conclusions: The zebrafish genome contains nearly all the genes involved in different DNA repair pathways in eukaryotes, including, homologous re- combination (HR), in which BRCA2 plays a major role. Therefore, zebrafish provide an ideal in vivo model for studying variants in genes involved in DNA damage and repair. 36 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C14
.4  C14
.6 Cancer treatments contribute to the development of multiple primary Tracing the origin of disseminated tumor cells in breast cancer using tumours in Li-Fraumeni syndrome single-[[Unsupported Character - Codename &shy;]]cell sequencing E. Kasper1, Y. Zerdoumi1, E. Colasse2, E. Angot2, L. Nicol3, S. Adriouch4, Y. Lacoume5, J. P. Kumar1,2, E. Moller3,4, J. Demeulemeester1,5, S. Nord3,4, D. Wedge2, M. Zamani Esteki1, A. Sabourin2, T. Frebourg1, G. Bougeard1, J. Flaman1; Børresen-Dale3, K. White6, B. Naume3, V. Kristenen3, P. Van Loo5,2, T. Voet1,2; 1Inserm U1079, Rouen University and Department of Genetics, Rouen University 1University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Welcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Hospital, Normandy Centre for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, United Kingdom, 3University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 4Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo, 2Inserm U1079, Rouen University and Department of Pathology, Rouen University Norway, 5The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom, 6University of Chicago, Hospital, Normandy Centre for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, Chicago, IL, United States. 3Small Animal Magnetic Resonance Imaging Facility, Rouen University, Rouen, France, 4Inserm U905, Rouen University, Rouen, France, 5Animal Facility, Rouen University, Rouen, France. Single‐cell micro-metastases of solid tumors often occur in bone marrow. These disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) may lay dormant, resist therapy and may cause overt bone and visceral metastases. Unfortunately, the molecular Li-Fraumeni syndrome, due to T P53
 germline mutations, is characterized by nature of DTCs remains elusive, as well as when and where they spring from an exceptional high risk of multiple primary tumours. Considering that p53 the tumor. Here, we apply single-cell sequencing to identify and trace the pathway is activated in response to DNA damage, we recently developed an origin of DTCs in breast cancer. universal genotoxicity assay based on the transcriptional induction of T P53
 Results: We sequenced 40 single cells isolated by micromanipulation from target genes in human lymphocytes exposed to DNA damaging agents (Zer- the bone marrow of six patients using established immunocytochemical doumi et al., Mutat Res 2015). To evaluate the impact of genotoxic agents markers and morphologic characteristics for epithelial tumor cells. Compa- in vivo, we first characterized the mouse transcriptome in response to DNA rison of the cells’ DNA copy number (CN) profiles with those of the primary damage, selected Trp53 target genes, developed a similar genotoxic assay tumors and lymph node metastasis established that a quarter of the cells in mice based on the ex vivo exposure of mouse splenocytes and then di- disseminated from a tumor clone. The remaining cells represented non‐ rectly performed the assay after intraperitoneal (IP) injection of chemo- aberrant ‘normal’ cells and ‘aberrant cells of unknown origin’ that have CN therapies. The mouse ex vivo and in vivo genotoxic assays showed, like the landscapes discordant from the tumor. Genotyping somatic mutations called assay performed in human lymphocytes, that all classical chemotherapies, on bulk tumor exomes in the SC sequences confirmed that these latter cells except microtubule poisons, are strongly genotoxic. We then submitted 6 did not derive from the same lineage as the breast cancers. Evolutionary weeks old Trp53 -/- LFS mice and Trp53 wt/wt control mice to IP injec- reconstruction analysis of bulk tumor and DTC genomes enabled ordering tion of chemotherapies or radiotherapy and performed monthly total body of CNA events in molecular pseudo‐time and tracing the origin of the DTCs MRI. We found that genotoxic chemotherapies and radiotherapy accelerate to either the main tumor clone, primary tumor subclones, or subclones in the development of malignant solid tumours and hemopathies in Trp53 -/- lymph node metastases. mice. All these results strongly support that cancer treatments contribute Conclusions: SC sequencing, in parallel with intra‐tumor genetic hetero- to the development of secondary tumours in LFS and explain the sequential geneity profiling from bulk DNA, is a powerful approach to identify and stu- occurrence of tumours observed in LFS patients. This indicates that, in LFS dy DTCs, yielding insight into metastatic processes. A heterogeneous popu- patients, radiotherapy should be avoided, whenever possible, and that non lation of CNA‐positive cells of unknown origin is prominent in bone marrow. genotoxic chemotherapies should be evaluated in order to reduce the risk of multiple primary cancers.  C15
 Neurogenetic disorders  C14
.5 Single-cell transcriptional profiling identifies rare cell types with gene markers for classification and prognosis in Acute Myeloid  C15
.1 Leukemia A Complex Mutational Spectrum of Structural Variation Contributing A. Sartori1, E. Falconnet1, P. Ribaux1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2,3, T. Matthes2, C. Borel1; to Autism 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Hospitals of M. E. Talkowski1,2,3, R. Collins1, C. Redin1, M. Stone1, J. Glessner1, S. Sanders4, H. Brand1,2; Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3iG E3
 Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, 1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Harvard Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. Boston, MA, United States, 3Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a particularly aggressive blood cancer dif- ficult to treat because of its recurrence affecting differentiation of hemato- Recent genomic studies of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have relied upon poietic progenitors. It is hypothesized that relapse of AML is due to incom- genome-wide characterization of coding mutations using whole-exome plete eradication of leukemic stem cells (LSC) with self-renewal and leuke- sequencing (WES) and copy number variants (CNV) using chromosomal mia-initiating properties. Our ultimate goal is to characterize LSC based on microarray (CMA). In ASD, these efforts have revealed a strong associati- their transcriptional profiling. on with de novo loss-of-function (LoF) mutations and CNVs segments that Evidence suggests that CD34+CD38− cell population is enriched for LSCs alter the dosage of genes under evolutionary constraint. Unfortunately, the but they remain rare and difficult to identify. Thus, we present a single-cell impact of balanced and complex structural variation (SV), which also repre- RNA-seq approach to characterize CD34+CD38- sorted cells in 2 AML indi- sent LoF variation, remains uncharacterized in ASD and other human disea- viduals (AM L1
(M0), AM L2
(M5)) at the time of diagnosis and in 4 unaffected se studies. Here, we explored the full mutational spectrum of SV contribu- individuals (N). For 311 single-cells, 1764 genes were detected on average ting to ASD by integrating large-insert, short-insert and synthetic long-read (RPKM>10). We identified 763 and 858 significantly differentially expressed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) technologies with CMA in 307 idiopathic genes in AM L2
 and AM L1
, respectively using D3E. We demonstrate that the ASD probands and 120 family members from the Simons Simplex Collec- captured AML cells possess the hallmarks of LSC. The top highly expressed tion. Analyses revealed a diverse landscape of SVs beyond canonical CNVs, genes are stem markers including SOX4, CD74, CD69 and CXC L8
. In particu- including inversions, insertions, and translocations. We also categorized 13 lar, HOXA-B cluster genes appeared markedly dysregulated demonstrating distinct subclasses of recurrent complex SVs and demonstrate that each ge- their leukemia-initiating capability. Gene ontology revealed enrichment for nome sequenced harbored at least one such large complex rearrangement annotation of apoptotic resistance and self-renewal capacity as well. Fur- (~5 kb resolution). We identified 26 de novo SVs likely contributing to ASD, thermore, 3 distinct clusters of co-expressed genes were identified that di- 50% of which were cryptic to detection by previous technologies on the- stinguished between N cells and AML cells with M0 and M5 (SEURAT-tool). se same samples. These data confirmed 13 previously proposed ASD risk Finally, we hypothesized that prognostic gene-expression signature is pre- factors and discovered 12 novel candidates. We estimate that the overall sent at diagnosis. Using TCGA RNA-seq and clinical datasets, we identified contribution of de novo SVs in ASD at this resolution to be at least 8.2%, or genes whose expression correlated with AML patient survival. We confir- a two-fold increase over previous analyses restricted to CNVs. These data med their differential expression in AML single-cells and thus, their con- suggest that cryptic and complex SV represent an important and presently tribution in leukemogenesis and potential relevance for clinical-outcome underappreciated component of ASD etiology. prediction. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 37ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C15
.2 A potential role for the linker for activation of T-cells (LAT) in the neuroanatomical phenotype of the 220kb 16p11.2 B P2
-B P3
 CNVs found that downregulation of row expression, specifically in neurons, leads M. Loviglio1, T. Arbogast2, M. Leleu3, G. Giannuzzi1, K. Männik1, 16p11.2 Consortium, J. S. to deficits in habituation, a form of non-associative learning that is highly Beckmann4, S. Jacquemont5, N. Katsanis2, C. Golzio2, A. Reymond1; relevant for both ID and ASD. 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Center for Human Disease Conclusion: Combined, these data underscore the pathogenicity of loss-of- Modeling - Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, 3EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, function mutations in POGZ and define a novel POGZ-related syndrome. 4Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland, 5CHUSJ - Université de Some features may be explained by the high expression of POGZ early in Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada. fetal brain development, particularly in the cerebellum and pituitary.  C15
.4 Copy number variants (CNVs) of the distal 16p11.2 220kb B P2
-B P3
 regi- CLOZUK2: A population-based approach to the genomics of on show mirror effect on BMI and head size, and association with autism treatment-resistant schizophrenia spectrum disorders (ASD) and schizophrenia, as previously reported for A. F. Pardiñas1, S. Legge1, S. Ripke2, the CRESTAR Consortium, K. D. Chambert3, J. L. the proximal 16p11.2 600kb B P4
-B P5
 deletion and duplication. These two Moran3, S. A. McCarroll3, M. J. Owen1, M. C. O‘Donovan1, J. T. R. Walters1; 1MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, CNVs-prone regions at 16p11.2 are also reciprocally engaged in complex United Kingdom, 2Universitätsmedizin Berlin: Charité, Berlin, Germany, 3Stanley Center chromatin looping, successfully confirmed by 4C, FISH, Hi-C and concomi- for Psychiatric Research, The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, tant expression changes. We assessed the 220kb B P2
-B P3
 duplication by United States. overexpressing each of the 9 encompassed human transcripts, CD19, NFAT-  C2
IP, ATXN2L, TUFM, AT P2
A1, RABE P2
, SPN S1
, LAT and SH2B1, in zebrafish embryos. Overexpression of the linker for activation of T cells (LAT) induced About one third of patients with schizophrenia do not respond adequately a reduction in dividing cells in the brain and number of post-mitotic neurons to antipsychotic medication, and are thus considered to have treatment- in the anterior forebrain at 2dpf, and of intertectal axonal tracts at 3dpf, re- resistant schizophrenia (TRS). This is one of the most disabling forms of sulting in microcephaly at later stages. We showed similar results upon ove- mental illness and constitutes a major challenge and cost to public health, rexpression of CD247 and ZA P70
, two genes belonging to the LAT’s immune affecting at least 1 million people solely in Europe. The only drug backed system signaling pathway. Co-injections experiments showed that KCTD13, by evidence-based studies as a prescription for TRS is the atypical antipsy- MVP, and MAPK3, three genes mapping within the 600kb B P4
-B P5
 locus and chotic clozapine, which requires frequent blood monitoring due to rare but major driver and modifiers, respectively, of the head circumference pheno- potentially lethal adverse effects. type linked to that region, and LAT acted in an additive manner to increase Through an agreement with the major pharmaceutical companies that the severity of the microcephaly phenotype, suggesting the presence of ge- market clozapine in the UK (Novartis and Leyden Delta) we collected blood netic interaction. Chromatin conformation capture further showed that LAT samples of 15,210 anonymous clozapine takers, which were genotyped on cis- and trans-interacting chromatin partners were enriched for ASD genes the Illumina OmniExpress beadchip by the Broad Institute of MIT and Har- (p=5.6E-03, OR=1.9). Our results suggest that LAT, besides its well-recogni- vard (Cambridge, USA) and deCODE genetics (Reykjavík, Iceland). We ob- zed function in T-cells development, is a major contributor in the 16p11.2 tained genotype data from 25,811 unscreened control individuals through (B P2
-B P3
) 220kb CNVs neurodevelopmental phenotypes. public sources and collaboration with large-scale genotyping projects. Ana-  C15
.3 lysis of this dataset showed significant associations in known schizophrenia Disruption of POGZ is associated with intellectual disability and loci (TSNAR E1
, CACNA1C, DRD2) and novel signals (RAPGEF4, ZNF664) autism spectrum disorders which have been previously linked to brain development. In order to clarify H. A. F. Stessman1, M. H. Willemsen2, M. Fenckova2, O. Penn1, A. Hoischen2, B. Xiong1, T. the relationship between broad-sense schizophrenia and TRS, we generated Wang3, K. Hoekzema1, L. Vives1, I. Vogel4, H. G. Brunner2, I. van der Burgt2, C. Ockeloen2, polygenic risk prediction scores from the largest available schizophrenia J. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers2, J. Klein Wassink-Ruiter5, C. Stumpel6, J. Vles6, C. Marcelis2, H. GWAS (Ripke et al. 2015), which were used to calculate risk profiles in TRS van Bokhoven2, V. Cantagrel7, S. Lyonnet7, L. Colleaux7, R. Bernier1, J. Gerdts1, B. P. Coe1, individuals. There was no compelling evidence of a stronger polygenic si- C. Romano8, L. Grillo8, A. Alberti9, C. Scuderi8, M. Nordenskjöld10, M. Kvarnung10, H. Guo11, gnal in this analysis, disputing the view that TRS represents simply a severe K. Xia11, A. Piton12,13, B. Gerard13, D. Genevieve14, B. Delobel15, D. Lehalle16, L. Perrin17, form of schizophrenia. F. Prieur18, J. Thevenon16, J. Gecz19, M. Shaw19, R. Pfundt2, B. Keren20, A. Jacquette20, A. Schenck2, E. Eichler1,21, T. Kleefstra2; Funding source: European Community‘s F P7
/2007-2013, grant n° 279227. 1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 2Radboud University Medical  C15
.5 Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3School of Life Sciences, Changsha, China, 4Aarhus H-prune is required for microtubule assembly and is mutated in University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 5University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 6Maastricht UMC+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Institut Imagine, INSERM, microcephaly and neurodevelopmental delay Paris, France, 8IRCCS Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy, 9IRCCS M. Y. Ahmed1,2, E. Baple3,4, M. Carotenuto5,6, R. Singh7, B. Chioza3, P. De Antonellis5,6, Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Toina, Italy, 10Center for Molecular Medicine, V. Ferrucci5,6, R. N. Chaurasia7, T. M. Mohapatra8, R. Prasad9, P. Pucci6, R. Rashmi7, F. Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 11School of Life Sciences, Central South Cozzolino6, R. K. Sunil7, M. Monti6, A. Rajab9, A. Al-Amri9, A. Alshehi10, M. Patton1,3, M. University, Changsha, China, 12Institut Génétique Biologie Moléculaire Cellulaire, Zollo5,6, A. H. Crosby1,3; Illkirch, France, 13Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 14Hôpital 1Genetics Research Centre, St. George’s University London, London, United Kingdom, Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 15Hopital Saint Vincent de Paul, Lille, France, 2RILD Wellcome Wolfson Centre, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, 16Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 17Hôpital Robert Debré, United Kingdom, 3Medical Research (Level 4), RILD Wellcome Wolfson Centre, Royal Paris, France, 18CHU de Saint-Étienne, Saint-Etienne, France, 19Robinson Research Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4University Hospital Institute and the University of Adelaide at the Women’s and Children’s Hospital, North Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, Adelaide, Australia, 20Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 21Howard Hughes United Kingdom, 5Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, United States. Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy, 6CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy, 7Molecular Genetics, Department Of Anatomy, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India, 8Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Medical Sciences Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India, 9National Genetic Centre, Ministry Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorders of Health, Muscat, Oman, 10Department of Biology, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, (ASD) are genetically heterogeneous, and associated genes for both condi- Oman. tions overlap substantially. Few mutations in POGZ were reported in recent exome studies. However, these studies did not provide detailed clinical in- formation, leaving the pathogenicity and a clear phenotypic definition of the Introduction: Microtubules are crucial cytoplasmic structures regulating POGZ patient unknown. neuronal cells migration and polarity which are key processes in brain mor- Patients and Methods: We collected the clinical and molecular data of 25 phogenesis. Their important role in human brain development is highligh- individuals with disruptive mutations in POGZ identified by diagnostic who- ted by the neurological disorders arising from mutations in genes encoding le-exome, whole-genome, or targeted sequencing of 5,223 individuals with tubulins or their cellular interacting partners. neurodevelopmental disorders (ID primarily) or by targeted resequencing Materials and methods: Using genome wide SNP genotyping paralleled with of this locus in 12,041 individuals with ASD and/or ID. In parallel, we utili- whole exome sequencing, we investigated a large multigenerational Omani zed a Drosophila knockdown model of the POGZ orthologue row to provide pedigree and a single nuclear family from India to identify the genetic basis further support for the importance of POGZ in cognitive function. of a severe autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental condition with cardi- Results: We defined common phenotypic features of POGZ patients, inclu- nal features of microcephaly and global developmental delay. We performed ding variable levels of developmental delay and more severe speech and in vitro cell assays to examine the functional consequences of the identified language delay compared to motor delay and coordination issues. We also mutations in key cellular processes. identified significant associations with vision problems, microcephaly, hy- Results: We identified two novel mutations in the PRUNE gene affecting p3er8activity, a tendency to obesity and feedingE dSifHficGu l2tie0s1. I6n |a dBdAitRioCn, EwLeO NkAey, SfuPnActIioNn a|l WmoWtifWs o.fE thSeH eGnc.oOdeRdG protein: (c.88G>A/ p.Asp30Asn) in theABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index extended Omani family, and (c.889C>T/ p.Arg297Trp) in the Indian family. variant in single-SNP testing has less evidence than a regulatory variant cor- Our studies identified PRUNE as a binding partner of β-tubulin crucial for related with it. tubulin polymerization. This interaction is impaired by both mutations as We believe that FINEMAP’s approach of jointly modeling the whole locus shown by disrupted subcellular co-localizations and undermined in vitro together with its unprecedented computational efficiency will help reveal microtubules assembly. We also show that both mutations impair in vitro valuable knowledge that could otherwise remain hidden due to limitations cell migration, proliferation and differentiation which are processes nor- of existing fine-mapping methods. mally enhanced by wild type PRUNE.  C16
.2 Conclusions: Our data confirm the essential role of tubulin-related proteins Phenotype similarity regression for identifying the genetic in cortical development and define PRUNE as a pivotal interacting molecule determinants of rare diseases important for normal microtubule assembly which may be mutated to result E. Turro1, D. Greene1, S. Richardson2, NIHR BioResource; in human microcephaly and a global neurodevelopmental delay phenotype. 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2MRC Biostatistics Unit, Supported by MRC grant: G1002279 Cambridge, United Kingdom.  C15
.6 Primary microcephaly: ALFY-controlled DV L3
 autophagy regulates Wnt signaling, determining human brain size Rare genetic disorders, which can now be studied systematically with af- R. Kadir1, T. Harel1, B. Markus1, Y. Perez1, A. Bakhrat2, E. Chervinski3, J. Zlotogora4, S. fordable genome sequencing, are often caused by high-penetrance rare va- Sivan5, R. Y. Birnbaum2, U. Abdu2, S. Shalev3, O. S. Birk5,6; riants. Such disorders are often heterogeneous and characterised by abnor- 1Human Genetics and the Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion malities spanning multiple organ systems ascertained with variable clinical University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Department of Life Sciences, Ben Gurion University, Beer precision. Existing methods for identifying genes with variants responsible Sheva, Israel, 3Genetics Institute, HaEmek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, 4Department for rare diseases summarise phenotypes with unstructured binary or quan- of Community Genetics, Public Health Services, Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel, titative variables. The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) allows composite 5The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for Biotechnology phenotypes to be represented systematically but association methods ac- in the Negev and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 6Genetics Institute, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva, counting for the ontological relationship between HPO terms do not exist. Israel. We present a Bayesian method to model the association between an HPO- coded patient phenotype and genotype. Our method estimates the probabi- lity of an association together with an HPO-coded phenotype characteristic Primary microcephaly is a congenital neurodevelopmental disorder of re- of the disease. We thus formalise a clinical approach to phenotyping that duced head circumference and brain volume, with fewer neurons in the is lacking in standard regression techniques for rare disease research. We cortex of the developing brain due to premature transition between sym- demonstrate the power of our method by uncovering a number of true as- metrical and asymmetrical cellular division of the neuronal stem cell layer sociations in a large collection of genome-sequenced and HPO-coded cases during neurogenesis. We now show through linkage analysis and whole exo- with rare diseases. me sequencing, that a dominant mutation in ALFY, encoding an autophagy  C16
.3 scaffold protein, causes human primary microcephaly. We demonstrate the PRSlice: A new polygenic risk score approach that leverages dominant effect of the mutation in drosophila: transgenic flies harboring pleiotropy to improve prediction of complex traits the human mutant allele display small brain volume, recapitulating the di- J. Euesden, Y. Ruan, A. Socrates, J. R. I. Coleman, C. M. Lewis, P. F. O‘Reilly; sease phenotype. Moreover, eye-specific expression of human mutant ALFY King‘s College London, London, United Kingdom. causes rough eye phenotype. In molecular terms, we demonstrate that nor- mally ALFY attenuates the canonical Wnt signaling pathway via autophagy- dependent removal specifically of aggregates of DV L3
 and not of Dvl1 or Polygenic Risk Scores (PRS) are widely applied in human disease genetics. Dvl2. Thus, autophagic attenuation of Wnt signaling through removal of We have developed the first dedicated software for calculating, testing and Dvl3 aggregates by ALFY acts in determining human brain size. plotting the results of polygenic risk scores - PRSice (‘precise’). To impro- ve PRS predictive power further, we investigate an alternative approach to  C16
 Bioinformatics, statistical and population the selection of SNPs to calculate genetic risk, in particular in the context genetics of applying PRS to assess shared genetic aetiology between different traits. By splitting the genome into chunks (eg. 5Mb regions) and selecting an optimum threshold for each chunk, we are able to select SNPs with large effects on the target phenotype but more modest effects on the discovery  C16
.1 phenotype, which would have been omitted based on discovery P-value FINEMAP: Ultrafast high-resolution fine-mapping using summary alone. We demonstrate, via application to real and simulated data, that this data from genome-wide association studies novel method - PRSlice - can improve phenotype prediction across a num- C. Benner1,2, C. Spencer3, A. S. Havulinna4, V. Salomaa4, S. Ripatti1,2,5, M. Pirinen1; 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of ber of common contingencies. We firstly focus on using summary data for Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Wellcome Trust Centre for one disease to predict risk of another comorbid phenotype - this not only Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4National Institute for improves disease prediction in scenarios where the highest powered GWAS Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki, Finland, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome available is in a different but related trait, such as using BMI genetic risk Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom. to predict hypertension - but also provides insight into the shared genetic architecture between complex traits. Secondly, we demonstrate the value of this approach for predicting genetic risk across different worldwide popu- Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of loci lations, an increasingly common analysis strategy, demonstrating that the associated with complex diseases. A next crucial step is fine-mapping: iden- effects of allelic heterogeneity can be accounted for. tifying causal variants that point to molecular mechanisms behind the asso-  C16
.4 ciations and, eventually, suggest therapeutic targets. Recently, fine-mapping Emergence of a Homo sapiens-specific gene family and the evolution methods have been extended to use only GWAS summary data together with of disease risk at chromosome 16p11.2 pairwise correlations of the variants. Common to these approaches is that G. Giannuzzi1, X. Nuttle2, M. H. Duyzend2, J. G. Schraiber2, I. Narvaiza3, F. Camponeschi4, they rely on computationally expensive exhaustive search restricting their P. Sudmant2,5, O. Penn2, G. Chiatante6, M. Malig2, J. Huddleston2,7, C. Benner3, M. C. N. use to a few hundred variants. We introduce a software package FINEMAP Marchetto3, L. Denman2, L. Harshman2, C. Baker2, A. Raja2,7, K. Penewit2, N. Janke2, J. W. that replaces the exhaustive search by an ultrafast stochastic search and the- Tang8, M. Ventura6, F. Antonacci6, L. Banci4,9, S. Ciofi-Baffoni4,9, J. M. Akey2, C. T. Amemiya8, reby allows fine-mapping analyses to scale up to whole chromosomes. F. H. Gage3,10, A. Reymond1, E. E. Eichler2,7; We show that FINEMAP (1) opens up completely new opportunities by, 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, e.g., exploring 15q21/LIPC locus for HDL-cholesterol with 20,000 variants 2Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, in less than 90 seconds while exhaustive search would require more than La Jolla, CA, United States, 4Department of Chemistry, University of Florence, Florence, 9,000 years, (2) provides similar accuracy to exhaustive search when the Italy, 5Program in Computational and Systems Biology, Massachusetts Institute of latter can be completed, (3) achieves even higher accuracy when the latter Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Department of Biology, University of Bari, must be restricted due to computational reasons, and (4) identifies more Bari, Italy, 7Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 8Benaroya plausible variant combinations than conditional analysis. At 15q21/LIPC Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, WA, United States, 9Magnetic Resonance locus with at least a 3-SNP association pattern with HDL, a missense vari- ant and a promoter polymorphism areE SlikHelGy t2o 0be1 c6a u| sBalA wRhCerEeaLsO thNeA le,a Sd PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 39ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Center CERM, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 10Center for Academic Research and Chile, 6Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Training in Anthropogeny, La Jolla, CA, United States. Alegre, Brazil, 7Laboratorio de Genética Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, Colombia, 8Centro Nacional Patagónico, CONICET, Puerto Madryn, Argentina. Recurrent pathogenic deletions and duplications at chromosome 16p11.2 are medHiaotmedo bsya pai ecnosmplex set of highly identical and directly oriented seg- mental duplications. This disease-preBdOisLpAo2sing architecture results from Latin America has a complex history of extensive admixture between Nati- recent, -specific duplications (i.e. absent in Neanderthal and ve Americans, Europeans and Africans. Thus far, this process has been ex- Denisovan) of a segment including the gene, the latest among a series plored with genetic data to examine patterns of continental ancestry. Here of genomic changes that dramatically restructured the region during homi- we explore sub-continental ancestry using ~700,000 autosomal SNPs in a nid evolution. All humans examined (n = 2,359) carry one or more copies of sample of ~7,000 Latin Americans from Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and the duplicationB,O wLAhi2ch nearly fixed early in the human lineage—a pattern Peru (DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004572). unlikely to have arisen so rapidly in the absence of selection (p < 0.009). We describe a novel statistical approach exploiting patterns of haplotype We show that duplications affect its expression levels among indivi- similarity with increased precision over a related approach that was ap- duals and between humansB aOnLdA o2ther primates. Its copy number correlates plied successfully to study the fine scale patterns of worldwide populati- with both RNA expression (r = 0.36) and protein level (r = 0.65) in human ons (DOI:10.1126/science.1243518) and Great Britain (DOI:10.1038/ lymphoblastoid cell lines. is highly expressed in embryonic stem nature14230). We identify the contributions of geographically precise cells, where it shows the greatest expression difference between humiann v aitnrdo ancestral components, including those from Africa and Europe, to both re- chimpanzee. BOLA2 localizes to the cell cortex and forms a [2Fe-2S]-bridged gions and individuals. For Brazil, we highlight how the sources of European heterotrimeric complex with GLRX3 (glutaredoxin 3). We show that ancestry vary considerably, reflecting influx at different times from the Ibe- increasing BOLA2 results in a shift from dimeric GLRX3 to heterotrimeric rian Peninsula, Italy and Northern Europe. In the former Spanish colonies, BOLA2/GLRX3 complex and the latter is 3-fold more stable upon air ex- we identify ancestry from specific regions in Spain at the individual level. posure. We are currently investigating the cellular phenotypes assoBcOiaLtAed2 Strikingly, Native American ancestry within Latin Americans shows a strong with BOLA2 differential expreHsosmioon s aanpdie noxs idative stress conditions to gain correlation with DNA patterns of specific local Native groups. We demon- insights into the possible advantage linked to the emergence of the strate that genetic patterns among these Native groups, as well as among gene family at the root of the lineage. different migrant groups, are clearly differentiated, which has important implications in understanding how genetic associations to phenotypes vary  C16
.5 across Latin Americans with widely heterogeneous ancestral backgrounds. Using whole exome sequence based imputation panel to boost Overall, we are able to identify ancestry patterns at higher resolution than considerably the number of successfully imputed low-frequency and has been previously achieved, allowing us a fine grained analysis of how rare coding variants in the Finnish founder population history shaped the genetic makeup of Latin America and how this affects I. Surakka1,2, A. Sarin1,2, K. Karczewski3,4, R. Durbin5, D. MacArthur3,4, V. Salomaa2, A. association studies. Palotie1,4,6, S. Ripatti1,5,7, SISu project group; 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland, 2National Institute  C17
 Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Analytical and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton,  C17
.1 United Kingdom, 6Psychiatric & Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Department of Comprehensive genomic analyses of Japanese cases with Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 7Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. mitochondrial respiratory chain complex deficiencies M. Kohda1, Y. Tokuzawa1, Y. Kishita1, Y. Moriyama1, Y. Mizuno1, T. Hirata1, Y. Yatsuka1, Y. Yamashita-Sugahara1, Y. Nakachi1, H. Kato1, S. Tamaru1, H. Nyuzuki1, N. N. Borna1, H. Harashima1, T. Yamazaki1, M. Mori2, K. Murayama3, A. Ohtake1, Y. Okazaki1; It has been shown that population specific reference panel improves impu- 1Saitama Medical University, Hidaka, Japan, 2Matsudo City Hospital, Matsudo, Japan, tation accuracy especially in the case of rare and low-frequency variants. We 3Chiba Children‘s Hospital, Chiba, Japan. studied how much better we can impute variants using a population based sequence reference panel instead of commonly used global 1000 Genomes or the Haplotype Reference Consortium (HRC) reference panels. Specifically, Mitochondrial disorders have the highest incidence among inborn errors of we evaluated the utility of extending the Finnish low-coverage whole geno- metabolism and are characterized by biochemical respiratory chain com- me sequencing (WGS) panel (N = 1,941) with a jointly called whole exome plex deficiencies. It occurs at a rate of 1 in 5,000 births, and has phenotypic sequencing (WES) based reference panel (N = 4,932) to successfully impu- and genetic heterogeneity. Mutations in about 1,500 nuclear encoded mito- te coding variation into our test dataset of 10,489 Finns. Using the Finnish chondrial proteins may cause mitochondrial dysfunction of energy produc- WGS reference panel we saw a ~100% increase in the number of well-im- tion and mitochondrial disorder. More than 250 genes that cause mitochon- puted exonic variants in 0.1-0.5% allele frequency range compared to the drial disorder have been reported to date. However exact genetic diagnosis 1000G panel. The HRC reference panel gave us 7% more variants compared for patients still remained largely unknown. To reveal this heterogeneity, we to the Finnish WGS panel but also introduced 0.8% false positive variant performed comprehensive genomic analyses for 142 patients with child- calls compared to 0.1% with the Finnish WGS reference panel mostly driven hood-onset mitochondrial respiratory chain complex deficiencies. The ap- by rare variants with allele frequency <0.1%. By combining the WES panel proach includes whole mtDNA and exome analyses using high-throughput with the population specific WGS reference panel, we observed over 20% sequencing, and chromosomal aberration analyses using high-density oli- more well-imputed variants in the 0.1-0.5% allele frequency range compa- gonucleotide arMraRyPsS. 2W3e QidReSnLt1ifieSdL  C4215
 mA2u6tation PinN PkLnAow4n mitochondrial di- red to the Finnish WGS only panel. As an example, we successfully imputed sease genes, of which 37 were novel. We also identified and 4 mitochondria- 422 loss-of-function (LoF) variants enriched in the Finnish population into rMelaEtCePd2 genesT N(NI3 , , and ) as novel causative the test dataset. These variants are now the basis of an intense phenome- genes. We further identified 2 genes known to cause monogenic diseases wide association (PheWAS) testing. Our results show that population spe- ( and ) and 3 chromosomal aberrations (6q24.3-q25.1, 17p12, cific WES based reference panel boost considerably the imputation of rare and 22q11.21) as causes in this cohort. Our approaches enhance the abi- and low-frequency coding variants. lity to identify pathogenic gene mutations in patients with biochemically defined mitochondrial respiratory chain complex deficiencies in clinical  C16
.6 settings. They also underscore clinical and genetic heterogeneity of mito- Genetic history of Latin America: Fine-scale population structure and chondrial respiratory chain complex deficiencies and will improve patient phenotypic diversity J. Chacón-Duque1, K. Adhikari1, V. Acuña-Alonzo2,1, S. Canizales-Quinteros3, C. Gallo4, care of this complex disorder. G. Poletti4, F. Rothhammer5, M. Bortolini6, G. Bedoya7, R. Gonzalez-José8, D. Balding1, CANDELA Consortium, G. Hellenthal1, A. Ruiz-Linares1; 1Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment. University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2National Institute of Anthropology and History, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Facultad de Medicina and Facultad de Química, UNAM; Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición ‚Salvador Zubirán‘, Mexico City, Mexico, 4Laboratorios de Investigación y Desarrollo, Facultad de Ciencias y Filosofía, Universidad Perúana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru, 5Instituto de Alta Investigación Universidad de Tarapacá, Programa de Genética Humana ICBM Facultad de Medicina Universidad de Chile, Arica, 40 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C17
.2 Recessive mutations in TRMT10C cause defects in mitochondrial RNA processing and multiple respiratory chain deficiencies compounding mutations in PPA2, a nuclear encoded mitochondrial protein M. D. Metodiev1, K. Thompson2, C. L. Alston2, A. Morris3, L. He2, Z. Assouline4, M. Rio4, N. most commonly associated with complex V in the oxidative phosphorylati- Bahi-Buisson4, A. Pyle5, H. Griffin5, S. Siira6, A. Filipovska6, A. Munnich1,4, C. F. Patrick5, R. on respiratory chain. A further three unrelated pedigrees with six acutely McFarland2, A. Rötig1, R. W. Taylor2; affected neonatal individuals were recently identified with homozygous and 1INSERM U1163, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, compound heterozygous PPA2 mutations, resulting in much more severe France, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, symptoms including seizures, lactic acidosis and cardiac arrhythmia leading Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Willink Biochemical to death within days or months of birth. Comparison of fibroblast mitochon- Genetics Unit, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Departments of dria from normal and mutated PPA2 individuals showed the activity of in- Pediatric, Neurology and Genetics, Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, organic pyrophosphatase was significantly reduced in affected individuals. 5Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Recombinant PPA2 enzymes modelling hypomorphic missense mutations Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Harry Perkins Institute exhibit decreased activity that correlated with disease severity. These fin- of Medical Research, Centre for Medical Research and School of Chemistry and dings confirm the pathogenicity of PPA2 mutations, and suggest that PPA2 is Biochemistry, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. a new cardiomyopathy-associated protein, which has a greater physiological importance in mitochondrial function than previously recognised. Mitochondrial disorders are both clinically and genetically diverse since de-  C17
.4 fective expression of mitochondrial (mt)DNA can be caused by mitochondri- Biallelic mutations of PPA2 (pyrophosphatase inorganic 2) in 2 al or nuclear gene mutations. Recently, several novel genes encoding factors families with recurrence of sudden unexpected infant death involved in mTtR-tMRTN1A0 pCrocessing have been identified as important causes of A. Guimier1, C. Gordon1, F. Godard2, M. Oufadem1, C. Vasnier3, P. Nitschke1, C. Bole- Feysot1, C. Masson1, S. Dauger4, C. Rambaud5, B. Kugener6, D. Bonnet7, P. Bouvagnet8, S. mitochondrial disease. Using whole exome sequencing, we identified muta- Di Filippo9, V. Probst10, R. Redon10, P. Charron11, A. Rötig1, S. Lyonnet1, L. De Pontual1, J. di tions in the gene (encoding the mitochondrial protein MRP P1
), Rago2, A. Delahodde3, J. Amiel1; in two unrelated individuals who presented at birth with elevated CSF and 1Institut Imagine, INSERM U1163, Paris, France, 2Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Institute of serum lactate levels, hypotonia and deafness. Together, MRP P1
, MRP P2
 and Cellular Biochemistry and Genetics (IBGC, UMR 5095), Bordeaux, France, 3Institute MRP P3
 form the mitochondrial ribonuclease P (mt-RNase P) protein that for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris- is responsible for cleaving the 5’ end of mt-tRNAs from polycistronic pre- Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, 4Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Robert Debré University cursor1 RNA molecules. Additionally, a stable complex of MRP P1
 and MRP P2
 Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5Forensics and Pathology Department, Raymond Poincaré University Hospital, AP-HP, Garches, France, 6CRRMIN Rhône Alpes, Bron, France, 7Unité has mR9 methyltransferase activity which methylates mt-tRTNRAMsT a1t0 pCositi- Médico-Chirurgicale de Cardiologie Congénitale et Pédiatrique, Centre de Référence on 9, a vital modification required for folding mt-tRNAs into their correct Malformations Cardiaques Congénitales Complexes (M3C), Hôpital Necker-Enfants tertiary structures. Analysis of subject fibroblasts harboring mis- Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 8Laboratoire Cardiogénétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, sense variants revealed decreased protein levels of MRP P1
 and defective Bron, France, 9Service de cardiologie pédiatrique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, mitochondrial protein synthesis. Cell lines from affected individuals showed 10L‘institut du thorax, Inserm UMR1087 CNRS UMR6291, Nantes, France, 11Départements an increase in mt-RNA precursors indicative of defective mt-RNA proces- de génétique et de cardiologie, Centre de référence des maladies cardiaques héréditaires, sing. The pathogenicity of the detected variants - compound heterozygous Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. p.(Arg181Leu) and p.(Thr272Ala) changes in subject 1, a homozygous p.(Arg181Leu) variant in sTuRbMjeTct1 20 C- was confirmed by the functional rescue of associated OXPHOS and mt-RNA processing defects following lentiviral Sudden unexpected death in infancy (SUDI) occurs in apparently healthy transduction of wild type . OuTr RsMtuTd1y0 sCuggests that these varia1nts infants and remains unexplained despite thorough investigation including affect MRP P1
 stability and mt-tRNA processing without effects on mR9 complete autopsy. The vast majority of cases are sporadic. We investigated methyltransferase activity, identifying as a novel mitochondrial two families with recurrence of SUDI in 4/5 and 2/2 siblings between 4 and disease gene and highlighting the importance of post-transcriptional RNA 20 months PoPf Aa2ge. Who le exome sequencing of two affected cases in family processing for mitochondrial function. 1 and one in family 2 revealed compound heterozygous missense variati- ons in the gene,encoding mitochondrial pyrophosphatase inorganic  C17
.3 2. This protein is thought to catalyze hydrolysis of inorganic pyrophospha- Mitochondrial inorganic pyrophosphatase (PPA2) mutations underlie te, the homeostasis of which is exceedingly important for the cell. The four a spectrum of cardiomyopathy disorders missense variations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and segregated K. Doudney1, H. Kennedy1, T. B. Haack2, V. Hartill3, L. Mataković4, E. Baumgartner5, H. according to autosomal recessive inheritance in both fpapma2ilΔies. PPA2 protein Potter1, R. Mackay1, C. Alston6, S. O’Sullivan7, R. McFarland6, G. Connolly8, C. Gannon9, levels were decreased in the patients’ fibroblasts compared to coPnPtAro2ls. We R. King1, S. Mead1,10, I. Crozier11, W. Chan11, C. Florkowski1, M. Sage12, T. Höfken13, B. Alhaddad14, L. Kremer2, R. Kopajtich2, R. Feichtinger15, W. Sperl15, R. Rodenburg16, J. show that yeast cells lacking the orthologous gene ( ) are not viable Minet17, A. Dobbie18, T. Strom2, T. Meitinger2, P. George1, C. Johnson19, R. Taylor6, H. due to the loss of mitochondria and are rescued by the human gene Prokisch2, J. Mayr15; but not when it carries the mutations found in patients. Using a regula- 1Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Canterbury Health Laboratories, Canterbury District table (doxycycline-repressible) gene expression system we show that the Health Board, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technische primary consequences of the pathogenic ppa2 mutations are a decreased Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3University of Leeds, St James‘ University rPaPtAe2 of oxygen consumption and ATP synthesis and a drop in th PeP eAle2c trical Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 4Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, mitochondrial membrane potential. Altogether these data demonstrate that Austria, 5Metabolic Unit, University Children’s Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 6Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle is an essential gene in yeast and that biallelic mutations in cause University, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 7Royal Hospital for Sick Children,, Belfast, United a novel mitochondrial disease associated with sudden death in infants. Kingdom, 8Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, United  C17
.5 Kingdom, 9Department of Pathology, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, 10SEALS Genetics Laboratory, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 11Department Mutations in TMEM126B cause a severe isolated complex I deficiency of Cardiology, Christchurch Hospital, Canterbury District Health Board, Christchurch, and variable clinical phenotype New Zealand, 12Department of Anatomical Pathology, Christchurch Hospital, Canterbury C. L. Alston1, A. G. Compton2,3, L. E. Formosa4, V. Strecker5, M. Oláhová1, T. B. Haack6,7, District Health Board, Christchurch, New Zealand, 13Department of Life Sciences, Brunel J. Smet8, K. Stouffs9, P. Diakumis10,11, E. Ciara12, D. Cassiman13, N. Romain14,15, J. W. University London, London, United Kingdom, 14Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Yarham1, L. He1, B. De Paepe8, A. V. Vanlander8, S. Seneca9, R. G. Feichtinger16, R. Płoski17, Universität München, München, Germany, 15Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus D. Rokicki18, E. Pronicka12,18, R. G. Haller15,14, M. Bahlo10,11, J. Mayr16, R. Van Coster8, H. Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 16Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Prokisch6,7, I. Wittig5,19,20, M. T. Ryan4, D. R. Thorburn3,2, R. W. Taylor1; Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Netherlands, 17Department of Neonatology UKBB Bruderholz, University Children’s Kingdom, 2Dept. of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Murdoch Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 18Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Chapel Allerton Childrens Research Institute & Victorian Clinical Genetic Services, Royal Children’s Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 19Section of Ophthalmology & Neurosciences, Leeds Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 4Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. University, Melbourne, Australia, 5Functional Proteomics, SFB 815 Core Unit, Goethe- Universität, Frankfurt, Germany, 6Inst. of Human Genetics, TU-München, Munich, Germany, 7Inst. of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 8Dept. of Pediatric Neurology & Metabolism, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, We have identified biallelic missense mutations in the nuclear-encoded 9Center for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Research Group Reproduction & Genetics, Vrije mitochondrial inorganic pyrophosphatase (PPA2) in a family with four Universiteit Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, 10Bioinformatics Div., Walter and Eliza Hall affected individuals, two of whom died separately in their second decade Inst. of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 11Dept. of Mathematics and Statistics, following the intake of small amounts of alcohol. Post-mortem results iden- University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 12Dept. of Medical Genetics, The tified mid-myocardial fibrosis, however years of biochemical and genetic Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 13Metabolic Center, University investigation failed to elucidate possibEleS cHauGse 2s a0n1d6 a n|y B liAnkRs CtoE tLheOirN hAigh, lSy PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 41 sensitive alcohol response. Whole exome sequencing of the family revealedABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 14Dept. of Neurology & Neurotherapeutics, University  C18
 Eye Disorders of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States, 15Neuromuscular Center, Inst. for Exercise & Environmental Medicine, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, Dallas, TX, United States, 16Dept. of Pediatrics, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria, 17Dept. of Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical  C18
.1 University, Warsaw, Poland, 18Dept. of Pediatrics, Nutrition & Metabolic Diseases, PTCH1 is a major contributor to ocular developmental anomalies The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 19Cluster of Excellence P. Calvas1, E. E. Davis2, A. Causse3, V. David4, A. Demaison1, A. R. Niederriter5, S. Lamarre6, “Macromolecular Complexes”, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt, Germany, 20German C. Vincent-Delorme7, L. Pasquier8, C. Coubes9, D. Lacombe10, M. Rossi11, J. Dufier12, H. Center for Cardiovascular Research, Partner site RheinMain, Frankfurt, Germany. Dollfus13, J. Kaplan14, N. Katsanis15, H. C. Etchevers16, S. Faguer17, N. Chassaing1; 1UMR1056 INSERM/UPS, Toulouse, France, 2) Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,, NC, United States, 3Ophthalmology department, Isolated complex I deficiency is the most common biochemical phenotype Toulouse, France, 4Institut de Génétique et Développement, CNRS UMR6290, Université de Rennes 1, IFR140 GFAS,, Rennes, France, 5Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke observed in patients with mitochondrial disease, and with an estimated University Medical Center,, Durham, NC, United States, 6INRA, UMR792,& Plateforme 1300 proteins in the mitoproteome it is often associated with clinical and Biopuces de la Génopole de Toulouse Midi Pyrénées, INSA/ DGBA 135, Toulouse, France, genetic heterogeneity. Massively parallel sequencing (MPS) technologies 7Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 8Service including custom, targeted gene panels or unbiased whole exome sequenc- de Génétique clinique, Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 9Service de Génétique Médicale, ing (WES) are hugely powerful in identifying the underlying genetic defect Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 10Service de Génétique Médicale, in a clinical diagnostic setting, yet a significant proportion of patients still Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 11Service de Génétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, lack a genetic diagnosis. These patients may harbour mutations in poorly INSERM U1028 UMR CNRS 5292, UCBL, CRNL TIGER Team, Lyon, France, 12Service d‘Ophtalmologie, Hôpital Necker enfants Malades, Paris, France, 13Service de Génétique understood or uncharacterised genes, and their diagnosis relies upon char- Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 14UMR INSERM acterisation of these orphan genes. Complexome profiling has recently iden- Université ParisV, LGO Institut Imagine des maladies génétique, Paris, France, 15Center tified TMEM126B as a component of the mitochondrial complex I assem- for Human Disease Modeling,Department of Pediatrics and Department of Cell Biology, bly (MCIA) complex alongside the ACAD9, ECSIT, NDUFAF1 and TIMMD C1
 Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States, 16UMR910 INSERM, proteins. We describe the clinical, biochemical and molecular findings in Université de la Méditerranée Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France, 17UMR1048 six cases of TMEM126B-related mitochondrial disease from four unrelated INSERM/UPS, I2MC, Toulouse, France. families. We provide functional evidence to support the pathogenicity of these TMEM126B variants and unequivocally establish this gene as a cause of complex I deficiency in association with either a severe multisystem pre- Ocular developmental anomalies (ODA) including Anophthalmia/Micro- sentation in infancy or pure myopathy in later adulthood. Functional experi- phthalmia (AM) have an estimated combined prevalence of 3.7 in 10,000 mentation including lentiviral rescue and complexome profiling of subject births. cell lines establishes TMEM126B as the tenth complex I assembly factor Mutations in SOX2 are the most frequent contributors to severe ODA, yet associated with human disease and validates the importance of proteomic account for a minority of the genetic drivers. To identify novel ODA loci, we approaches in characterising novel disease genes whose physiological roles conducted targeted high-throughput sequencing of 407 candidate genes in were previously undetermined. an initial cohort of 22 sporadic ODA patients. Patched 1 (PTCH1), an inhi- bitor of sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling, harbored an enrichment of rare  C17
.6 heterozygous variants in comparison to either controls, or to the other A syndrome characterized by recurrent episodes of acute liver failure, candidate genes; targeted resequencing of PTCH1 in a second cohort of 48 peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar vermis atrophy, and ataxia is ODA patients identified two additional rare nonsynonymous changes. Using caused by disruptive mutations in SCY L1
 multiple transient models and a CRISPR/Cas9 mutant, we show physiologi- R. E. Bittner1, W. M. Schmidt1, B. Mayerhofer1, S. Rutledge2, R. Schüle3,4,5, S. Züchner5, E. cally relevant phenotypes altering SHH signaling and eye development upon Boltshauser6; 1Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Genetics, University of abrogation of ptch1 in zebrafish for which in vivo complementation assays Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States, 33Hertie-Institute for Clinical using these models showed that all six patient missense mutations affect Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 4German Research Center SHH signaling. Finally, through transcriptomic and ChIP analyses, we show for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 5Dr that SOX2 binds to an intronic domain of the PTCH1 locus to regulate PTCH1 John T Macdonald Department of Human Genetics and John P. Hussman Institute for expression, findings that were validated both in vitro and in vivo. Human Genomics, University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States, 6Division of Pediatric These results demonstrate that PTCH1 mutations contribute to as much as Neurology, University Children‘s Hospital, Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland. 10% of ODA, identify the SHH signaling pathway as a novel effector of SOX2 activity during human ocular development, and indicate that ODA is likely the result of overactive SHH signaling in humans harboring mutations in eit- Hereditary cerebellar ataxias are heterogeneous disorders characterized by her PTCH1 or SOX2. gait disturbances, often accompanied by additional neurological symptoms and involvement of other organs. Here, we report on three human individu-  C18
.2 als from two unrelated families, who presented with recurrent episodes of Non-coding mutations in the promoter of OVO L2
 cause autosomal acute liver failure in early infancy, peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar vermis dominant corneal endothelial dystrophies congenital hereditary atrophy, and ataxia. By whole exome-sequencing, we identified compound endothelial dystrophy 1 (CHED1) and posterior polymorphous heterozygous mutations within the SCY L1
 gene in all affected individuals. corneal dystrophy 1 (PPCD1) All mutations identified were predictably disruptive, causing loss of SCY L1
 A. E. Davidson1, P. Liskova2, C. J. Evans1, L. Dudakova2, L. Nosková2, N. Pontikos3, C. at the protein level. Despite clear parallels in clinical phenotypes between Zarouchlioti1, V. Plagnol3, M. Filipec4, S. Kmoch2, S. J. Tuft5,1, A. J. Hardcastle1; 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 2Charles University in a Scyl1 deficient mouse model and human patients, recurrent hepatic fai- Prague and General Teaching Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 3UCL Genetics lure represents a non-neurological clinical manifestation that has not been Institute, London, United Kingdom, 4European Eye Clinic Lexum, Prague, Czech Republic, anticipated from the mouse study. SCY L1
 belongs to the evolutionarily high- 5Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom. ly conserved SCY1-like family of catalytically inactive protein kinases and plays an important constituent of the coatomer (COPI)-coated vesicles me- diated membrane trafficking machinery. We showed that in SCY L1
-deficient Congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy 1 (CHED1) and posterior po- human fibroblasts the Golgi apparatus is massively enlarged, substantiating lymorphous corneal dystrophy 1 (PPCD1) are autosomal dominant corneal the notion that SCY L1
 maintains Golgi morphology by interacting with se- endothelial dystrophies which map to overlapping loci on chromosome 20. veral key components of COPI coats. Intriguingly, SCY L1
 shares a functional To identify the genetic cause(s) of disease we recruited extensive pedigrees role in retrograde Golgi transport with the NBAS gene, which was recently comprising over 100 affected individuals. Whole-genome sequencing and implicated in a syndromic as well as a non-syndromic form of recurrent targeted re-sequencing experiments resulted in identification of unique episodes of infantile liver failure, which suggests a common pathogenetic heterozygous mutations within a conserved region of the OVO L2
 proximal underpinning. promoter sequence; c.-339_361dup in a large British CHED1 pedigree and Our study demonstrates that the discovery of human disease related ge- c.-370T>C in a Czech PPCD1 cohort. In additional families, we identified two nes can be accelerated by studying naturally occurring mouse mutants and other mutations within the highly conserved proximal promoter sequence further argues for an unbiased genome-wide strategy in the molecular dia- (c.-274T>G and c.-307T>C) by direct sequencing of the OVO L2
 promoter. gnosis of patients with rare inherited disorders. OVO L2
 is a transcription factor and a direct transcriptional repressor of the established PPCD-associated gene ZEB1. Both transcription factors regu- late mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition. Using a dual luciferase reporter assay we demonstrated that all four OVO L2
 promoter mutations display 42 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONsAig,n SifPicAanItNly |( PW≤0W.00W1). EinScHreGas.eOd RtrGanscriptional activity compared to theABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index corresponding wild-type promoter sequence. Furthermore we demonstrate Whole exome sequencing data of over 1000 IRD patients were inspected that OVO L2
 is not normally expressed in healthy adult corneal endotheli- for RCBTB1 mutations, and targeted next-generation sequencing of the co- um and in vitro culture of patient derived primary corneal endothelial cells ding region of RCBTB1 was performed in 280 IRD patients. In six families (CECs) harbouring an OVO L2
 promoter mutation reveals aberrant OVO L2
 with isolated and syndromic IRD five distinct homozygous missense vari- expression. Our data establish CHED1 and PPCD1 as allelic conditions and ants were found. All changes segregate with disease, affect highly conserved implicates transcriptional dysregulation of OVO L2
 as a common cause of amino acids and are predicted to be deleterious. A Mediterranean founder dominantly inherited corneal endothelial dystrophies. We hypothesise that haplotype was identified for mutation c.919G>A, p.(Val307Met), occurring the non-coding mutations identified create cryptic cis-acting regulatory se- in two families of Italian and Greek origin, respectively. Ocular phenotypes quence binding sites that drive the aberrant OVO L2
 expression detected in range from typical RP starting in the second decade to chorioretinal dystro- patient derived CECs. phy with a later age of onset. RCBTB1 mRNA expression was demonstrated in human retina and RPE, and protein immunostaining was observed mainly  C18
.3 in the inner retina. As RCBTB1 has previously been identified as a Cullin3 Gillespie Syndrome: a unique gene, two modes of inheritance substrate adaptor, different components of the Cullin3 and Nrf2 pathway L. Fares-Taie1, S. Gerber1, K. J. Alzayady2, L. Burglen3, V. Marchesin4, O. Roche5, M. Rio6, B. Funalot7, R. Calmon8, A. Durr9, V. Gil da Silva Lopes10, M. Ribeiro Bittar10, B. Heron11, P. were quantified. This revealed a decreased mRNA expression of Nrf2 and Berquin12, N. Bahi Buisson13, C. Bole14, C. Masson15, A. Munnich6, D. Bremond Gignac5, M. five Nrf2 target genes. Simons4, N. Boddaert16, S. Lyonnet6, J. Kaplan1, P. Calvas17, D. Yule2, J. Rozet1; In conclusion, hypomorphic RCBTB1 missense mutations were identified 1Laboratory of Genetics Ophthalmology Imagine Institut INSERM U1163 Paris in families with non-syndromic and syndromic IRD respectively, putting Descartes University, Paris, France, 2Department of Pharmacology and physiology, forward RCBTB1 as a new IRD disease gene. Finally, our data suggest a po- University of Rochester, New York, NY, United States, 3Reference center for cerebellar tential role of the ubiquitination pathway in the pathogenetic mechanism malformations and congenital diseases INSERM U1141 DHU PROTECT Robert Debre underlying RCBTB1-associated IRD. Hopsital, Paris, France, 4Epithelial biology and disease Liliane Bettencourt Chair of Developmental Biology INSERM U1163 Imagine Institut Paris Descartes University,  C18
.5 Paris, France, 5Department of Ophthalmology IHU Necker University Paris Descartes, Novel genes and phenotypic correlations in inherited retinal disease Paris, France, 6Department of Genetics IHU Necker University Paris Descartes, Paris, G. Arno1,2, A. Fiorentino1,2, N. Pontikos1,3, C. Chakarova1, A. G. Robson1,2, UKIRDC, G. E. France, 7Department of Genetics GHU Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 8Department of Holder1,2, M. E. Cheetham1, V. Plagnol3, M. Michaelides1,2, A. J. Hardcastle1, A. R. Webster1,2; Neuroradiology IHU Necker Imagine Institut INSERM U1163 Paris Descartes University, 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 2Moorfields Eye Hospital, Paris, France, 9Institut du cerveau et de la moelle épiniere CHU Paris GH La Pitié London, United Kingdom, 3UCL Genetics Institute, London, United Kingdom. Salpetrière Charles Foix, Paris, France, 10Departamento de Genetica Medica Faculdade de Ciencias UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 11Department of Neuropediatrics Hopital Trousseau, Paris, France, 12Pole de pédiatrie CHU Amiens Hopial Nord, Amiens, France, 13Embryology and genetics of human malformation Imagine Institut INSERM U1163 Introduction: Inherited retinal disease displays vast genetic and allelic he- Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 14Genomics Platform Imagine Institut INSERM terogeneity, On cohorts from a UK-wide consortium we used an integrated U1163 Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 15Bioinformatics Platform Imagine genomic and phenotypic approach to i) accelerate novel gene discovery ii) Institut INSERM U1163 Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 16DDepertment of determine the phenotypic and severity spectrum for specific molecular sub- Neuroradiology IHU Necker Imagine Institut INSERM U1163 Paris Descartes University, types and iii) accumulate whole exome and genome data to identify alleles Paris, France, 17Service de Génétique Hopital Purpan, Toulouse, France. modifying the action of known genes. Methods: Extensive pre-screening using next-generation sequencing of known genes on over 1000 inherited retinal disease families led to a cohort Introduction. Gillespie syndrome (GS) is a rare variant form of aniridia cha- likely enriched for novel genes for further whole exome/genome sequen- racterized by nonprogressive cerebellar ataxia, intellectual disability, and cing. An integrated database-server was developed based on the ExAC and iris hypoplasia. Unlike the more common dominant and sporadic forms of Phenotips software to query genes and phenotypes (using human pheno- aniridia, there has been no significant association with PAX6 mutations in type ontology (HPO)) in the pool of families. individuals with GS and the mode of inheritance of the disease had long Results: To date, 84 families have undergone analysis (76 exome, 8 CgLeNn7o/- been regarded as uncertain. The aim of the present study was to characteri- mMFeS).D I8n 13 probands, likely disease causing mutations in known genes were ze the molecular bases of GS. revealed. Amongst these, specific alleles of ceroid lipofuscinosis 7 ( Materiel and Methods. We used a combination of trio-based whole exome ) were consistently associaGtNeBd 3with a non-syndromic retinal degene- sequencing and Sanger sequencing in five simplex GS families. Functional ration. Three genes, previously unreported in human retinal disease, have analysis of the identified mutations was assessed in cell models. been discovered. These include mutated homozygously (c.124C>T ; Results and conclusions. We found homozygous or compound heterozygous p.Arg42Ter) in a patient with a distinct stationary retinal dysfunction. 102 truncating mutations and de novo heterozygous mutations in a unique gene exomes of probands with inherited retinal dystrophy (from UCLEx) with supporting the genetic homogeneity of this rare disease. The gene encodes detailed phenotypic data have been integrated into a computer searchable a protein involved in calcium homeostasis. Expression in a heterologous cell framework. system of the truncation mutants and of the missense mutants -alone or in Discussion: Pooling, sharing and integration of genomic and phenotypic combination with the wildtype counterpart- supported that both loss-of- data increases the power of gene discovery. An extensible, programmatic function and dominant negative mutations cause Gillespie syndrome ending infrastructure which includes both genomic and phenotypic data has been the long debate regarding the transmission of this rare syndrome. developed to efficiently determine genotype-phenotype correlations and  C18
.4 modifier alleles. Hypomorphic mutations in RCBTB1 cause autosomal recessive Support: RPFB, NIHR-BRC, Fight For Sight. isolated and syndromic inherited retinal dystrophy  C18
.6 F. Coppieters1, G. Ascari1, K. Nikopoulos2, M. Xu3, K. Dannhausen4, M. K. Tsilimbaris5, T. Chrysanthi5, B. Styliani5, M. Karlstetter4, M. Bauwens1, M. De Bruyne1, F. Meire6, T. Molecular inversion probe based sequence analysis of 108 genes Langmann4, R. Chen3, C. Rivolta2, C. P. Hamel7, B. P. Leroy1,8,9, E. De Baere1; associated with non-syndromic inherited retinal disease in 4,000 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, probands 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, M. Imran Khan1, C. Gilissen1, C. Ayuso2, D. Sharon3, R. K. Koenekoop4, C. Rivolta5, E. 3Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, deBaere6, C. F. Inglehearn7, M. van de Vorst1, S. Kohl8, C. P. Hamel9, A. Hoischen1,10, F. P. M. TX, United States, 4Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Cremers1,10; Germany, 5Department of Opthalmology, Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical centre, Nijmegen, Greece, 6Department of Ophthalmology, Hôpital des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Netherlands, 2Department of Genetics, University Hospital Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Belgium, 7INSERM U 1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Montpellier, Madrid, Spain, 3Departments of Ophthalmology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical France, 8Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital and Ghent University, Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Departments of Paediatric Surgery, Human Genetics and Ghent, Belgium, 9Division of Ophthalmology, The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Ophthalmology, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Department of Philadelphia, PA, United States. Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 7Department of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 8Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Centre for Ophthalmology, University We identified a homozygous missense variant in RCBTB1 c.973C>T of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 9National Center in Genetic of Sensory Diseases, p.(His325Tyr) in individuals with a syndromic inherited retinal dystrophy Institute for Neurosciences of Montpellier, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France, (IRD), consisting of retinitis pigmentosa (RP), hypothyroidism, primary 10Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, ovarian insufficiency, and mild intellectual disability. Here, we aimed to in- Nijmegen, Netherlands. vestigate the contribution of RCBTB1 in IRD and to assess the underlying pathogenetic mechanism. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 43ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Purpose: Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are clinically and genetically very genetic diagnostics at the Radboud University Medical Center, we sequenced heterogeneous, as ~125 genes have been associated with non-syndromic the exome of 820 ID-patients and their parents. Here we utilize this dataset IRDs. The purpose of this study was to develop a flexible, comprehensive to identify novel genetic causes of ID. and cost-effective sequencing procedure for IRDs. Methods: Based on gene specific mutation rates we performed a statistical Methods: About 4,000 probands with non-syndromic IRDs were ascertai- analysis to detect genes that are significantly enriched for loss-of-function ned by partners of the European Retinal Disease Consortium (ERDC). In or functional de novo mutations. To achieve the best possible power to iden- total, 6,200 molecular inversion probes (MIPs) were designed to capture tify novel candidate ID genes, we added data from previously published exo- ~1,600 protein-coding exons and flanking intronic sequences of 108 IRD- me-sequencing trio studies giving rise to a combined cohort of 2,104 trios. associated genes. The captured targets were sequenced on a NextSeq500 Results: In our cohort of 820 ID patients we identified 4 novel genes signi- Illumina sequencer and the data were analyzed using an in-house pipeline ficantly enriched for functional or loss-of-function de novo mutations. We to find the causal genetic variants. reproduce these results in the combined ID-set of 2,104 trios and identify Results: In pools of 120 samples the average coverage per probe was ~500X, 6 further novel genes enriched for de novo mutations. In addition, we show where 95% of the probes were covered >10X. Analysis was completed for that similar to known ID genes, these 10 candidate genes are highly intole- 2,500/4,000 samples. Sanger validation was performed for a representative rant to normal variation. A phenotype comparison of patients with de novo set of variants identified in 290 probands from Nijmegen. We have identified mutations in the same gene provides further support for a shared genetic the causal variants in 59% (172/290) of the cases, which included a number cause. of plausible de novo variants and several novel genotype-phenotype corre- Conclusions: In summary, we identified 10 novel candidate ID genes by lations. Material costs for sequencing 108 IRD genes was €65 per sample, performing a meta-analysis on WES data of 2,104 ID trios, highlighting the rendering it very cost-effective. potential of unbiased statistical analyses of large trio-based sequencing stu- Conclusions: Taken into consideration that the Nijmegen cohort was pre- dies to identify novel candidate genes. viously prescreened using various genotyping methods, the corrected yield  C19
.3 would be ~71%. At 1/10th of WES cost, this efficiency is equal or superior to Whole exome sequencing in 150 consanguineous families with other published gene-panel (36 - 62%) or WES-based (49 - 66%) sequence intellectual disability: high diagnostic yield and identification of novel analysis. Based on preliminary results, we estimate to identify causal vari- candidate genes ants in at least 2,000 IRD probands. M. Reuter1, H. Tawamie1, R. Buchert1, T. Froukh2, O. Hosny Gebril3, T. Strom4, S. Hoffjan5, D. Wieczorek6, H. Sticht1, A. Reis1, R. Abou Jamra1,7;  C19
 Big data Analyses of Intellectual Disability 1Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Philadelphia University, Amman, Jordan, 3National Research Center, Doky, Cairo, Egypt, 4Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 5University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 6Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf, Germany, 7University Medical Center Leipzig,  C19
.1 Leipzig, Germany. The prevalence and architecture of dominant developmental disorders M. E. Hurles, Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study; Autosomal recessive intellectual disability (ARID) represent a significant Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. fraction of ID, especially in consanguineous families. Several hundred ARID genes were identified to date, and many more are presumed. We perfor- med genetic mapping and whole exome sequencing (WES) in 150 consan- Children with severe, undiagnosed developmental disorders (DDs) are enri- guineous families with one (29%) or multiple (71%) affected children with ched for damaging de novo mutations in developmentally important genes. ID. Most affected persons showed additional symptoms including muscular We exome sequenced 4,295 families with children with DDs, and meta-ana- hypotonia, epilepsy, and microcephaly. We identified relevant variants in lysed these data with published data on children with similar disorders. We 114 (76%) of families. Among these, 53 are meanwhile confirmed genes and identified over 90 genes in which damaging de novo mutations show geno- likely clarify the cause of ARID in the corresponding families while in 60 the me-wide significant (p < 1e-6) evidence for causing developmental disor- homozygouAs HvaI1riaGnPtR is5 6lo, cPaRteRdT 2in, a canPdLiAd2aGte6 gene. Despite the high hetero- ders, including 15 novel genes reaching this level for the first time. We also geneity we found variants in two unrelated families for four already descri- identified a novel seizure disorder associated with truncating mutations in bed genes, , and . At least one patient has two SM C1
A, a gene in which missense mutations are known to cause a different distinct phenotypes because of two homozygous variants in different genes. disorder. We estimated that we have statistical power to detect ~50% of all In order to prove the pathogenicity of non-tFrAuRn1caPtiGnAgP v1arPiaGnAtsP,2 wEe ZaRppEliDeCd3 a haploinsufficient genes, and that most haploinsufficient genes causing DDs wPTidEeN spTAecFt1r3umFR oRf Sfu1nLcZtiIoPn8a, lK eIxApAe0r5im86ents. Until now, we have shown a dele- have already been discovered. Our large number of genome-wide significant terious effect for 12 variants in 10 genes ( , , , , , findings allow us to compare empirically the power to detect novel DD-as- , , , ). In order to prove the causality of the sociated genes using exome or genome sequencing. We find that, at current candidate variants, identifying further likely pathogenic variants in similar- cost differentials, exome sequencing has much greater power for novel gene ly affected individuals is necessary. Therefore we initiated a Consortium of discovery for genetically heterogeneous disorders. Finally, we estimate that Autosomal Recessive Intellectual Disability (CARID) to share data which al- ~45% of our cohort likely carry pathogenic de novo mutations in coding lowed identification of additional independent cases for 12 candidate genes, sequences, with approximately half operating by a loss-of-function mecha- so far. WES in consanguineous families with ID has the highest diagnostic nism, and the remainder being gain-of-function or dominant negative in ac- yield and should therefore become part of a first line diagnostic approach. tion. By extrapolating from the DDD cohort to the general population, we estimate that de novo dominant developmental disorders have an average  C19
.4 birth prevalence of 1 in ~400. Common morphological and transcriptome changes in Rett spectrum disorders justify a shared therapeutic approach  C19
.2 A. Pinto1,2, E. Landucci1, L. Bianciardi1, S. Daga1, E. Frullanti1, M. Brindisi3, S. Butini3, V. Meta-analysis of 2,104 trios provides support for 10 novel candidate Imperatore1, F. Ariani1,2, S. Brogi3, G. Campiani3, A. Renieri1,2, I. Meloni1; genes for intellectual disability 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Azienda S. H. Lelieveld1, M. R. F. Reijnders2, R. Pfundt2, H. G. Yntema2, E. Kamsteeg2, P. de Vries2, B. Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 3European Research Centre for Drug B. A. de Vries2, M. H. Willemsen2, T. Kleefstra2, K. Löhner3, M. Vreeburg4, S. Stevens4, I. van Discovery & Development Dept. Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy University of der Burgt2, E. M. H. F. Bongers2, A. P. A. Stegmann4, P. Rump3, T. Rinne2, M. R. Nelen2, J. A. Siena, Siena, Italy. Veltman2,4, L. E. L. M. Vissers2, H. G. Brunner2,4, C. Gilissen1; 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, Donders Centre for Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Rett syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder ranging from the classic Netherlands, 3Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, MEC P2
-related form to a FOXG1-related congenital variant. The FOXG1-rela- Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, ted variant shows a shorter perinatal normal period and more severe micro- Maastricht, Netherlands. cephaly. Given the presence of shared signs/symptoms and the overlapping function of the involved genes, we hypothesized a common molecular me- chanism behind RTT phenotypic spectrum. Therefore, to better investigate Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) and other neurodevelopmental dis- this hypothesis, taking advantage of the breakthrough genetic reprogram- orders are in part due to de novo mutations. Large-scale whole-exome se- ming technology, we investigated morphological and RNA-seq transcripto- quencing (WES) studies of patient-parent trios have efficiently identified ge- me changes on iPSC-derived neurons from several patients for each disease- n4es4 enriched for de novo mutations in ID patienEtS cHohGor 2ts0. A1s6 p a|r Bt oAf RroCutEinLeO N rA el, a S teP dA geIN ne .| SW ucW h aW na. lE yS siH s lG ed. O toR tG he identification of a unique neuronalABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index morphological phenotype probably related to axon guidance signal disrup- mental delay pheAnRoItDy1pBe s, we performed whole transcriptome sequencing tion. RNA-seq analysis showed changes in the expression level of genes rela- (RNA-seq) analysis in fresh peripheral blood lymphocytes from ID indivi- ted to cell migration, adhesion and to the proper establishment of the GABA- duals harboring mutations and control subjects. Pathway analysis ergic circuit. The transcriptome analysis also revealed an upregulation of of 452 genes showing prominent transcriptional changes between affected enzymes that regulate the acetylation of tubulin and microtubules-related and control subjects indicated deregulation in cell movement related pro- genes MA P2
 and MAPT in the iPCS-derived neurons for each disease-related cesses, especially of embryonic stem cells. In ID individuals, qRT-PCR ex- gene and a reduction in acetylated α-tubulin was demonstrated by Western pression analysis confirmed downregulation of two key regulators of actin blot. These findings strongly support the involvement of common pathways organization and inducers of cell migration, Rho-associated protein kinases in the pathomechanism of the whole Rett phenotypic spectrum. Notably, in ROCK1 and ROCK2. Using models for cell migration we found that siRNA- line with the molecular findings, in vitro experiments with drugs selective mediated knockdown of ARID1B strongly reduced cell migration and led to for the tubulin acetylation pathway (a newly developed HDA C6
 inhibitor) downregulation of both ROCK1 and ROCK2. In addition to ROCK1/ROCK2, and the GABAergic circuits (repurposed drug) showed a significant reversal in both neuroblastoma and osteosarcoma cells, ARID1B knockdown led to of the unique discovered morphological phenotype, providing a real possi- downregulation of NCK1, an important mediator of activated receptor tyro- bility of an efficacious common treatment for Rett disorders. sine kinase signaling that reorganizes the actin cytoskeleton and promotes cell polarization and directional migration via pseudopodia formation. Our  C19
.5 results indicatAeR tIhDa1tB ARID1B can regulate cell migration and raise the pos- Haploinsufficiency of MEC P2
-interacting transcriptional co-repressor sibility that compromised cell migration due to ARID1B mutations could be SIN3A causes mild intellectual disability by affecting the development implicated in -associated ID syndromes. of cortical integrity J. Witteveen1,2, M. H. Willemsen3, T. C. D. Dombroski1,2, N. H. van Bakel1,2, W. M. Nillessen3,  C20
 Gene Editing: To Fear or to Cheer? (joint J. A. van Hulten1,2, E. J. R. Jansen1,2, I. E. Veenstra-Knol4, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij4, J. S. Klein Wassink-Ruiter4, P. Rump4, M. Vincent5, A. David5, C. Le Gaignec5,6, J. Schieving7, C. with EMPAG) Gilissen3, N. Foulds8, T. Strom9,10, K. Cremer11, A. M. Zink11, H. Engels11, S. A. de Munnik3, J. E. Visser1, H. G. Brunner3,2, G. J. M. Martens1,2, R. Pfundt3, S. M. Kolk1,2, T. Kleefstra3,2; 1Department of Molecular Animal Physiology, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Human Genetics, Radboud  C20
.3 University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Groningen, Are biomedical research fundamental principles appropriate for Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 5CHU Nantes, Service de génétique using genome editing in humans? médicale, Nantes, France, 6INSERM; UMR_S 957; Laboratoire de Physiopathologie de la E. Rial-Sebbag, A. Cambon-Thomsen; Résorption osseuse et Thérapie des tumeurs osseuses primitives, Faculté de Médecine; INSERM UMR 1027, Toulouse, France. CHU Hôtel-Dieu, Nantes, France, 7Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8UHS NHS Foundation Trust and Department of Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Genome editing with CRISPR-Cas 9 is considered as a revolution in life sci- Germany, 10Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, ences since 2013. Thanks to this technology a sequence implicated in a di- Germany, 11Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. sease could be modified in the DNA of various cell types: somatic, germinal or in embryo. This technology is still under scientific evaluation which poses the question of its validation in embryos and humans and its future appli- Next-generation sequencing has revealed numerous genes that are asso- cations in therapy. However, the fundamental principles and bioethics basis ciated with a broad range of neurodevelopmental disorders including in- for conducting research in these three areas can vary according different tellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD), but detailed legal regimes and are implemented into national regulations in a heteroge- knowledge of their associated protein dysfunction is mostly lacking. Here, neous manner. we identified dominant mutations in the gene encoding the transcriptio- Beyond these legal regimes Scientific Academies, research institutes and nal repressor and MeC P2
-interactor switch-insensitive 3 family member A ethics committees have provided materials (reports, opinions) based on (SIN3A) in individuals with predominantly mild ID who display a strikingly core ethical principles coming from the biomedical field for using Genome similar facial gestalt and various additional features as ASD, microcephaly, editing for medical applications. In this paper we analyse the different posi- short stature, epilepsy, hypermobile joints and hearing loss. Brain MRIs re- tions adopted by those bodies and we compare their points of convergence vealed subtle abnormalities, such as corpus callosum hypoplasia and ven- and divergence as well as the ethical and legal principles underlying their triculomegaly. Intriguingly, in vivo functional knockdown of SIN3A using in conclusions. We then compare the results with the only binding instrument utero electroporation led to changes in the developing mouse brain such in Europe for Bioethics: the Oviedo Convention (articles 13 and 18). Final- as reduced cortical neurogenesis, altered neuronal identity and aberrant ly, we survey the fundamental rights principles expected to be relevant for cortico-cortical projections, observations that have a high translational va- Genome editing: How could they conflict with the research supported by se- lue with the clinical features of our individuals. Together, our data establish veral institutions in Europe? Can an inheritable modification of the genome, that haploinsufficiency of SIN3A is associated with mild ID and associated illegal according to the Convention, still can be envisaged? characteristics as observed in the atypical 15q24 microdeletion syndrome, EUcelLex project (F P7
 grant 601806) and that Sin3A is a key transcriptional regulator crucial for proper develop-  C20
.4 mental expansion and connectivity of cortical brain areas. One small edit for man, one large edit for mankind? Points to consider This work was supported by funding from Science without Borders, CAPES- for a responsible way forward with gene editing Brasil (BEX 12044/13-0) to T.C.D.D, The Netherlands Organization for H. C. Howard1, G. de Wert2, C. G. van El3, F. Forzano4, D. Radojkovic5, E. Rial-Sebbag6, M. Health Research and Development, ZonMw (grant 907-00-365) to T.K., the C. Cornel7, on behalf of the Public and Professional Policy Committee of the European Dutch Brain Foundation (HsN F2014(1)-16) to J.E.V. and the German Mini- Society of Human Genetics; stry of Research and Education (grant numbers 01G S08164
, 01G S08167
, 1Centre for Research Ethics and Bioethics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 01G S08163
 German Mental Retardation Network) to H.E. and T.M.S. 2Department of Health, Ethics & Society, Research Schools CAPHRI and GROW, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics,  C19
.6 Section Community Genetics and EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU Genes controlling cell movement und migration are deregulated in University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Ospedali ARID1B-associated ID Galliera, Genova, Italy, 55Laboratory for Molecular Genetics, Institute of Molecular G. Vasileiou, M. V. Hadjihannas, A. Reis; Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 6INSERM, Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Faculté de medicine Université Toulouse 3, Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 7Department Erlangen, Germany. of Clinical Genetics, Section Community Genetics and EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. The human BRG1-associated factors (BAF) chromatin remodeling complex (also known as SWI/SNF-A complex) regulates the structure and position of A recent resurgence of debate over genetic modification has been ignited, nucleosomes and can facilitate both activation as well as repression of gene due to the recent advent of a novel tool for site-specific gene editing, CRIS- transcription. Non-syndromic Intellectual disability (ID) and Coffin-Siris PR-Cas9, and the publication in April 2015 that human embryos had been syndrome (CSS) are associated with loss-of-function mutations in various edited in research. CRISPR-Cas9 allows for increased efficiency, specificity, componeAntRsI Dof1 tBhe BAF complex, such as ARID1B, which is expressed in the relative ease and speed of use, and accessibility to researchers. Increased human brain and in mammalian embryonic stem cells. To understand how access to, and novel uses of, new technologies leads to the need for further mutated affects human brainE dS eH veG lo p2 m0 e1 n6 t a| n B d A leR adC sE tL o O deN veA lo, p S -PA rI eN fl e| c W tionW oW n t. hE eS pH otG en. tO iaR l sG cientific, and medical impacts as well as eth4ic5al,ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C21
 Disorders with skin abnormalities legal and social issues (ELSI). While some of the risks and ELSI of somatic and heritable gene editing in humans have been discussed previously (e.g.  C21
.1 re: IVF, PGD, cloning) what is particular to the current discussion is that we Antisense oligonucleotide-mediated exon skipping as a potential have, technically, never been so close to having the technology to conduct systemic treatment for recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa gene editing in humans in a potentially safe and effective manner. Contribu- J. Bremer1, O. Bornert2, A. Nyström2, A. H. Gostynski1, M. F. Jonkman1, A. Aartsma-Rus3, A. ting to a constructive discussion within the ESHG, the Public and Professio- M. G. Pasmooij1, P. C. Van den Akker4,1; nal Policy Committee has outlined different areas that require attention in 1Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of order to move forward and ensure a responsible use and application of gene Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Dermatology, Medical Center – editing. These include: education and engagement of different stakeholders, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, Leiden including lay stakeholders to support meaningful discussions; identification University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Department of Genetics, University and monitoring of risks; ethical reflection identifying generic risks and issu- Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. es as well as those specific to gene editing; attention to governance and legal issues; addressing the potential roles and impacts of commercial actors in the development of gene editing; and the consideration of alternative me- Introduction: Patients with the devastating skin disorder ‘generalized se- thods that could be used instead of gene editing. vere’ recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (CRODL E7
BA)1 suffer lifelong blistering upon the slightest trauma and die of skin cancer before the age  C20
.5 of 40. RDEB isC OcaLu7sAe1d by biallelic null-mutations in , resulting in a Ethical issues of gene editing: what does popular media report? complete absence of type VII collagen (ColVII). There is no cure for RDEB. E. Niemiec1,2,3, B. M. Zimmermann4,5, H. C. Howard6; 1Joint International PhD Program in Law, Science and Technology, University of Since 91C%O Lo7f A1 exons are in-frame and encode repetitive amino acid Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Law, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 3Centre for stretches, and low levels of ColVII already drastically improve the phe- Ethics and Law in the Life Sciences, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany, notype, seems a perfect candidate for antisense oligonucleotide 4Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, (AON)-meind ivaitterdo exon skipping therapy. in Sweden, 5Department for Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 6Centre Mvivaoterials and Methods: We examined the feasibility of AON-mediated exon for Research Ethics and Bioethics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. skipping in primary cultured keratinocytes and ifnib vriotbrolasts, iann vdi vo in a human skin-graft mouse model after systemic delivery. The func- tionality of the resulting protein was assessed in diverse and CRISPR Cas9 gene editing technology was reported to have been used in functional assays. human embryos for the first time in April 2015. This research led by Jun- Rine vsuitlrtos: Treatment with AONs designed against a mutant exon 105 led to jiu Huang has sparked controversy, prompted debate and extensive media in-framine evxivoon 105 skipping at the RNA level and restored ColVII expression coverage on this issue. Since then, a number of meetings have been held to . Moreover, systemic administration of these AONs to nude mice in- discuss this issue, and reports, statements, and recommendations have been duced re-exipn rveistrsoion of ColVII in skin grafts, generated from mutant issued by groups, including the Washington Summit organizers, the Hinxton patient cells, engrafted on the miicne v’siv boack. Additionally, the resulting ColVII Group, and The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies. proved functional in trypsin digestion, type IV collagen binding and These highlight the need to have an ongoing discussion with a multitude fibroblast migration assays, and in a ColVII-deficient mouse model. of stakeholders including experts and lay public. Discussing a novel tech- Conclusions: This study provides strong proof-of-concept for AON-mediated nology with different stakeholders can be difficult if stakeholders are not exon skipping as a systemic therapeutic strategy for RDEB. aware of, or do not have much information about said technology. One of the Grants and Fellowships: ERARE-2 Grant (AN, AA, AMGP); Clinical Fellowship widely accessible educational as well as opinion-forming resources for lay ZonMW (90715614, PvdA) public about new scientific advancements may be media coverage. To study  C21
.2 the information disseminated through the media on gene editing, a content Osteoporosis in the segmental progeroid disorder gerodermia analysis of a subset of English newspaper articles was performed. Articles osteodysplastica is caused by defective decorin glycanation and TGF-β were identified from five of the most popular online newspaper websites: induced oxidative stress. USAToday.com, NYTimes.com, DailyMail.co.uk, WashingtonPost.com, The- U. Kornak1, W. Chan1, M. Steiner1, J. Egerer1, A. C. Ma2, B. Busse3, S. Mizumoto4, J. Pestka3, Guardian.com. A preliminary study of a subset of articles shows that articles H. Zhang1, I. Hausser5, K. Sugahara4, M. Amling3, D. Chan6, S. Mundlos1; regularly present a basic explanation of the science as well as some ethical 1Charité-Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2The University of Hong Kong, concerns regarding (germ line) gene editing, including the potential bene- Hong Kong, China, 3University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, fits and harms. Studying media messages is important as they may influence 4Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan, 5University Clinic Heidelberg, Heidelberg, public attitudes and debate and ultimately influence the acceptability (or Germany, 6The University of Hong Kong, Hong ong, China. lack thereof) for gene editing.  C20
.6 Age-related tissue deterioration is a multifactorial process that can be ex- Optimising CRISPR genome editing using machine learning emplarily studied in segmental progeroid disorders like gerodermia osteo- R. Doyle,  E1
 2ST; Desktop Genetics, London, United Kingdom. dysplastica (GO), a recessive condition characterized by skin laxity and early-onset osteoporosis. The GO disease gene GORAB, which encodes a small Golgi protein, was conditionally inactivated in mesenchymal proge- nitor cells of the limb skeleton. These GorabPrx1 mice showed hallmarks of Decision rules are commonly used to select guide RNA sequences for a parti- age related bone changes including a disorganization of collagen fibrils and cular CRISPR genome editing application. Such rules use sequence-level and thinned, porous cortical bone culminating in spontaneous fractures of long contextual features of the predicted cut site locations to predict the activity, bones. Reduced dermatan sulfate levels and impaired glycanation of deco- specificity, and outcome of using CRISPR. rin, indicating abnormal modification of extracellular matrix proteins, were We designed a library of guides to test common rules for indel-mediated associated with an increase of activated TGF-β in tissues. Elevation of TGF-β gene disruption. Our library maximized the orthogonality of the guide po- downstream signalling components included the reactive oxygen species pulation, internally and with respect to previously published guides (rather (ROS) producing enzyme Nox4. The subsequent oxidative stress entailed an than maximize guide performance), to create a better training data set for accumulation of DNA damage and cellular senescence in GorabPrx1 bone machine learning. We compared our machine-selected guides to a set of ma- and in cultured human GO fibroblasts. Elevated ROS levels were also found nually-selected guides, and tested different types of negative control guides. after inactivation of gorab in a zebrafish model. Antioxidant treatment of Our rules enriched for performant guides at a population level but could not GorabPrx1 mice ameliorated the osteoporosis phenotype underlining the select or eliminate individual guides with certainty. We find that combining importance of oxidative stress for the GO pathogenesis. Our data unravel a decision rules has a cumulative effect; machine selection may be superior to pathway involving Golgi function, matrix composition, TGF-β signalling and manual; and using prior performance data and co-located genome features oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis. are critical. We demonstrated significant sources of variance which impact guide activity and may confound statistical learning algorithms. We recommend: filtering guides using several rules, incorporation of genomic context, maximizing library orthogonality, inclusion of randomly chosen control guides, explicit incorporation of prior guide performance, and machine selection of guides. 46 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C21
.3  C21
.5 Mutations in either TUBB or MAPR E2
 cause circumferential skin Natural history of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) caused by CHST14/ creases Kunze type D4ST1 deficiency: from an international collaborative clinical study M. Isrie1, M. Breuss2, G. Tian3, A. H. Hansen2, F. Cristofoli1, J. Morandell2, E. Porta Dapena4, by the International Consortium for EDS K. Leonard5, F. Tinsa6, S. Moortgat7, H. Ulucan8, E. Koparir8, E. Karaca9, N. Katsanis10, V. T. Kosho1, D. Syx2, T. Van Damme2, H. Morisaki3, H. Kawame4, T. Sonoda5, Y. Hilhorst- Marton11, J. R. Vermeesch1, E. Davis10, N. Cowan12, D. A. Keys2, H. Van Esch1; Hofstee6, N. C. Voermans7, K. J. Wierenga8, R. Mendoza-Londono9, K. Ishikawa10, T. 1Center for Human Genetics, LEUVEN, Belgium, 2Institute of Molecular Pathology, Kobayashi4, M. Kono11, K. Mochida12, K. Kikkawa13, C. Giunta14, A. R. Janecke15,16, N. Vienna, Austria, 3NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, 4Ourense Miyake17, F. Malfait2; Hospital Complex, Ourense, Spain, 5University of Alberta Stollery Children’s Hospital, 1Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 6Children’s Hospital of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 7, Institut de Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Bioscience and Genetics, Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium, 8Cerrahpasa Medical School of Istanbul National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Suita, Osaka, Japan, University, Istanbul, Turkey, 9Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 4Division of Genomic Medicine Support and Genetic Counseling, Tohoku Medical 10Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, 11The arctic University of Norway, Tromso, Megabank Organization, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan, 5Department of Pediatrics, University Norway, 12Center for Human Genetics, NYU Langone Medical Center, NY, United States. of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 7Department of Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Section of Genetics, Department of Circumferential skin creases Kunze type (CSC-KT) is a specific congenital Pediatrics, the University of Oklahoma College of Medicine, Oklahoma, OK, United States, 9Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, the Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, entity with an unknown genetic cause. The disease phenotype comprises 10Department of Pediatrics, Iwate medical University School of Medicine, Morioka, characteristic circumferential skin creases accompanied by intellectual Japan, 11Department of Dermatology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, disability, cleft palate, a short stature and dysmorphic features. Here we Nagoya, Aichi, Japan, 12Department of Dermatology, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, report that mutations in either MAPR E2
 or TUBB underlie the genetic ori- Japan, 13Department of Pediatrics, Kochi Health Science Center, Kochi, Japan, 14Division gin of this syndrome. MAPR E2
 encodes a member of the microtubule end- of Metabolism, Connective Tissue Unit and Children’s Research Center, University binding family of proteins that bind to the GTP cap at growing microtubule Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 15Department of Pediatrics I, Innsbruck plus ends, while TUBB encodes a beta-tubulin isotype that is expressed ab- Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 16Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 17Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City undantly in the developing brain. Functional analyses of the TUBB mutants University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. show multiple defects in the chaperone-dependent tubulin heterodimer folding and assembly pathway that leads to a compromised yield of nati- ve heterodimers. The TUBB mutations also have an impact on microtubule Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) caused by CHST14/D4ST1 deficiency, also dynamics in vivo. For MAPR E2
, we show that the mutations result in enhan- named as EDS musculocontractural type 1, is a recently-identified disorder ced MAPR E2
 binding to microtubules, implying an increased dwell time at with 38 published patients (25 families). We, on behalf of the International microtubule plus ends. Further, in vivo analysis of MAPR E2
 mutations in a Consortium for EDS, have conducted an international collaborative study to zebrafish model of craniofacial development show that the variants likely establish the natural history. Comprehensive clinical information has been perturb the patterning of branchial arches, either through excessive activity obtained from 20 published patients (17 families) and 15 additional pati- (under a recessive paradigm) or through haploinsufficiency (dominant de ents (14 families). Patients had craniofacial characteristics in infancy (lar- novo paradigm). Taken together, our data add CSC-KT to the growing list ge fontanelle, hypertelorism, short/downslanting palpebral fissures, blue of tubulinopathies, and highlight how multiple inheritance paradigms can sclera, low-set and rotated ears, high arched palate, long philtrum, small affect dosage-sensitive biological systems so as to result in the same clinical mouth, micro-retrognathia) and from adolescence (slender, asymmetrical defect. shape with protruding jaw), congenital multiple contractures (adducted  C21
.4 thumbs, clubfoot), characteristic finger shapes (tapering, slender, cylindri- Two new genetic disorders presenting with lymphatic-related cal), progressive deformities of feet (pes planus with valgus) and spine (ky- hydrops fetalis pho/scoliosis), skin hyperextensibility, fragility, and bruisability, wrinkling E. Fotiou1, S. Martin-Almedina1, I. Martinez-Corral2, R. Holdhus3, A. Vicente4, M. A. palmar creases, large subcutaneous hematomas (the most serious problem, Simpson5, S. Lin6, K. Petersen3, A. Hoischen7, C. Gilissen7, H. Jeffery1, G. Atton1, J. W. occurring after minor traumas, spreading with severe pain, and sometimes Wiseman8, M. Wedin8, K. Gordon1, G. Brice1, I. Jeffery1, D. C. Rees9, C. Mignot10, J. Vogt11, accompanying hemorrhagic shock), ocular complications (retinal detach- T. Homfray1, M. P. Snyder6, S. G. Rockson6, S. Jeffery1, P. S. Mortimer1, S. Berland12, T. ment), cryptorchidism in males, and other malformations (atrial septal de- Makinen2, S. Mansour1, P. Ostergaard1; 1St George‘s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2Uppsala University, fects). Two fatal events were described: a massive skin necrosis resulting Uppsala, Sweden, 3University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 4University College London, from a large subcutaneous hematoma all around the leg; perforation of de- London, United Kingdom, 5King‘s College London School of Medicine, London, United scending colon diverticula followed by skin rupture, with deterioration of Kingdom, 6Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 7Radboud University general conditions to death. The disorder presents with an arthrogryposis- Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8AstraZeneca R&D, Molndal, Sweden, 9King‘s like appearance at birth and later fit the hallmark of EDS with a decrease College Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 10St George‘s University of LondonCentre de of ADL/QOL and potential lethality due to progressive skeletal deformities, Référence des Déficiences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris, France, 11Birmingham large subcutaneous hematomas, and visceral/ophthalmological complicati- Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 12Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. ons. Grants: Practical Research Project for Rare/Intractable Diseases, Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development; Japan Foundation for Ped- iatric Research. Hydrops fetalis describes fetal fluid accumulation in at least two of the fol-  C21
.6 lowing: the serous cavities or in body tissue. Previous studies have shown Duplicated enhancer region upstream of the CTSB gene segregates that non-immune hydrops fetalis is a heterogeneous condition and accounts with keratolytic winter erythema in South African and Norwegian for 85% of all cases of hydrops fetalis. A lymphatic abnormality is known to families be the cause in approximately 15% of those, however, not much is known T. Ngcungcu1, M. Oti2, B. I. Haukanes3, J. C. Sitek4, F. Yang5, R. Bruccoleri6,5, T. Stokowy7, about the cause. The aim of this study was therefore to describe two inheri- E. J. Oakeley8, B. Linghu5, J. Zhu5, M. Sultan8, J. Schalkwijk9, C. von der Lippe4, H. G. ted forms of lymphatic-related hydrops fetalis (LRHF); ionn uet aeurotosomal domi- Brunner9,10, S. Buechmann-Moller8, M. M. Thomas5, N. Nirmala5, H. van Bokhoven9, V. M. nant, the other autosomal recessive. Steen7, P. R. Hull11, J. Szustakowski12, F. Staedtler8, H. Zhou2, T. Fiskerstrand7, M. Ramsay1; 1University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa, 2Radboud University, Exome sequencing on families, with a large numbeErP oHf B4 and neonatal Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 4Oslo deaths associated with non-immune hydrops fetalis, identifiedP InEoZvOe1l vari- University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, ants in the genes encoding Ephrin-receptor-B4 ( ) (dominant form) Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Congenomics, Glastonbury, CT, United States, 7University and Piezo-type mechanosensitive ion channel component 1 ( ) (re- of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 8Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, cessive form). Biochemical analysis of the muEtpahnbt 4EPHB4 proteins demon- Switzerland, 9Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Maastricht strate that they are devoid of tyrosine kinase activity. We further show that University Medical Center+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 11Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, lymphaPtIiEcZ eOn1dothelial specific inactivation of in mouse embryos lead Canada, 12Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ, United States. to subcutaneous edema due to defective lymphatic vessel formation. Mutati- ons in were also shown to affect expression of PIEZO1. Together, these findings identify EPHB4 and PIEZO1 as critical regulators Keratolytic winter erythema (KWE) is a rare autosomal dominant skin of early lymphatic vascular development and that mutations in these genes disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of palmo-plantar centrifugal can cause two new forms of lymphatic-related non-immune hydrops fetalis erythema and epidermal peeling. KWE was previously mapped to 8p23-p22 with a high mortality. This also suggests not only is LRHF genetically hete- (KWE critical region) in South African families, who are expected to share rogeneous, but it should also be considered in both dominant and recessive the same mutation due to a founder effect. Using targeted resequencing of forms. This work was funded by British Heart Foundation (SP/13/5/30288) the KWE critical region in three South African families and SNP array/whole and Newlife Foundation for Disabled CE hS ilH drG en 2 (10 21 -16 3 /| 0 B 1)A .RCELONA, SPA gI eN n o| m W e W seqW ue. nE cS inH g G in. O twR oG Norwegian families, we identified two over4la7p-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C22
.2 CTSB Whole exome sequencing identifies ALPK3 as a new disease ping tandem duplications of 7.67 kb and a 15.93 kb respectively. The. dupli- gene causing both severe paediatric and ‘milder’ adult-onset cations are located upstream to the gene, and the 2.63 kb overlapping cardiomyopathies. region includes an enhancer element that is a, ctive in keratinocytes Based J. D. H. Jongbloed1, J. M. A. Verhagen2, R. Almomani1, E. Brosens2, K. Y. van Spaendonck- on NCHTESKB cell lineHi-CF dDaFtaT 1and MCF-7 cNeEllI Lli2n.e CTCF ChIA-PET data, three Zwarts1,3, A. Asimaki4, P. A. van der Zwaag1, I. M. E. Frohn-Mulder5, A. M. Bertoli-Avella2,6, potential topological domCaTinSsB were revealedFDaFlTl 1c onta NinEinILg2 t he enhancer L. G. Boven1, M. A. van Slegtenhorst2, J. J. van der Smagt7, W. F. J. van IJcken8, B. Timmer9, and , plus either and even However, the activity of the M. van Stuijvenberg10, R. M. Verdijk11, J. E. Saffitz4, F. A. du Plessis5, M. Michels12, M. P. van den Berg13, R. M. W. Hofstra2, P. van der Harst13, R. J. Sinke1, P. van Tintelen1,3, M. W. enhancer correlated with but not with and CTgSeBne expres- Wessels2, J. C. Herkert1, I. M. B. H. van de Laar2; sion in differentiaFtDinFgT k1e rat NinEoIcLy2t es and other cell lines, and MCF-7 RNAPII 1Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, ChIA-PET data showCeTdS tBhat the enhancer interacts with the promoter Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical but not with the or promoters, suggesting that the enhancer Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical normally regulates expression. In conclusion, we showCT tShBat KWE in Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Pathology,, Harvard Medical School, South African and Norwegian families is caused by tandem duplications in Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States, 5Department of non-coding DNA containing an active enhancer element for . Duplica- Paediatric Cardiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 7Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical tion of this region may cause aberrant expression of nearby genes due to Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Center for Biomics, Erasmus University Medical changes in the topological domain structure, in response to environmental Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 9Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, triggers. University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 10Division of Neonatology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,  C22
 Cardiovascular disorders Groningen, Netherlands, 11Department of Pathology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 12Department of Cardiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 13Department of Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.  C22
.1 FOXF2, a novel risk locus for stroke and small artery disease: a genome-wide association study Paediatric cardiomyopathies are a heterogeneous group of disorders cha- G. Chauhan1, C. R. Arnold2, A. Y. Chu3, M. Fornage4, A. Reyahi5, J. C. Bis6, A. S. Havulinna7, racterized by structural and functional cardiac abnormalities. Up to 40% of the Cervical Artery Dissection and Ischemic StrokePatients (CADISP) study, the METASTROKE consortium, the Stroke Genetics Network (SiGN, the International Stroke affected children die or undergo cardiac transplantation within five years Genetics Consortium (ISGC), O. J. Lehmann8, L. J. Launer9, M. Ikram10, P. Carlsson5, D. I. of diagnosis. While understanding the molecular basis of paediatric cardio- Chasman3, S. J. Childs2, W. T. Longstreth, Jr11, S. Seshadri12, S. Debette1, the Neurology myopathy has greatly improved over the last decades, in many cases the Working Group of the CHARGE consortium; underlying cause remains unknown. Currently available (targeted/custom 1Université de Bordeaux, Centre Inserm U 897, Bordeaux, France, 2Alberta Children‘s based) diagnostic tests do not represent the whole spectrum of genetic etio- Hospital Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, logies and lead to a genetic diagnosis in a subset of paediatric patients only. University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 3Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham Using homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing in two consanguineous and Women‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Institute of Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics Center, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, families with idiopathic paediatric cardiomyopathy, we identified homozy- TX, United States, 5Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of gous truncating mutations in a new disease gene: alpha-kinase 3 (ALPK3). Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 6Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, Department This gene encodes a nuclear kinase essential for early differentiation of car- of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 7National Institute diomyocytes, being involved in important transcription factor pathways. A for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 8Department of Ophthalmology, University of third family carrying mutated ALPK3 was identified upon cohort screening. Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 9IRP/NIA/NIH, , MD, USA, Bethesda, MD, United States, Patients with biallelic mutations presented with severe cardiomyopathy 10Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 11Department of leading to early lethality or biventricular dysfunction in childhood. Some Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 12Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States. heterozygous family members showed adult-onset cardiomyopathy with atypically distributed hypertrophy, indicating that this gene may also play a role in dominantly inherited cardiomyopathies. We provide microscopic evidence of intercalated disc remodelling, as previously observed in Alpk3 Background: Genetic determinants of stroke, the leading neurological cause knockout mice. Further functional experiments and studies on the role of of death and disability, are poorly understood and have seldom been explo- the gene in adult-onset cardiomyopathies and cardiac hypertrophy are on- red in the general population. going. Methods: We performed a genome-wide screen for common genetic va- In conclusion, biallelic truncating mutations in ALPK3 cause severe paedia- riants associated with incident stroke risk in 18 prospective population- tric cardiomyopathy. Our findings highlight the importance of transcription based cohorts comprising 84,961 participant-s6, of whom 4,348 experienced factor pathways in the molecular mechanisms underlying human cardio- stroke. We followed-up variants with p<5×10 in the largest available cross- myopathies and underscore the high genetic heterogeneity of paediatric sectional studies (70,804 participants of whom- 819,816 experienced stroke). cardiomyopathies. For genome-wide significant findings (p<5×10 ), we explored associations with additional cerebrovascular phenotypes and undertook functional ana-  C22
.3 lyses in mouse and zebrafish mutants. FOXF2 Exome sequencing reveals distinct genetic architectures for Results: We replicated seven of eight known loci for ischemic stroke and syndromic and nonsyndromic congenital heart defects identified a novel locus at chr6p25 (rs12204590, near ) associated- A. Sifrim1, M. Hitz1,2, A. Wilsdon3, J. Breckpot4, S. H. Al Turki5, B. Thienpont6,7, J. McRae1, 8w ith risk of all stroke: odds ratio (OR) =1·08 (95%CI:1·05-1·12), p=1·48×10 T. W. Fitzgerald1, T. Singh1, G. J. Swaminathan1, D. Rajan1, E. Prigmore1, The INTERVAL (minor allele frequency 21%). The rs12204590 stroke risk allele also in- study, The UK10K Consortium, Competence Network for Congenital Heart Defects, creased MRI-defined white matter hyperintensity (WMH) bFuOrXdFe2n, a marker German Register for Congenital Heart Defects, S. Mital8, P. Daubeney9, B. Keavney10, J. Goodship11, R. M. Abu-Sulaiman12,13, S. Klaassen14,15, C. F. Wright1, H. V. Firth16, J. C. of cerebral small artery disease, in stroke-free adults (N=21,07F9o;x pf2=0·0025). Barrett1, K. Devriendt4, D. R. Fitzpatrick17, J. D. Brook3, The Deciphering Developmental Consistently, young patients with segmental deletions of exhibited Disorders Study, M. E. Hurles1; extensive WMH burden. ConditioFnOaXl F(2in ducible) deletion of in adult 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2UKSH Kiel, Kiel, Germany, mice resulted in cerebral infarction, reactive gliosis, and microhemorrha- 3University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 4University Hospitals Leuven, ge. The zebrafish equivalents of (orthologs) foxf2b/foxf2a were ex- Leuven, Belgium, 5Harvard Medical School Genetics Training Program, Boston, MA, pressed in brain pericytes and mutant foxf2b-/- cerebral vessels showed United States, 6Vesalius Research Center, Flemish Institute for Biotechnology, Leuven, decreased smooth muscle cell and peFriOcXytFe2 coverage. Belgium, 7Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 8Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 9Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 10University Conclusion: In our study of 155,765 persons in total (24,164 with stroke), of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 11Newcastle University, Newcastle, United we idFeOnXtFif2ied common variants near associated with increased stro- Kingdom, 12Ministry of National Guard–Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 13King Saud ke susceptibility. Extensive epidemiological and experimental data suggest bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 14Charite Medical that mediates this association, potentially via differentiation defects Faculty and Max-Delbruck-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 15German of cerebral vascular mural cells. Heart Institute Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 16East Anglian Medical Genetics, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 17MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine (IGMM), University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Congenital Heart Defects (CHD) have a neonatal incidence of 0.8-1%. De- 48 ESHG 2016 | BARCELON sA pi, t eS P abA uI nN da | n W t exW amW pl. eE sS oH f mG o. nO oR geG nic CHD in humans and mice, CHD hasABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index a low absolute sibling recurrence risk (~2.7%), suggesting a considerable autosomal dominant manner but rare X-linked families have been descri- role for de novo mutations, and/or incomplete penetrance. De novo prote- bed. So far, FLNA is the only X-linked gene associated with a syndromic form in-truncating variants have been shown to be enriched among the 10% of of TAAD, namely the periventricular nodular heterotopia type of Ehlers- ‘syndromic’ patients with extra-cardiac manifestations (Homsy et al., 2015). Danlos syndrome. However, FLNA only explains a small number of the X- However, these findings do not explain the recurrence risk in the majori- linked TAAD families. ty (~90%) of CHD cases which present themselves clinically as isolated We performed targeted resequencing of nearly 500 extracellular matrix and cardiac defects. We exome sequenced 4,593 individuals from 1,823 CHD TGFβ related genes in a cohort of 11 Marfan-like probands without known families (1,365 trios, 32 multi-sibling families and 458 singletons), inclu- causal mutation. We identified two patients with loss-of-function mutations ding both syndromic (n=610) and non-syndromic cases (n=1,281). In the in BGN, encoding the extracellular matrix small leucine-rich proteoglycan syndromic CHD cohort, we confirmed a significant enrichment of de novo, biglycan. Subsequent Sanger sequencing of BGN in 400 male and 200 fema- but not inherited, protein-truncating variants, in known CHD-associated le TAAD-patients, negative for known TAAD genes, identified a splice site genes, consistent with recent findings. Conversely, in non-syndromic CHD mutation in a male proband and suggested a deletion in two other male we observed significant enrichment of protein-truncating variants inherited probands. The latter were confirmed by micro-array analysis. The clinical from unaffected parents in known CHD genes. These findings point towards phenotype is characterized by early onset aortic aneurysm (age 1 year) and a role for variants with reduced penetrance in these non-syndromic cases. dissection (age 15 years). Other recurrent findings include hypertelorism, Additionally, we identified three novel genome-wide significant syndromic pectus deformity, joint hypermobility, contractures and mild skeletal dys- CHD disorders caused by de novo mutations in CHD4, CDK13 and PRKD1. To plasia. Histological stainings of the patients‘ aortic wall revealed a substan- summarise, our study reveals distinct genetic architectures underlying the tial reduction in collagen content, while elastin fibers appeared normal. Bi- low sibling recurrence risk in syndromic and non-syndromic CHD. glycan deficiency in male BALB/cA mice leads to sudden death from aortic rupture, indicating that biglycan is both structurally and functionally essen-  C22
.4 tial for the integrity of the aortic wall. Defective connective tissue remodeling in Smad3 mice leads to These results confirm that BGN gene defects in human cause an X-linked accelerated aneurysmal growth through disturbed downstream TGF-β syndromic form of severe TAAD. signaling I. van der Pluijm, N. van Vliet, J. von der Thusen, J. Robertus, Y. Ridwan, P. van Heijningen, B. van Thiel, M. Vermeij, R. Buijs-Offerman, R. Kanaar, A. Bertoli-Avella, J.  C23
 Functional Genomics Essers; Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.  C23
.1 Mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) in peripheral blood is associated Aneurysm-osteoarthritis syndrome (AOS, or Loeys-Dietz syndrome type3, with age, smoking, shorter survival and increased risk of cancer and LD S3
) is characterized by aortic aneurysms and early-onset osteoarthritis, Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in men caused by SMAD3 mutations. Smad3 is part of the Smad2/3/4 transcripti- J. Dumanski1,2, J. Lambert3, C. Rasi1,2, V. Giedraitis4, H. Davies1,2, B. Grenier-Boley3, on factor, essential for TGF-β-activated transcription. Although mutations in C. M. Lindgren5,6, D. Campion7, C. Dufouil8, C. Bellenguez9, V. Chouraki9, A. Brice10, TGF-β-related genes result in aneurysm formation, the underlying mecha- J. Epelbaum11, C. Berr12, J. Dartigues8, D. Hannequin7, A. Boland13, M. Lathrop14, D. nism is un-/k-nown. Here, we examined aneurysm formation and progression Zelenika13, F. Pasquier9,15, P. Amouyel9,15, L. Lannfelt4, M. Ingelsson4, L. Kilander4, L. Lind16, in Smad-/-3 animals. L. A. Forsberg1,2; Smad3 animals developed aortic aneurysms rapidly, resulting in prematu- 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, re death, earlier in males than females. Aortic wall immunohistochemistry Sweden, 2Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Institut Pasteur de Lille, showed no increase in extracellular matrix and collagen, nor loss of vascular Université de Lille, Lille, France, 4Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 5Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) but instead revealed medial elastin disruption University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard and adventitial inflammation. Remarkably, matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) University, Cambridge, MA, United States, 7Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, were not activated in VSMC-/-s, but were specifically activated in inflammato- 8Victor Segalen University, Bordeaux, France, 9Université de Lille, Lille, France, ry areas. Although Smad3 aortas showed increased nuclear pSmad2 and 10Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 11Université Paris Descartes, Paris, pErk, indicative of TGF-β receptor activation, downstream TGF-β-activated France, 12Hôpital La Colombière, Montpellier, France, 13Institut de Génomique, Evry, genes were not upr-e/-gulated. Increased pSmad2 and pErk staining in pre- France, 14Université McGill, Montréal, QC, Canada, 15Centre Hospitalier Régional aneurysmal Smad3 aortas without immune infiltrates implied that the Universitaire de Lille, Lille, France, 16Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. aortic damage and subsequent TGF-β receptor-activated signaling precede aortic inflammation. Finally, increased pErk together with impaired-/ -down- stream TGF-β-activated transcription resulted in increased Smad3 VSMC Introduction: Life expectancy of men is about 5 years shorter compared prolifer-/a-tion. with women but the underlying factor(s) have been elusive. Our previous Smad3 animals recapitulate the aortic phenotype observed in patients results show that mosaic loss of chromosome Y in blood cells (LOY) is asso- with SMAD3 mutations. Smad3 deficiency leads to imbalanced activation of ciated with age, smoking, all-cause mortality and non-hematological tumors downstream genes and no activation of MMPs in VSMCs, causing an immu- (Nat. Genet. 2014 PMID:24777449, Science 2015 PMID:25477213). The ne response resulting in rapid dilatation and rupture of the aortic wall. Our aim of the preset study was to test if men with LOY are more susceptible to findings uncover new possibilities for treatment of patients carrying SMAD3 Alzheimer’s disease (AD). mFuuntdatiinogn sS;t iicnhsttienagd l iojff etrne laetvineng with drugs targeting the TGF-β pathway, they Materials and Methods: LOY in blood cells was estimated using SNP-array may benefit more from immune suppression. data from >3200 men from one AD case-control study and two prospective cohorts. Whole genome sequencing was used for validations. A set of stati-  C22
.5 stical techniques were used to evaluate association between LOY in blood Loss-of-function mutations in the X-linked gene BGN cause a severe and AD diagnosis. syndromic form of thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections Results: LOY was detected in ~17% of participants (median age=73, ran- J. A. N. Meester1, G. Vandeweyer1, I. Pintelon2, K. Waitzman3, L. Young3, L. W. Markham4, ge=37-96). We found that men with AD diagnosis had a higher degree of J. Vogt5, J. Richer6, L. M. Beauchesne7, S. Unger8, A. Superti-Furga9, E. Reyniers1, A. LOY mosaicism in the case-control study (adjusted odds ratio=2.80, AD Verstraeten1, L. Van Laer1, B. L. Loeys1; events=606, p=0.0184). Furthermore, analysis of the two prospective co- 1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of Cell Biology and Histology, University of Antwerp, horts showed that men with LOY in blood at sampling had an increased risk Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Lurie Children’s Hospital for incident AD during follow-up time (HR=6.80, 95% CI=2.16-21.43, AD of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 4Divisions of Pediatric and Adult Cardiology, events=140, p=0.0011). Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States, 5Birmingham Women‘s NHS Conclusions: Our results suggest that LOY in blood cells is associated with Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Department of Medical Genetics, increased risk for both AD and cancer, suggesting a role of LOY in blood cells University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottowa, ON, United States, 7Division of Cardiology, on disease processes in other tissues, possibly via defective immunosurveil- University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottowa, ON, United States, 8Centre Hospitalier lance functions of immune cells without the Y chromosome. Hence, as a ma- Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 9Service of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. le-specific genetic risk factor, LOY might help explain why males on average live shorter than females. Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissectiEonS H(TGAA 2D0) i1s 6ty p| iBcaAllyR iCnhEeLriOteNd iAn ,a Sn PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 49ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index  C23
.2  C23
.4 Single cell allele specific expression (ASE) in T21 and common Assessment of the GENCODE annotation through experimental trisomies:Novel approach to understand gene dosage effects in Down validation syndrome and common aneuploidies A. Ferreira1,2, B. Uszczynska3, J. Lagarde3, J. Chrast1, A. Frankish4, J. Harrow4, R. Guigó3, G. Stamoulis1, F. Santoni2, P. Makrythanasis2, A. Letourneau1, M. Guipponi2, M. Garieri1, A. Reymond1; N. Panousis1, E. Falconnet1, P. Ribaux1, C. Borel1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2,3; 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Geneva University Hospitals-HUG, Service of Genetic Spain, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Medicine, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland, Geneva, Switzerland, 3iG E3
 Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, University of Geneva, 1211, Geneva, Switzerland. Within the ENCODE consortium, GENCODE aims to accurately annotate all protein-coding genes, pseudogenes and non-coding transcribed loci in Trisomy 21(T21), is a model disorder of altered gene expression. We have the human genome through manual curation and computational analysis. previously used a pair of monozygotic-twins discordant for T21 to study Lower confidence transcribed loci, i.e. not supported by ENCODE or GTex the global dysregulation of gene expression,eliminating genetic variation RNA-seq data, were systematically experimentally evaluated in 8 tissues by among individuals(Nature:508;345-350;2014). Majority of previous stu- RT-PCR amplification followed by highly multiplexed sequencing readout, a dies on aneuploidies were conducted οn cell-populations or tissues.Studies method we coined RT-PCR-seq. 78% of all assessed junctions are confirmed on gene and allelic-expression of single-cells(SC) may reveal important by this evaluation procedure demonstrating the high quality of the annota- biological insights regarding the cellular impact of aneuploidy elucidating tion reached by the GENCODE gene set. In a second phase unvalidated junc- the fundamental mechanisms of gene dosage. We estimated the allele- tions were reevaluated by RT-PCR-seq in a second set of 8 tissues and with a specific-expression(ASE) from RNAseq of ~1000 single-cells in different novel pair of primers to account for tissue specificity and bad design of the aneuploidies:352 SC fibroblasts (172 Normal-179 T21 cells) from the pair oligos, respectively. of monozygotic-twins discordant for T21, 166 from a mosaic-T21, 176 To assess the completion of the GENCODE annotation we then tried to am- mosaic-T18, 151 mosaic-T8, and 146 SC-fibroblasts from mosaic-T13.In the plify new exons and/or new splice junctions of 541 deeply annotated prote- monozygotic-twins,considerable number of heterozygous sites genomewi- in-coding genes that belong to the UK Genetic Testing Network list through de were expressed monoallelically(Normal:73.5%-564,668 observations, individual 5’ and 3’ nested-RACEs in 8 different tissues (brain, testis, heart, and T21:78.7%-549,799 observations). There was considerable monoal- kidney, liver, lung, spleen and skeletal muscle) paired with long-range Pa- lelic-expression for chr21 sites in Normal and,surprisingly, in T21 cells as cific Biosciences sequencing. Whereas these experiments failed to reveal well(Normal:63,3%-5,009 observations,T21:72.8%-6,456 observations). a large number of new exons and splice sites, they further contributed to We classified chr21 genes in three classes according to the level of the aggre- the improvement of the human genome annotation through identification gate monoallelic-expression of their corresponding sites (9-monoallelic,29- of new splice junctions between already annotated exons, de facto new intermediate,2-biallelic). We hypothesize that each class of genes contribu- transcripts. While the results demonstrate that the human transcriptome tes in a specific way to the phenotypic variability of Down-Syndrome(DS). annotation is far from complete, we are moving to accurately identifying all Similar results,(i.e. extensive monoallelic-expression of genes on the super- protein-coding loci of major interest to the clinical community.  C23
.5 numerary chromosomes,were also observed in the other aneuploidies.Our Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of human pancreatic islets analysis demonstrated that,for genes with monoallelic-expression,the alte- M. Garieri1,2, C. Borel1, T. Stoeger3, F. Santoni1, C. Howald1,2, P. Ribaux1, L. Pelkmans3, P. red gene dosage induced by the aneuploid chromosome is due to the num- Halban1, S. Antonarakis1, E. Dermitzakis1,2; ber of cells expressing the gene on the supernumerary chromosome.This 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, difference in the fraction of expressing cells could contribute to the deve- Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Geneva, Switzerland, 3Institute of lopment and variability of phenotypes in aneuploidies.This study provides Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. a new fundamental understanding of gene dosage effects in aneuploidies.  C23
.3 The landscape of polymorphic inversions and their functional impact Pancreatic islets consist of several endocrine cell types. We investigate the in the human genome J. Lerga-Jaso1, M. Oliva1, S. Villatoro1, D. Izquierdo1, L. Pantano1, S. Casillas1,2, M. heterogeneity of this tissue using single-cell (SC) RNA-seq. Dissociated islet Cáceres1,3; cells of 3 donors (n=241, 183 after quality control) were analyzed. We also 1Institut de Biotecnologia i de Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, sequenced sorted-beta SCs (n=60, 44 after quality control) from the same Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain, 2Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia, Universitat individuals. Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain, 3Institució Catalana de Recerca i Clustering analysis on islet SCs identified the follow populations of cells: Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. beta SCs (mean INS expression 40777 RPKM, representing the 75% of all SCs), alpha (mean GCG expression 86443 RPKM, 12%), gamma (mean PPY expression 49928 RPKM, 3%), delta (mean SST expression 76061 RPKM, Recent advances in genomic techniques have generated an increasing inte- 2%) and a small population of exocrine SCs. In the sorted beta SCs we ob- rest in structural variants (SVs). However, there is still limited data on their served beta SCs (INS 32708 RPKM, 93%) and delta SCs (SST 135327 RPKM, functional impact. This is particularly true for inversions, in which their ba- 7%). lanced nature and the complex repetitive regions where they appear make Interestingly we observed that insulin (INS) is expressed in all the islets SCs their study especially challenging. In this regard, we have designed a null and not just in the subpopulation of beta SCs, in addition GCC has expression model to elucidate the functional characteristics of these variants, taking in 93% of all islets SCs. We controlled for the absence of transcript contami- as reference the most reliable set of human polymorphic inversions so far nation of INS and GCG by sequencing 11 empty chambers. We are verifying from the InvFEST database. Human inversions show the signature of natural the cellularity of the cell types and the presence of INS and GCG transcript in selection, avoiding more often than expected not only genes, but also other most of the SCs using another technology (branched-DNA single-molecule functional elements such as enhancers, chromatin domain boundaries and FISH) allowing for quantification and cellular localization of transcripts. highly conserved regions. Moreover, we measured the effect of 45 experi- Differential expression and differential splicing analysis has been mentally-genotyped polymorphic inversions on gene expression based on performed among all different cell types. the transcriptome data from lymphoblastoid cell lines of 175 individuals SC transcriptome analyses provide an unprecedented opportunity to disco- from the Geuvadis project. Using a combination of well-established tools ver the heterogeneity of human pancreatic islets of Langerhans. and further filtering criteria to minimize false positives, we found that alt- M.G and C.B. and the labs of SEA and ETD contributed equally to the work. hough the majority of inversions do not appear to have any significant regu-  C23
.6 latory effect in this cell type, around half a dozen of them have a clear influ- Identifying novel long non-coding RNAs in the Human genome ence on specific genes, both in cis and in trans. Finally, we intersected SNPs M. P. Hardy, J. Harrow, J. Loveland, A. Frankish, HAVANA Group; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. reported as GWAS hits of different human phenotypes with the inversions in our dataset. All together, these results illustrate the potential impact of inversions on the human genome, and contribute to shed light on the mole- Multiple lines of evidence are emerging that long non-coding RNAs (lncR- cular mechanisms responsible for phenotypic variability. NAs) can be crucial regulators and markers of disease. For example, the long Support: European Research Council (ERC) Starting Grant (INVFEST). intergenic RNA (lincRNA) MALAT1 has been shown to regulate cancer tu- mor growth in bone and has been identified as a potential therapeutic tar- get in osteosarcoma*. As part of the GENCODE project, the HAVANA team at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute aims to identify and manually annotate 50 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONaAll, l nScPRANAINs i n| WtheW huWm.aEnS aHndG m.OouRsGe genomes. Our most recent release forABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index human (GENCODE 24) identifies 15,941 lncRNA loci containing 28,031 tran- nel for skeletal dysplasias was designed to sequence 70 genes. Amplicons scripts. Historically, lncRNA annotation has been supported by ESTs and cD- were captured by Sure-Select technomogy (Agilent technologies) and se- NAs submitted to INSDC databases. Recent developments in next generation quenced on HiSeq (Illumina). Alignment and detection of variants were rea- sequencing technology provide a huge amount of transcriptome data, ho- lized thanks to Burrows-Wheeler and Genome Analysis Toolkit softwares wever, this data needs to be handled carefully if it is to be used for building before annotation and analysis by a homemade web interface (PolyWeb). high quality gene annotation**. We will discuss the incorporation of public 216 DNAs have been analyzed. For 61 patients (28 %), a pathogenic vari- RNAseq and SLRseq datasets into our annotation pipeline to identify novel ant was identified and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Many variants of loci and describe our PacBio Capture-seq pipeline to extend loci to their full unknown significance (VOUS) were found. In 63 cases (30 %) the VOUS length and identify alternative splicing (AS). Additionally, we will show how were consistent with the phenotypes; familial segregation studies and cDNA we use PhyloCSF and Mass Spectrometry data to check coding potential in analysis (for some) are still in progress. Finally, analyses were negative in lncRNA loci and confirm their non-coding status, or update their annotation. 92 cases (42%). Combining multiple public and bespoke next-generation data sets allows us Targeted NGS is efficient to establish the molecular diagnosis of skeletal to identify novel lncRNA loci, extend and add AS transcripts to existing loci dysplasias, especially in subgroups with high genetic heterogeneity, such as and validate their non-coding annotation in an effort to provide a more de- epiphyseal dysplasias. The important number of VOUS highlights the impor- tailed picture of the human non-coding transcriptome. tance of clinico-biological staffs. Such expertise further emphasizes the need *PubMedID 25504755 for Centre of Reference for rare diseases. **http://www.gencodegenes.org/rgasp/  C24
.3  C24
 Rare Disease Gene Discoveries NU P107
 mutations cause autosomal recessive inherited early childhood-onset steroid resistant Nephrotic syndrome N. Miyake1, H. Tsukaguchi2, E. Koshimizu1, A. Shono3, N. Matsumoto1; 1Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan, 2Kansai Medical University, Osaka, Japan,  C24
.1 3Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan. Studying the genetic basis of idiopathic short stature using whole exome sequencing C. T. Thiel1, N. N. Hauer1, E. Schöller1, S. Schuhman1, M. T. Wittmann1, B. Popp1, S. Uebe1, Introduction: Nephrotic syndrome is a renal disorder caused by disruption C. Büttner1, A. B. Ekici1, K. Kutsche2, D. Wieczorek3, H. Sticht4, H. Dörr5, A. Reis1; of the glomerular filtration barrier, resulting in massive proteinuria, hypo- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg- albuminemia, and dyslipidemia. At least 27 genes have been reported to be Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 3Institute of Human-Genetics, University of Düsseldorf, associated with steroid resistant Nephrotic syndrome (SRNS), but appro- Düsseldorf, Germany, 4Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-University ximately 70% of the patients with childhood-onset SRNS are genetically Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 5Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent unknown. Medicine, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. Materials and Methods: To identify the novel responsible gene for SRNS, we performed WES for 18 families in whom the causative mutations have not been identified in the known SRNS genes. Shortness of stature is a common medical concern in childhood with an inci- Results: We identified biallelic NU P107
 mutations in nine affected indivi- dence of 3%. After excluding common defects the underlying cause remains duals from five unrelated families who showed early-onset SRNS. Seven of unknown in approximately 70-80%. nine affected individuals had compound heterozygous mutation of one trun- We now recruited and clinically characterized a group of >500 families with cating mutation (c.1079_1083del or c.969+1G>A) and commonly sheared idiopathic short stature (ISS) and selected 200 individuals where common missense mutation (c.2492A>C). They developed nephrotic syndrome from genetic causes were excluded for whole exome sequencing (100 Trios, 100 2 to 3 years of age and progressed to end stage renal disease until 10 years affected only). old. The rest of two patients in one family had compound heterozygous mu- Surprisingly, in 21 Trios we found mutations in known short stature genes tation of two missense mutation (c.469G>T and c.2492A>C) and showed where characteristic clinical features of the syndromes were missing. In 62 milder phenotype with later onset (10 to 11 years old). NU P107
 encodes of the remaining 89 trios we found potential protein affecting variants in Nucleoporin 107kDa (NU P107
) is a component of the nuclear pore complex 126 novel candidate genes. A second variant was found for 4 of these 126 embedded in the nuclear envelope, and ubiquitously expressed including candidate genes in the affected only analysis. 2 further genes were recently in glomerular podocytes. NU P107
 knockdown zebrafish generated by mor- reported for ISS in agreement with a dominant de novo model of inheri- pholino oligonucleotides displayed hypoplastic glomerulus structures and tance. 31 / 126 genes show evidence for causation based on gene constraint, abnormal podocyte foot processes, which could recapitulate the renal chan- chondrocytes expression levels, animal models, short stature associated ges in the patients with NU P107
 mutations CNVs, functional GO terms and known protein interactions. Conclusions: Here, we identified biallelic NU P107
 mutations caused early In conclusion, exome analyses of 200 patients with ISS identified a known childhood-onset SRNS and highlighted the importance of nuclear pore com- cause of shorted stature in 11% of cases. Furthermore, we found 126 po- plex in human renal disease. tential novel candidate genes in 62% of the individuals including 6 genes  C24
.4 with independent mutations in two individuals each. Thus, our data stron- Whole-exome sequencing identifies mutations of TB C1
D1 encoding a gly suggest that single gene defects may be a frequent cause for idiopathic Rab-GTPase-activating protein in patients with congenital anomalies short stature. of the kidneys and urinary tract (CAKUT)  C24
.2 A. Kosfeld1, M. Kreuzer2, C. Daniel3, F. Brand1, A. Schäfer4, A. Chadt5, A. Weiss4, V. Riehmer1, C. Jeanpierre6, M. Klintschar7, J. Bräsen8, K. Amann3, L. Pape2, A. Kispert4, H. Targeted Next Generation Sequencing in skeletal dysplasias: Al-Hasani5, D. Haffner2, R. G. Weber1; experience on 216 patients 1Hannover Medical School, Department of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany, C. Michot1, S. Hanein2, C. Haudry3, G. Baujat1, S. Monnot3, A. Munnich1, J. Bonnefont3, V. 2Hannover Medical School, Department of Pediatric Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Cormier-Daire1; Diseases, Hannover, Germany, 3Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, 1Genetics Department, INSERM UMR1163, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité Department of Nephropathology, Erlangen, Germany, 4Hannover Medical School, University, Imagine Institute, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, Institute of Molecular Biology, Hannover, Germany, 5Leibniz Center for Diabetes 2Imagine Institute, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 3Molecular Biology Research at the Heinrich-Heine- University Düsseldorf, German Diabetes Center, Department, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Necker-Enfants Malades Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Hospital, Paris, France. UMR1163, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades; Université Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 7Hannover Medical School, Department of Legal Medicine, Hannover, Germany, 8Hannover Medical School, Department of Pathology, Short stature is a common reason for paediatric consultations. After having Hannover, Germany. excluded digestive, renal, inflammatory, metabolic or endocrinologic aetio- logies skeleton X-rays may orientate toward the diagnosis of skeletal dyspla- sias. Next generation sequencing (NGS), allowing simultaneous analysis of Congenital anomalies of the kidneys and urinary tract (CAKUT) are gene- many genes, has improved the ability to perform genetic testings for such tically highly heterogeneous leaving most cases unclear after mutational heterogeneous related conditions. The study reports the results of the ana- analysis of the around 30 causative genes known so far. Assuming that phe- lyses of 216 patient DNAs by targeted NGS. notypes frequently showing dominant inheritance, such as CAKUT, can be Medical files and X-rays from all patients included were first reviewed by caused by de novo mutations, de novo analysis of whole exome sequencing Centre of Reference for ConstitutionalE BSoHneG D y2s0pl1a6sia |s .B AA taRrCgeEteLdO NNGSA p, aS-PAdINata | w WasW doWne. EonS tHwGo p.OatiRenGt-parent-trios to identify novel CAKUT gene5s.1 InABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 5Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Acıbadem University, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Advanced Genomics and Bioinformatics Research Center one case, we detected a heterozygous de novo frameshift variant in TB C1
D1 (IGBAM), BILGEM, TUBITAK, Kocaeli, Turkey, 7Division of Medical Genetics, Department encoding a Rab-GTPase-activating protein regulating glucose transporter of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 8Maternity Children Hospital, Makkah, Saudi Arabia, 9Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, GLUT4 translocation. Sequence analysis of 100 further CAKUT cases yiel- Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, 10Genetic Engineering ded three novel or rare inherited heterozygous TB C1
D1 missense variants and Biotechnology Institute, TUBITAK Marmara Research Center, Kocaeli, Turkey, predicted to be pathogenic. TB C1
D1 mutations affected Ser237-phospho- 11Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey, rylation or protein stability and thereby act as hypomorphs. Tbc1d1 showed 12Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United widespread expression in the developing murine urogenital system. A mild Kingdom, 13Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Singapore, Singapore, 14Center CAKUT spectrum phenotype, including anomalies observed in patients car- for Biobanking and Genomics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. rying TB C1
D1 mutations, was found in kidneys of some Tbc1d1-/- mice. Si- gnificantly reduced Glut4 levels were detected in kidneys of Tbc1d1-/- mice and the dysplastic kidney of a TB C1
D1 mutation carrier versus controls. Primary intraosseous vascular malformations are rare and almost exclusi- TB C1
D1 and SL C2
A4 encoding GLUT4 were highly expressed in human fetal vely described in sporadic cases involving bones that ossify intramembra- kidney. The patient with the truncating TB C1
D1 mutation showed evidence nously such as the skull. We previously reported an autosomal recessive for insulin resistance. These data demonstrate heterozygous deactivating form of such a disorder, intraosseus vascular malformation (VMOS) [MIM TB C1
D1 mutations in CAKUT patients with a similar renal and ureteral phe- 606893], characterized by severe progressive life-threatening craniofacial notype, and provide evidence that TB C1
D1 mutations may contribute to CA- vascular malformations and supraumbilical raphe. Homozygosity mapping KUT pathogenesis, possibly via a role in glucose homeostasis. and massively parallel sequencing identified mutations in ELMO2, which conveys extracellular signals to cytoskeleton, in five unrelated families with  C24
.5 eight affected individuals with VMOS. These include two splice site mutati- Mutations in KLH L7
, a Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa - Locus, Cause a ons, a one-nucleotide deletion causing frameshift, and a complex rearran- Recessive Crisponi/CIS S1
-like phenotype gement deleting the first exon. VMOS lesions had bones with abnormally L. Crisponi1, A. Angius1, P. Uva2, I. Buers3, M. Oppo1,4, A. Puddu1, S. Onano1,4, I. Persico1, A. Loi1, L. Marcia1,4, W. Höhne5, G. Cuccuru2, G. Fotia2, M. Deiana1, M. Marongiu1, H. Atalay6, expanded and malformed blood vessels lacking mature vascular smooth S. Inan7, O. El Assy8, L. Smit9, I. Okur10, E. Kılıç11, G. Zampino12, G. Crisponi13, F. Rutsch3; muscle layer. ELMO2 deficient cells had a significant downregulation of the 1Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cagliari, associated partner DOCK1, resulting in deficient activation of RA C1
 - a key Italy, Cagliari, Italy, 2Centre for Advanced Studies, Research and Development in Sardinia factor in controlling cell migration. Primary fibroblasts from an individual (CR S4
), Science and Technology Park Polaris, Pula, Italy, 3Department of General with VMOS had impaired cell migration, an essential process during angio- Pediatrics, Münster University Children‘s Hospital, Münster, Germany, 4Dipartimento genesis, which was rescued by external ELMO2 protein. Comparative phy- di Scienze Biomediche, Università degli Studi di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 5Cologne logenetic analysis points out that Elmo2 first appeared with the divergence Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6Department of ophthalmology, Gazi University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 7Opthalmology of jawed vertebrates from others, and might have acquired new functions Department of Afyon Kocatepe University, Afyon, Turkey, 8Pediatric Department-SCBU, in jawed vertebrates. Taken together, our study places ELMO2 in a critical Dibba Hospital, Dibba Al Fujaira, United Arab Emirates, 9HagaZiekenhuis Den Haag, position for maintenance of vascular stability in bone tissue, and sheds new Department of Neurology, Den Haag, Netherlands, 10Department of Pediatric Nutrition light on the understanding of the regulatory mechanisms underlying angio- and Metabolism, Gazi University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey, 11Pediatric Genetics, genesis in intramembranous ossification. Pediatric Hematology Oncology Research & Training Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 12Istituto di Pediatria, Policlinico “A. Gemelli”, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, POSTERS 13Clinica Sant‘Anna, Cagliari, Italy. Introduction: Crisponi syndrome (CS)/Cold-induced sweating syndrome  P01
 Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics type 1 (CIS S1
) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by a complex phenotype with high neonatal lethality, hyperthermia and feeding difficulties in the neonatal period, scoliosis and cold induced sweating since  P01
.001 early childhood. Mutations in the CRLF1 gene are implicated in CS/CIS S1
. A Trisomy/Tetrasomy 15q in two prenatal cases subset of CS/CIS S1
 cases remains yet genetically unexplained after CRLF1 E. Geán1, D.Escué¹,M.A. Caamaño¹,A. Morales¹,R. Bohera¹,S. Rubio¹,A.Torrents¹,M. sequencing. García²,V. Moreno²,F. Espejo², C. Garrido1,2; Materials and Methods: To identify new gene(s) implicated in the clinical 1Reference Laboratory, L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain, 2Hospital de Mérida, Mérida, Spain. phenotype, we used a whole exome sequencing approach followed by tar- geted Sanger sequencing. Results: We identified homozygous mutations in the KLH L7
 gene in five ca- Introduction: Tetrasomy 15q is a well-known clinical entity. Sometimes is ses. KLH L7
 encodes a BTB-Kelch-related protein involved in the ubiquitina- found in prenatal study like a SMCs or derivative chromosome. tion of target proteins for proteasome-mediated degradation. Mono-allelic Case 1: Amniotic fluid for a 29-year-old woman was referred to our labora- mutations in KLH L7
 have been reported in three cases affected by a late- tory for atrio-ventricular dilatation, liver arterio-venous malformation and onset form of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. A critical evaluati- bilateral hydronephrosis of the fetus. Cytogenetic analysis showed 47,XX, on of the retinal phenotype in our probands revealed retinitis pigmentosa, + SAC in 65% of metaphases. ISCA array by Agilent of 60K, and we found so implying that KLH L7
 mutations could show greater severity in recessive an amplification of 15q25.2q26.3 region. It seems to be the origin of SAC. than in dominant cases. To confirm this hypothesis, we applied centromeric probe of chromoso- Conclusions: Although these data further support the pathogenic role of bi- me 15 and telomeric probe of 15qtel by FISH, and the result was an i(15) allelic KLH L7
 mutations in a CS/CIS S1
-like phenotype, they do not explain (q25.2q26.3), without centromeric signal. all their clinical manifestations and highlight the high phenotypic hetero- 47,XX,+mar.ish i(15)(q25.2q26.3)(D15Z1x0,D15 S936
x2).arr[hg19] 15q25. geneity associated to mutations in KLH L7
. Uncovering whether KLH L7
 and 2q26.3(81.795.278-102.383.473)x3 CRLF1 converge functionally can have important implications in the search Parental cytogenetic studies were normal, indicating a de novo origin for for novel disease-associated genes and pharmacological targets. the SMC. This work was supported by TELETHON exploratory grant GE P13093
 to L.C. Case 2: Amniotic fluid for a 27-year-old woman was referred to our labo- and by a grant from Innovative Medical Research, Münster, Germany to I.B. ratory for pleural effusion, ascites and hydrops of the fetus at 32 weeks of and F.R. gestation. Cytogenetic studies in amniotic fluid showed a derivative of chro-  C24
.6 mosome 7. CGH array confirm a terminal deletion on the short arm of chro- Loss-of-function mutations in ELMO2 impeding RA C1
 signaling and mosome 7 (with deletion of the genes in this region) and amplification of cell migration cause intraosseous vascular malformation 15q23q26.3, that behaves double gene dosage of the genes contained in that A. Cetinkaya1, J. R. Xiong2, I. Vargel3, K. Kosemehmetoglu4, I. Canter5, O. F. Gerdan6, N. region. No information about cytogenetic studies of the parents has been Longo7, A. AlZahrani8, E. Z. Taskiran1, L. D. Botto7, Z. Gormez6, E. Uz1,9, B. Yuksel10, S. facilitated. Ruacan11, M. S. Sağıroğlu6, T. Takahashi12, B. Reversade2,13, N. A. Akarsu1,14; 46,XX,der(7)t(7;15)(p22.3;q26.3).arr[hg19] 7p22.3(101.528-67.231)x1,15 1Department of Medical Genetics, Gene Mapping Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Institute of Medical Biology, Human Genetics q23q26.3(68.759.755-102.383.473)x3 and Embryology Laboratory, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore, 3Department of Plastic Conclusion: The increasing use of array CGH in clinical laboratories will pro- and Reconstructive Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, vide an efficient method for more comprehensive characterization of SMCs 4Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Istanbul, Turkey, and derivative chromosomes. We discuss clinical utility. 52 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P01
.002 vided into 2 cohorts: 1) young patients (<35) and 2) AMA (>35). Average age Raising confidence threshold increases the positive predictive value was 29,5 ±1,4 and 41,2±2,2, respectively. A-CGH (Bluegnome, Illumina) was of a SNP-based NIPT for the 22q11.2 microdeletion used to detect whole chromosome aneuploidies. Trophectoderm biopsy was A. Ryan, S. Iyengar, B. Jiorle, Z. Demko; Natera Inc, San Carlos, CA, United States. performed on 5-6 day of embryo development. Blastocysts were vitrified and transferred in next cycle after PGT. Results: PGT was performed for 48 blastocysts and aneuploidy rates were 53,1% for AIM: To examine whether raising the confidence threshold at which the al- young patients and 100% for AMA group. The reason for high aneuploidy gorithm for a SNP-based NIPT for the 22q11.2 microdeletion makes a posi- rate in AMA group is age and small number of blastocysts. Complex chromo- tive call would increase the positive predictive value (PPV) without affecting some abnormalities were more common in AMA group (Table 1). The most test sensitivity. frequent aneuploidies were trisomies (37,5%) and monosomies (35,4%), METHODS: 20,776 NIPT samples received between Feb-Aug, 2014 were pre- Aneuploidies for X and Y chromosomes were detected in 8,3%. viously evaluated for the 22q11.2 deletion using primers targeting 672 SNPs in a 2.9 Mb segment of 22q11.2, and analyzed using a high-risk confidence threshold of 0.90. Follow-up information, including ultrasound findings, Young AMA were collected for high-risk cases. Here, the algorithm’s confidence thresh- patients Average number of blastocysts per cycle 4 2,7 old was raised to 0.95, and PPV recalculated for the entire cohort and for the Euploid blastocysts,% 46,9 0 subset of cases with prior-known directly-associated ultrasound anomalies Blastocysts with complex chromosome 15,6 31,2 (high a priori risk) and with no prior-known anomalies (low a priori risk). abnormalities,% Failed amplification,% 4,2 RESULTS: At the original confidence cut-off, the test had a PPV of 18%, which increased to 42.3% upon reflex-sequencing of high-risk samples at a higher Conclusion: In cohort of AMA the average number of blastocysts on day 5 read depth (HDOR). Raising the algorithm’s confidence level increased the and 6 was significantly lower than in patients of younger age. Complex chro- PPV to 52.4% and reduced the false positive rate from 0.12% to 0.07%, with mosomal aberrations were double higher in this group. no loss in test sensitivity. The PPV was 100% for high a priori risk cases, and  P01
.005 20% for low a priori risk cases. Male age is not related with high rates of spermatozoa and embryos CONCLUSIONS: The updated methodology (raised confidence level + re- aneuploidy flexing) eliminated 80% of the FP cases originally reported, yielding an J. A. Ortiz1, B. Lledo1, R. Morales1, A. M. Fabregat1, E. Garcia-Hernandez1, A. Rodriguez- improved PPV for this SNP-based NIPT (52.4% vs. 18%). Given the higher Arnedo2, J. Llacer2, R. Bernabeu2,1; than previously-reported incidence of the 22q11.2 microdeletion and the 1IB Biotech, Alicante, Spain, 2Instituto Bernabeu, Alicante, Spain. benefits of early intervention, we expect this improved test to be highly ben- eficial in prenatal testing.  P01
.003 Introduction: The frequency of IVF embryo aneuploidies is estimated to be 5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine patterns in human high and its occurrence is related to maternal and paternal factors. The main spermatogenic cells factor is female age, however paternal factor could play an important role, A. V. Tikhonov1,2, O. A. Efimova1,2, A. A. Pendina1,2, I. D. Fedorova2, S. E. Parfenyev1, A. S. mainly in patients with abnormal seminal parameters and chromosomal Koltsova1,2, T. V. Kuznetzova1,2, V. S. Baranov1,2; segregation. 1Saint Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2D.O.Ott Research Materials and Methods: We performed a retrospective observational study Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductology, St.Petersburg, Russian (from January 2013 to December 2015). For PGSv2.0 trophoectoderm geno- Federation. me was amplified and aCGH performed using Agilent SurePrintG3 8x60K. The association between variables and male age was evaluated by logistic regression and chi-square (SPSSv20.0). We aimed to study 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) and 5-methylcytosi- Results: The seminal parameters and sperm FISH from 428 patients (from ne (5mC) patterns in human spermatogenic cells. Samples were obtained 20 to 53 years old) were evaluated. 31% of the analysed patients had an by testicular biopsy of 15 patients diagnosed with azoospermia. Chromo- abnormal sperm FISH. No significant differences were reported for male age some and nuclei preparations were made by “direct” technique using hy- and abnormal FISH (p=0.166), however patients older than 50y showed a potonic (0.9% sodium citrate) and colchicines treatment and fixation with tendency to higher sperm aneuploidies (50.0% vs 30.5%, p=0.081). To show methanol:acetic acid, 3:1. Using indirect immunofluorescence, we have ana- the effect on embryo aneuploidy we analysed 155 blastocysts from 51 oo- lyzed the localization of 5hmC and its co-distribution with 5mC in the nuclei cytes from donor cycles where the male partner had a normal sperm FISH and chromosomes from spermatogenic cells. To visualize nuclei and to iden- in order to evaluate the effect of male age in embryo aneuploidies avoiding tify chromosomes, we used QFH/AcD-staining. To determine nucleus ploidy, the confounding effect of female factor and the abnormal FISH. The embryo we used FISH with two centromeric DNA-probes. aneuploidy rate was 26%. In these cycles no significant difference was re- 5mC was detected in all nuclei from both diploid and haploid cells and in ported between male age and embryo aneuploidy rate (p=0.787) in oocyte all chromosomes from both mitotic spermatogonia and meiotic spermato- donors. cytes. 5hmC showed a different pattern: it was present only in some nuclei Conclusions: Increased paternal age is not associated with sperm and em- and was totally absent in mitotic and meiotic chromosomes. By comparing bryos aneuploidies, therefore aging men do not have increased risk of pro- hydroxymethylation and FISH patterns in 5000 nuclei from each sample, we ducing chromosomally abnormal offspring. established that 5hmC was present in 32-52% of diploid nuclei from sper- matogonia and Sertoli cells. In contrast, among haploid nuclei from sperma-  P01
.006 tids, only 0.6-1.9% was hydroxymethylated. Novel mutations in the androgen receptor gene in four 46,XY females Thus, in contrast to 5mC, global 5hmC pattern changes during human sper- with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome matogenesis. The presence of 5hmC in a minor set of spermatids suggests H. Ilgin-Ruhi1, H. G. Karabulut1, Z. Siklar2, E. Gokpinar1, M. Gokoglu1, M. Berberoglu2, A. active demethylation of their genome. The fate of these hydroxymethylated Tukun1; 1Ankara University Medical Faculty,Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, spermatids during spermiogenesis is to be elucidated in further studies. 2Ankara University Medical Faculty,Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ankara, Supported by RFBR (16-34-00532_mol_a). Turkey.  P01
.004 Application of a-CGH for preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) in young women and patients of advanced maternal age Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (AIS) which is an X-linked disease, is one O. A. Yacuts, J. V. Tsukerman, A. B. Zhabinskaya, A. V. Aliakseyeva, O. L. Tishkevich; of the major cause of 46,XY disorders of sexual development (DSD). There Centre of assisted reproduction «Embryo», Minsk, Belarus. is variable phenotypic expession of the disease, and therefore it is classified into complete (CAIS), partial (PAIS) and mild (MAIS) AIS. Female appearence is characteristic finding for a complete resistance to androgen in an affected PGT was started in our center in 2012 with FISH diagnostics. In 2015 we be- person with a male karyotype. Here, we presented four cases with CAIS. gan applying array comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH) for preim- Case 1 is a 28-year-old infertile woman. Cases 2, 3 and 4 were evaluated due plantation screening and diagnostics. Indications for PGT included: advan- to primary amenorrhea, 17, 16 and 15 years old, respectively. Patients’ phy- ced maternal age (AMA) (>35), repeated implantation failure (>2), balanced sical examination revealed an apparently normal female phenotype. Routi- chromosome rearrangements. ne chromosomal analysis showed a 46,XY karyotype. All of them were SRY ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 53 Materials and Methods: We conducted 14 cycles, IVF+ICSI. Patients were di- (+) by FISH and were negative for Y chromosome microdeletions. ClinicalABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and laboratory investigation confirmed the patients’ diagnosis of CAIS. We in 12.5% of low responders, compared to 30.0% and 32.3% in intermedi- performed DNA sequencing analysis of all eight exons and respective exon- ate and high responders, respectively. High responders had significantly in- intron boundaries of the AR gene. The four novel mutations detected in the creased proportion of shorter CAG-RS and the difference of CAR-RS between AR gene were as follows: p.Y408* (c.1224T>A), p.Q68* (c.1314C>T) in exon alleles with low and higher CAG-RS repeats on both X chromosomes was 1 and p.D691E (c.2073C>A), p.G725R (c.3288G>C) in exon 4. To date, more significant (p<0.0001) between low and high responders. In addition, high than 1000 distinct mutations in the gene have been reported. We described responders with shorter CAG-RS were characterized by an association with two novel nonsense and two novel missense mutations. The identified mu- FSH/receptor gene polymorphisms -29 A/G and p.Asn680Ser, i.e. by an inte- tations provides further evidence for the correlation between genotype and grated genotype: AG / AsnAsn. phenotype corresponding to AIS. This study adds the number of AR gene Conclusion. Longer CAG-RS are linked to lower response to COH in asso- mutations identified so far. ciation with other FSH-R,LH-R and LH polymorphisms, including other ge- Refecence nes sensitive to the AR transactivation potential. Supported by 00064203, Mongan NP, et al. Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome. Best Pract Res Clin En- CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022 and NF-CZ11-PDP-3-003-2014 to MM. docrinol Metab, 2015; 29: 569-580.  P01
.009  P01
.007 A possible role of Androgen Receptor CAG/ GGN repeat The length of the CAG and GGN repeat stretches in the AR gene exert polymorphisms in therapeutic response of infertile men with independent and combinatorial effects on reproductive hormones Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism and sperm parameters A. Mohseni Meybodi1, M. Sabbaghian2, K. Farahmand1, V. Firouzi1, Z. Rokhsat Talab1, H. M. Grigorova1, M. Punab2, T. Kahre3, M. Ivandi3, N. Tõnisson3, O. Poolamets2, V. Vihljajev2, Hosseinifar2, M. Sadighi Gilani2, H. Gourabi1; B. Žilaitienė4, J. Erenpreiss5, V. Matulevičius4, M. Laan1; 1Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Andrology for reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR., Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of Unit, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Genetics, United Andrology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for reproductive Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Lithuanian University of Health Biomedicine, ACECR., Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. Sciences, Medical Academy, Institute of Endocrinology, Kaunas, Lithuania, 5Andrology Laboratory, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. Introduction: Male hypogonadism is a condition in which testicular func- tion harms and decreased synthesis of sex hormones and incomplete sperm Introduction: Androgen receptor (AR) is a transcription factor regulating production occurs.Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism(HH) affects the hypo- the expression of reproduction-related genes. We analysed independent thalamus and/or the pituitary gland, so secretion of gonadotropin releasing and combinatory effects of polymorphic CAG- and GGN-triplets within the hormone(GnRH) is absent or insufficient.HH may also result from isolated AR transactivation domain on reproductive parameters in the Baltic young lack of production or poor biosynthesis of pituitary gonadotropins.Accord- male cohort. ingly, these patients required Gonadotropin treatment by means of admin- Materials and Methods: Baltic young male cohort (n=974, 20±2.1 yrs, sperm istration of both FSH and β-HCG to have mature sperms in the ejaculate concentration 81.6±73.0 mln/mL); genotyping of CAG and GGN repeats by in order to reach fertility.Besides, testosterone is an androgenic hormone fragment analysis PCR; linear regression (CAG and GGN repeat lengths as which contributes directly to maintaining and promoting spermatogenesis. continuous variables), CAG and GGN trichotomised as short, intermediate, Given that the actions of Testosterone are mediated by its interaction with and long (i.e., CAG≤21, 22≤CAG≤24, CAG≥25; GGN≤22, GGN=23, GGN≥24), Androgen Receptor(AR),the aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of and treated as categorical variables for Wilcoxon rank-sum and Kruskal- CAG/GGN three nucleotides repeats expansion in AR gene on the effective- Wallis tests; tests for nine groups of the combinations of short (s), interme- ness of GnRH treatment. diate (i), and long (l) CAG and GGN repeats (i.e., lCAG-sGGN=long CAG-short Materials and Methods: Sixty-two HH subjects were subdivided according to GGN, etc.). their response to GnRH:31 HH men had positive and 31 HH men had nega- Results: The major findings of the study were: (1) Significant difference tive response to GnRH treatment.The numbers of CAG/GGN in first exon of in serum FSH among the carriers of ‘long-CAG’ (≥24 repeats; median 2.51 AR gene was analyzed using Hot Start PCR-Sequencing technique. IU/L) and ‘short-CAG’ variants (≤21 repeats, 2.92 IU/L; p=0.0007); (2) In- Results: The average of CAG repeats was statistically higher in patients who dependent associations of ‘short-CAG’ (71.6 mill/mL) and ‘short-GGN’ (68.4 had positive response in comparison with patients who hadn’t responded to mill/mL) stretches with the highest sperm concentration; (3) The lowest GnRH(p<0.05),but the incidence of GGN repeats were not statistically differ- sperm concentration (<51.8 mill/mL) among men with the ‘long-CAG’ and ent among these groups(p>0.05). ‘long-GGN’ combination; (4) A synergetic effect of ‘long-CAG’ and ‘short- Conclusion: The results of this study suggest that in contrast to GGN,the GGN’ on reduced total testosterone (18.8-19.1 vrs 25.5-28.6 nmol/L for length of AR gene CAG repeats polymorphism might affect the response to other variants). GnRH in HH men.Accordingly, it can be used as a predictive biomarker for Conclusions: Our results demonstrate for the first time that CAG and GGN response to GnRH in HH hormonal therapy. repeats in the AR gene affect male reproductive parameters in a combina-  P01
.010 torial way, and may have pharmacogenetic implications in modulating the Clinical implementation of a custom oligonucleotide array-CGH. outcome of hormonal therapy. Experience in a cohort of +2100 prenatal samples.  P01
.008 C. Hernando1, O. Villa1, N. Fornés1, S. Cano1, H. Mattlin1, M. Garcia1, L. Armengol1, L. A. Length of the androgen receptor CAG polymorphic repeat sequence Pérez-Jurado2; is associated with ovarian response to Elonva-controlled ovarian 1qGenomics Laboratory, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra- Unitat de Genètica, Barcelona, Spain. hyperstimulation M. Macek, Sr.1, G. Griesinger2, J. Chrudimska1, T. Lerman3, T. Borgbo4, H. Kluckova1, M. Macek Jr.1, C. Y. Andersen4; 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, Prague, Czech Introduction: The implementation of genomic array in prenatal diagnosis Republic, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kinderwunschzentrum, Luebeck, has demonstrated the ability of this technique to fulfil the longstanding need Germany, 3Department of Obsterics and Gynecology, Kinderwunschzentrum, Luebeck, for a diagnostic test with a higher resolution and higher diagnostic yield Germany, 4Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. than its predecessor, the conventional karyotype. Materials and methods: Array CGH analysis was performed prospectively in +2100 prenatal samples with indication for invasive testing, using a custom Introduction: Previously we have observed that “long” polymorphic CAG re- 60k oligonucleotide-microarray (qChip CM), enriched in pericentromeric, peat sequence (henceforward CAG-RS; 23-26x) of the androgene receptor subtelomeric and disease-associated genomic regions, in order to maximize gene (AR) are associated with significantly decreased intrafollicular fluid te- the detection of clinically relevant copy-number alterations and minimize stosterone levels, compared to “medium “(20-22x) and “short” (<20x) CAG- the detection of variants of unknown significance (VOUS). As a general rule, RS, as well as with higher conversion of testosterone into estradiol in small VOUS with no clear phenotypic effect (according to current knowledge) and antral follicles (PMID: 26404660). The aim of this study was to assess the some susceptibility variants were not reported. influence of the CAG-RS length on Elonva-controlled ovarian hyperstimula- Results: The genetic analysis of 2146 prenatal samples from different ori- tion (COH) in assisted reproduction. gins allowed us the identification of 151 pathogenic or probably pathoge- Materials and Methods: The prevalence of the three categories of CAG-RS nic alterations (7.03%) and 57 VOUS (2.65%). As expected, the greatest “length” was assessed in DNA samples from 48 “low”, 191 “intermediate” pathogenic detection rate (71,52%, 108/151) was found in fetuses with and 34 “high” responders by Sanger sequencing. R5es4ults: A significantly decreased prevalence oE fS “H shG or t2 ” 0 CA1 G6 - R| S B wA aR s C foE unL dO NuAlt,r SasPoAunIdN a |b WnorWmaWlit.iEesS. HReGga.OrdRinGg the VOUS detection, almost all of pa- rental analysis (when available) were inherited from a non-affected parentABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (88,46%, 23/26). b1/b3. It is known that the micro TESE outcomes as the surgical process for Conclusions: Our series demonstrates the utility of prenatal microarray sperm retrieval from the testis in infertile azoospermic men can be prede- testing, since it nearly doubles the diagnostic yield of conventional karyo- termined based on the type of AZF microdeletion. Present study was aimed typing (64/151 with CNVs <10Mb), without a significant increase in the fre- to evaluate the effect of partial AZFc microdeletions on micro TESE results. quency of VOUS. Based on this experience we highlight the importance of Materials and Method: 200 infertile azoospermic men referred to Royan pre-test and post-test counselling of couples who are offered prenatal array institute were evaluated for the presence of partial AZFc microdeletions be- analysis, and also to establish a fluid communication between the laborato- fore they undergo micro TESE. Partial AZFc microdeletions were examined ry and the clinicians for the discussion of possible findings. through multiplex PCR using seven different STS markers. Results: Among 90 patients (45%) with positive micro TESE results 9 (10%)  P01
.011 showed partial microdeletion in AZFc region. From 110 (55%) patients with Evaluation of the diagnostic performance of array CGH analysis in a negative micro TESE results 7 (6.3%) had AZC partial micro deletion. large cohort of prenatal samples in a public health service Conclusion: Among 200 patients 16 (8%) showed AZFc partial microdeleti- A. B. Lasierra, M. J. Alcaine, M. D. Miramar, A. Rodríguez, S. Izquierdo, J. I. González, D. Lerma; ons including 11 (5.5%) of gr/gr and 5 (2.5%) of b2/b3. Statistical analysis Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain. showed no significant difference on micro TESE results between the pati- ents with and without partial AZFc microdeletions. Introduction:  P01
.013 The application of array CGH (aCGH) in prenatal diagnostics Identification of Genetic Mutations Among Male Infertility Saudi enables the detection of submicroscopic copy number variants (CNVs) not Patients using Next Generation Sequencing panels detected by karyotyping that can be associated with clinically significant M. A. Al Balwi1,2, A. AlAbdulrahman2, M. Aldrees2, A. Alasiri2, M. Ballow2, F. AlSalman1, I. Mouattceormiaelss. Hanodw Meveetrh, iotsd uss:e in prenatal diagnosis is discussed and controver- AlAbdulkareem2; sial yet. We report the yield of prenatal aCGH test in a public clinical setting. 1King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Since 2014, our Genetics Service included aCGH in Arabia, 2King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Ministry of National prenatal genetic diagnosis routine, previous exclusion of common aneuplo- Guard Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. idy by QF-PCR/FISH and cytogenetic analysis performed concurrently on all samples tested. The criteria to realise aCGH was abnormal ultrasound scan findings (including NT> P99
) in the first or second trimester with normal Approximately half of male factor infertility cases have no known reasons in karyotype. A total of 1043 prenatal samples were analysed by conventional which genetic contribute up to 30% of Male infertility cases including chro- mReestuholtdss:: 881 amniotic fluid (AF) and 162 chorionic villi samplings (CVS). mosomal abnormality and chromosome Y microdeletion. Genetic expan- aCGH was performed in 192 AF and 31 CVS using qChip Pre (60K). sion testing should be considered for men who exhibited non-obstructive Conventional cytogenetics methods revealed chromosomal abnor- spermatogenic failure such as azoospermia or oligospermia. Here, genetic malities (aneuploidy, translocations, mosaicism…) in 89/881(10.1%) LA study were conducted on 130 patients whom diagnosed with azoospermia and 44/162(27.2%) CVS. By aCGH, clinically significant CNVs were observed or oligospermia and refereed from IVF and Urology clinics at King Abdula- in 5/192(2.6%) AF and 2/31(6.5%) CVS and variants of unclear significance ziz Medical City-Riyadh, Ministry of National Guard. Previously, we reported (VOUS) in 9/192(4.7%) AF and 3/31(9.7%) CVS. that about 21 patients (16%) of cases revealed presence of chromosomal C Cl ai sn eically sig A yn rg si efi cant CN WVs eeks Indication aCGH Parents study a ab ssn oo cr im ata el dit i wes a hn Yd 3 p ra ot mie on st os m(2 e.3 m% i) rh oa drb elo er ti in og (m Da Dle 3fa Yc t Dor a Zb 1n o Dr Am Za 2l ,i t Dy th Za 3t it ch c n X , A , A , US P9
Y genes). Incomplete AV 1 AF 32 16 c p sea r pn im ta al u, l mo ds e t a fi etu r cm i ta , l a 3r qr 2[ 6h (g 11 58 7] ,6 5q 32 35 ,1. 66-162,090,585)x1 dn K F aCIa S Gr Hy Ho t dy npe and W mae l ed e is ni fg en re tid li tin yf e ur st ii nli gty N p ea xn te l G o ef n 7 e2 ra g tie on ne s S b eqee un e nr ce ip no gr t te ed c ho nr o a loss go yc i aa pte pd ro w acit hh . hyperdense bowel Furthermore, about 81.5% (106 patients) of our cases still idiopathic were 2 3 A AF F 2 38 4 2 21 0. .5 0 S L I cn ok o t me n el g re mv t ba e uol n nd t ie r cy is as c tp < u iol lPa a n5s ri , a a 1 a 1r r9 8r r8 0[ [, ,h h8 6g g0 21 11 98 8, ,5 4] ] 0 13 50 2q q) )2 3x x9 51 1( .3 1 d d(9 n n17 7,2 82 ,74 2,7 35 ,54 8- 5- K F a K aC CIa aS G Gr rHy yH Ho o t td dy yn np pe e and s o Pc r Gr Me ne o nn m ee xd o t u l ges eci u nn l eg a r rt ah tai is n o a nd l e y ss esi i qg s un s ee t nd u c di in nief ge s r tt o ei f cl i ht my na op l lea o n gie n yl f ;s e W. r T t eo il i id t dya e t nie n t, i t fSh ya e sur ede vi a e Ar re ar lal i nbt i ot al ve . e Uk l n s mio n uw g - n 4 AF 33 14 N p veaT nt> h oP o s9 l uo9 sg, ical ductus a 1r 4r 6[ ,h 2g 91 08 ,8] 31 1q )2 x1 1.1 m(1 a4 t4,974,142- K aCa Gry Ho t myp ate t da yt i won es c, oS rN rP els a ten dd pin ad tie el ns a ’sn cd it nh ie ci ar f pr re eq su ee nn tc ay oam won itg o tu hr ip ra mtie un tats ti. In st h fii ns s it nu g- , a t l l ti n h e o n d 5 AF 17 26.2 N p d m anuaT et dc> gh t a cP uo ac9 sl yo r 9 v dsg, e t i i oic n sa mo , l Is eUu gGs a, R ly a 2 a 1r rq qr r1 1[ [3 3h h. .g g2 31 1( 38 84 (] ]2 5 2 2, 570 0 ,5 8q q9 51 1, 103 3 ,1 2. .1 33 1- 84 -9 6, 15 ,0 93 0, 05 ,8 89 2) 7x )1 x 3 Pending w  P0
it 1h .i 0n 1 t 5he 72 male infertility genes. 6 CVS 18 13 NT> P99
 and IUGR a 2r qr 3[ 3h (g 11 28 9] ,7 0q 93 82 ,0. 29-132,492,196)x1 dn a MC LG PH A dn MS- Severity of diseases in expanded carrier screening tests of Co7 nCV cS lusi3 o6 13.1 F we et ea kl sdeath at 13 a 1 Mr q or 3[ s7h a.g i3 c1 ( is8 9 m] 4 2 , 6 ~q 9 41 1 11 ,1 .. 86 %9-242,717,069)x2_3 Karyotype c L Co . iV nm i id cm am e a Inr r sc , tMi ita u. l V ep o l or k fo , MBv .i Pd de ie ctr e ars l Gin e; ns: l l t e l n etic, UMC Ljubljana, Slovenia, Ljubljana, Slovenia. The use of aCGH provides a 3.14%(7/223) incremental yield in prenatal cases with abnormal ultrasound scan findings and normal karyo- Introduction: As recently recommended by European Society of Human Ge- type. However, the frequency of VOUS detected was superior, 5.4%(12/223), netics and American College of Medical Genetics, expanded genetic carrier which complicates genetic counselling and increases parental anxiety provi- screening (EGCS) should be focused on severe childhood diseases. The aim ding doubts about pregnancy outcome. of our study was to evaluate and compare commercial providers of EGCS in  P01
.012 regard to severity of diseases included in their panels. Effects of partial AZFc microdeletions on micro TESE results in Methods: We selected four providers and srtetrieved information on their di- azoospermic infertile men sease panels from their websites on the 1 of February 2016. Disease seve- M. Zamanian1, M. Seddighi Gilani2, A. Miraghazdeh3, A. Ghaheri4; rity was determined using a recently published algorithm. 1Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute Results: The analyzed panels included from 75 to 255 diseases, while only for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of 29 diseases were screened by all four providers. Overall, providers screened Andrology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center,Royan Institute for Reproductive for 303 diseases of which 35% (range:37-40%) classified as profound, 28% Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Department of Molecular and (range:29-38%) as severe, 31% (range:19-28%) as moderate and 6% (ran- Cellular Sciences, Faculty of Advanced Sciences & Technology, Scince and research branch, Islamic Azad University, Islamic Azad Un., Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, ge:1-12%) as mild. The composition of panels regarding the severity of di- 4Department of Epidemiology and Reproductive Health, Reproductive Epidemiology seases differed significantly among the providers, mainly due to different Research Center, Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran, frequencies of mild diseases (p=0.008). Nevertheless, it should be noted Islamic Republic of. that the algorithm for disease classification had been designed based on medical professionals‘ opinions on disease severity, which might not neces- sarily reflect the lay public opinion. Introduction: Microdeletions of Yq chromosome are the most frequent Conclusions: Analyzed panels show great diversity in their composition and molecular genetic etiology for the male infertility which usually spans AZFa, size. The majority (68-75%) of diseases included in the panels were classi- AZFb and AZFc regions. Microdeletions are mostly seen in AZFc region and fied as either profound or severe, while relative frequency of mild diseases usually cover genes actively involved in spermatogenesis. Partial AZFc mi- differed significantly among the panels analyzed. crodeletion may also happen with vaEriSouHs Gsp 2an0s1 n6am | eBlyA gRr/CgrE, LbO2/Nb3A a,n Sd PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 55ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P01
.016 Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis experience in the Cukurova Region of Southern Turkey: detecting paternal mutations of sickle cell anemia on. Hence, a significant proportion(~17%) of fetal chromosomal abnormali- and β-thalassemia in cell-free fetal DNA using high resolution melting ties are not detectable by current cfDNA testing methods. To overcome these analysis limitations, NIPT should be extended to cover the entire genome. E. Dündar Yenilmez, A. Tuli, C. Evrüke; Here we present the results of the clinical validation of a novel NIPT de- Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey. signed to detect genome-wide fetal chromosomal abnormalities. A large blinded clinical study was performed, including cfDNA testing of maternal plasma, collected from pregnant women at increased risk for fetal chromo- Introduction This study used a high-resolution melting (HRM) technique to somal abnormalities undergoing invasive prenatal diagnosis. Performance detect paternal mutations for the noninvasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of was assessed by comparing test results with findings from G-band karyoty- β-thalassemia and sickle cell anemia (HbS). We also determined the levels of ping and/or microarray analysis. cell-free fetal DNA and total cell-free DNA. Among 1419 samples analyzed, there were 100 trisomy (T)21 samp- Materials and Methods We used the HRM technique for fetal genotyping les, 31 T18 samples, 14 T13 samples, 36 samples with sex chromosome of paternal mutations in maternal plasma from 32 pregnancies at risk of aneuploidies(SCAs) and 37 samples that had positive results for a varie- β-thalassemia and 57 pregnancies at risk of HbS. The DNA levels in maternal ty of CNV aberrations, including both sub-chromosomal copy number plasma were measured using real-time quantitative PCR. Multiples of the variants(CNVs) and whole chromosome trisomies. All euploid and chromo- median (MoM) values were calculated in women at risk for β-thalassemia somally abnormal samples were classified correctly by NIPT. Clinical sensi- or HbS. tivity and specificity within this study was determined to be 100% for T21, Results Twenty-two paternal mutations were detected in 89 pregnant wom- T18, T13, SCAs and genome-wide CNVs. en. Although we were successfully able to detect the paternal β-thalassemia This study has demonstrated that genome-wide non-invasive chromosomal mutations, the mutant HbS fetuses could not be distinguished from mater- assessment can provide sensitive and specific detection of common and nal background in the early weeks of pregnancy. The detection of DY S14
 in other aneuploidies, as well as a wide range of sub-chromosomal abnormali- male fetuses was 100%. The MoM values of women at high risk of having ties, analogous to what can be detected by cytogenetic G-band karyotyping HbS-affected fetuses were higher than those for the other groups. following invasive prenatal diagnosis.  P01
.019 Conclusion High-resolution melting is a useful method for NIPD of Clinical validation of the NeoBona test, a new paired-end MPSS β-thalassemias by detecting paternal mutations in the maternal plasma. approach for cfDNA based prenatal screening of common Cell-free fetal DNA quantification and MoM values were not informative for chromosome aneuploidies HbS or β-thalassemias in early pregnancy. V. Cirigliano, E. Ordoñez, L. Rueda, M. Grau, I. Castilla, M. P. Cañadas; References Labco Diagnostics, Barcelona, Spain. Weatherall DJ. The challenge of haemoglobinopathies in resource-poor countries. British J Haematol 2011;154:736–44. Lo YM, Corbetta N, Chamberlain PF, et al. Presence of fetal DNA in maternal Objective: To assess the performance of the NeoBona test, based on a novel p Pl 0a 1sm .0a 1 7and serum. Lancet 1997;350(9076):485–7. paired-end massive parallel shotgun sequencing (MPSS) approach for pre- Non-invasive prenatal testing for genome-wide detection of fetal copy natal aneuploidy screening using cell-free DNA (cfDNA) analysis in maternal number variants reveals aneuploidies in patients with repeated cell- blood. free DNA testing failures Methods: Retrospective study of 1730 plasma samples collected in the 1st S. Bono, F. Fiorentino, F. Pizzuti, A. Polverari, S. Duca, M. Faieta, A. Nuccitelli, M. Sessa, M. trimester (11-13 weeks) including 66 confirmed trisomies 21, 34 trisomies Baldi, L. Diano, F. Spinella; 18, 13 trisomies 13 and 8 sex chromosome aneuploidies. The NeoBona test GENOMA GROUP, Rome, Italy. was carried out blindly on 1 ml of plasma using paired-end MPSS and a novel bioinformatics approach generating a unique trisomy score for each chromosome, based on fetal fraction, counting statistics, size distribution A potential issue with the use of cell-free fetal DNA(cfDNA) testing as a uni- and sequencing depth. versal method of screening for aneuploidies, is the possibility of failure to Results: The NeoBona test provided valid results in 98,9% of cases. All tri- provide a result. This is relevant to comparisons with conventional scree- somies 21 and 13 were detected (100% sensitivity and specificity) as also ning, which rarely reports test failures. 33/34 trisomies 18. All 5 cases of 45,X and 3 with 47,XXY were also correct- Data from pregnant women with repeated quality control(QC) failures(i.e., ly identified without false positive results. Normal and aneuploid samples final analysis metrics do not meet internal QC standards) were retrospec- could be correctly scored even at low fetal fractions, in some cases below tively analysed using bioinformatics methods enabling genome-wide detec- 1%. tion of chromosomal copy number variations, in order to ascertain if such Conclusions: Paired-end MPSS allowed simultaneous assessment of fetal failures are caused by biological factors. fraction, size distribution and chromosome counting which, integrated into Of the 11.584 samples analysed, 12(0.1%) did not returned a result because a new analysis algorithm allowed the NeoBona test to be successful on a of a quality metrics failure. In 9 of these samples a single trisomy(T) was high proportion of samples. Setting analysis cutoffs at the new multifactorial identified, whereas the remaining 3 samples showed a double trisomy, one Tscore as evaluated in the course of this study, resulted in high specificity, of which involving chromosome 21(T2+T21). Pregnancy follow-up at birth while also eliminating the need of a lower limit for FF at 4%, thus potentially revealed five chromosomal abnormalities that have been overlooked: three extending the benefits of cfDNA analysis to a larger proportion of pregnan- cases of fetal mosaicism, one case of UPD15, and one case of T21. All the cies.  P01
.020 other pregnancies resulted in a normal karyotype, suggesting confined pla- Development of a high throughput workflow for genotyping CFTR cental mosaicism occurrences. A retrospective analysis of the 11.572 preg- mutations nancies with a normal result for common aneuploidies revealed further T. Hartshorne, J. Lang, E. Swartzman, P. Brzoska, D. de Castro, G. Chow, L. Tracy; 22(0.2%) samples with a single trisomy. Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States. These results demonstrate that aneuploidies other than T21, T18, T13 and sex chromosome aneuploidies, might represent a biological cause of repea- ted QC failures. cfDNA testing for genome-wide detection of fetal chromoso- Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive genetic disease caused by mu- mal abnormalities has demonstrated a useful tool to reduce the incidence of tations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) test failures and to improve prenatal management, obtaining comprehensi- gene. CF is the most common genetic disease of Caucasians, affecting 1 in ve information about the genetic makeup of the fetus.  P01
.018 3000 newborns. To facilitate CFTR genotype analysis, we developed a panel Clinical validation of a non-invasive prenatal test for genome-wide of 200 TaqMan™ SNP Genotyping Assays to specific CF-causing mutations detection of fetal chromosomal abnormalities and a high throughput CFTR genotyping workflow. CFTR mutations were F. Fiorentino, S. Bono, F. Pizzuti, A. Polverari, S. Duca, A. Nuccitelli, M. Sessa, M. Baldi, L. selected for TaqMan™ assay development from the CFTR1 and CFTR2 da- Diano, F. Spinella; tabases based on population frequency and predicted functional activity. Genoma Group, ROME, Italy. Mutations include single nucleotide polymorphisms, small insertion dele- tions, large deletions, repetitive sequences, and triallelic polymorphisms. The diverse nature of the mutations presented challenges to developing Current non-invasive prenatal testing(NIPT) approaches, based on analysis assays that used a single chemistry and that could be run together on one of cell-free fetal DNA (cfDNA), involve screening only for common fetal aneu- platform. TaqMan SNP assays were initially tested on both 384-well and ploidies. Such level of screening allows identification of ~83% of chromoso- OpenArray™ (3072-well) plates, run on a real-time PCR system, with Coriell m5a6l abnormalities detected by karyotyping in aE gS eH neG ra 2 l s0 cr1 e6 en | i nB gA poR pC ulE aL tiO - N cA e, ll S liP nA e gIN DN | A W saW mpW le. sE cS aH rryG in.O g CR FG TR mutations. As CFTR mutations areABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index rare and control gDNAs are not always available, assays were also tested We conclude that although CGH-array is an increasing, powerful analysis for with synthetic DNA controls representing all three genotypes per variant to prenatal diagnosis procedures, conventional karyotyping is still useful to as- ensure robust allelic discrimination. Any assays that underperformed were certain specific chromosomal rearrangements. redesigned to produce sufficiently robust assays. CFTR assays were addi-  P01
.023 tionally tested with DNA isolated from blood and buccal cell samples, and Counseling for variants of uncertain significance (VOUS) in the setting assay accuracy and concordance studies were performed. We present here of prenatal diagnosis our development of a complete sample-to-data analysis workflow for high A. Bar-Shira1, D. Brabbing-Goldstein2, I. Kaplan-Ber1, D. Barel1, H. Kolog1, T. Naiman1, S. throughput CFTR mutation detection, and provide example assay data and Simchoni1, A. Orr-Urtreger1,3, Y. Yaron1,3, A. Reches1,2; analysis methods for difficult targets such as the 5T/7T/9T polymorphism. 1Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Sackler Faculty of Medicine,  P01
.021 Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Implementation of NGS methodology in prenatal testing of Cystic Fibrosis: a diagnostic tool upgrading the quality of genetic services. V. Papanikolaou1, V. Maroulis1, E. Darmani2, M. Vergi3, V. Georgiou3, M. Papadakis1; Introduction: The increased sensitivity of chromosomal microarray (CMA) 1EUROGENETICA SA, Athens, Greece, 2EUROGENETICA SA, Thessaloniki, Greece, technology allows for improved detection of genomic alterations. Conse- 3Woman‘s Health, Athens, Greece. quently CMA is now recommended as a first-tier test for evaluating multip- le anomalies in the fetus. This technology has been embraced by low risk pregnant women in order to gain as much information about their fetus as Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a life-threatening genetic disorder as- possible. While there is an expected increase in the detection yield, there is sociated with mutations within the CFTR [cystic fibrosis transmembrane also an increased risk of detecting VOUSs. conductance regulator (ATP-binding cassette sub-family C, member 7)] Objectives: We describe our results within the unique setting of prenatal gene. Although >90% of CFTR mutations have already been identified, the counseling, often complicated by the unknown phenotype and the paucity severity of the disease, the absence of an effective treatment, and the great of information available. heterogeneity of mutations, raise the need for a more effective molecular Results: A total of 750 prenatal samples were processed using CMA. The in- characterization of CF mutations, especially in prenatal diagnosis. dications for prenatal testing included: maternal age, abnormal ultrasound Materials and Methods: We validated this approach in a cohort of 298 samp- findings, family history and parental request. Clinical implication of detec- les, the majority of participants were pregnant women or couples during ted CNV‘s was determined based on local guidelines and those described screening. Sampling is ongoing. Genomic DNA was amplified using the Ion in the literature. Of samples tested, 32 (4%) were pathogenic variants, 6 AmpliSeq™ CFTR panel. DNA libraries were pooled, barcoded, and sequen- (0.8%) were designated as likdeel yn opvaothogenic, and 55 (7.3%) were designa- ced using an Ion Torrent PGM sequencer. ted as VOUSs. Parental testing was done in some cases to determine whether Results: The NGS method helped identifying among known mutations and the finding was inherited or . All results were discussed in genetic polymorphisms, 54 rare variants, each found in just 1/298 samples. Among counseling. them, 27 are known as pathogenic or causing mild symptoms or CBAVD and Conclusion: Physicians and patients alike crave certainty. However, CMA 8 are known to be non-pathogenic. We identified 19 new variants, not in- testing often lead to the detection of VOUS, which may be associated with cluded in the known CF mutation databases. These variants, of unknown a variable phenotype, reduced expressivity and incomplete penetrance. In clinical significance include c.164+18G>A, c.164+1457 delT, p.Leu541Pro, such cases, expectant parents are often confused and perplexed. In our ex- p.Tyr577Cys, p.Glu826Lys, p.Asp836Tyr, pVal1212Phe, p.Gln1476Glu, perience, proper genetic counseling may alleviate parental anxiety and avo- c.*325A>G. id undue termination of a clinically unaffected fetus. Conclusions: The next-generation sequencing technology, fast and cost-ef-  P01
.024 fective, applied to the analysis of the CFTR gene on a larger scale of samples Increased chromosome 16 disomy rates in human spermatozoa and should allow a better identification of unknown variants and should be pro- recurrent spontaneous abortions ven a useful tool for the update of the existing mutation databases and the M. Neusser1, N. Rogenhofer2, S. Dürl1, R. Ochsenkühn3, M. Trottmann4, V. Jurinovic5, O. improvement of genetic counseling. Steinlein1, V. von Schönfeldt2, C. J. Thaler2, S. Müller1;  P01
.022 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, CGH-array and karyotyping analysis. Comparison in selected cases of Munich, Germany, 2Division of Gynecological Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, prenatal diagnosis. Germany, 3Center for Reproductive Medicine, Munich, Germany, 4Department of Urology, M. Costa1, M. Aviles2, S. Arévalo3, L. Espi1, L. Trobo1, E. Garcia-Arumi1,4, E. Tizzano1,4, C. Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 5Institute for Medical Informatics, Mediano1; Biometry and Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. 1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and rare Disease Unit. Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Unitat Diagnòstic Prenatal. Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Unitat de Medicina Fetal. Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBERER. Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: Fetal aneuploidy caused by maternal meiotic chromosome se- gregation errors is an established cause of pregnancy loss. We investigated whether unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortions (RSA) are also asso- CGH-array has had a major impact on genetic diagnosis over the last years. ciated with increased rates of aneuploidy in spermatozoa of RSA-partners Comparing with conventional karyotyping, CGH-array offers higher re- (“RSA males”). solution and faster results, which makes it the first approach for most of Materials and Methods: Sperm samples of eleven “RSA males” were evalu- postnatal cases as well as selected prenatal diagnosis referral indications. ated for elevated diploidy and disomy levels of chromosomes 1-22, X and Y However, conventional karyotyping should still be considered as a valuable by multicolour “sperm-FISH”. tool to confirm a number of CGH-array pathological results or to elucidate Results: Compared with base-line aneuploidy rates in healthy males, signi- the ethiological origin of some pathological findings for accurate genetic as- ficantly elevated mean disomy rates (p≤0.05) were observed for chromo- sessment. somes 1, 2 and 16, while chromosomes 3, 7, 8, 14, 17 and X were inconspi- Our Service in a public tertiary Hospital routinely offers QF-PCR and karyo- cuous in all eleven patients. We observed increased disomy rates for at least type to all prenatal invasive tests. From 2012 onward, CGH-array has been three chromosomes in more than 60% of our patients, but no significant progressively introduced to selected cases, such as fetal ultrasound abnor- increase of the overall mean sperm disomy or diploidy rate. Importantly, malities and genetic family history. meiotic errors involving chromosome 16 contributed to increased sperm A total of 534 CGH-array prenatal cases were performed including amnio- disomy in 7/11 of our patients. centesis (n=443) and chorionic (n=91) samples employing a 60 K custom Conclusions: The high relative contribution of maternal disomy 16 to aneu- oligonucleotide-based CGH-array (qChip Pre v1.1 Complete), that allows ploidy related fetal loss is well established. Our data suggest that among pa- a resolution of 100-125 Kb in regions causing genomic disorders. Results ternal meiotic errors nondisjunction of chromosome 16 might have similar were obtained at an average time of 7 days. relative influence on fetal aneuploidy. Our findings argue against using the Pathologic results were detected in 40 cases (7.5%) 19 of which (47.5%) “standard clinical FISH probe set” 13/18/21/X/Y in “RSA males”, because were confirmed by karyotype. Three different categories of cytogenetic as- aneuploidy of chromosome 1, 2, and 16, and probably also 6, 15 and 21 ap- certained abnormalities were defined: those that were surely detected by pear to be prevalent in spermatozoa from this particular group of patients, karyotype (n=10), those that were detected due to the CGH-array pathologic and chromosome 16 appears to be the most promising biomarker for dia- result (n=8) that included unexpected possible inherited translocations, and gnostic and prognostic objects in RSA patients. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 57 rare findings (n=1) that was defined as a ring of chromosome 15.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P01
.025 De novo mutations in autosomal recessive congenital malformation H. A. Black1, D. Parry1, S. S. Atanur1, D. Ross1, E. Rose1, H. Russell2, S. Stock3, J. Warner4, M. Background: Chromosomal microarray (CMA) testing is widely used in Porteous4, T. Aitman1, M. J. Evans5; prenatal and postnatal setting. Penetrance of many copy-number variants 1Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, Institute of Genetics and Molecular (CNVs) is incomplete; this poses challenges for genetic counseling. The pur- Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2NHS Fife Fetal Medicine pose of our study was to compare the prevalence of 20 known recurrent Unit, Victoria Hospital, Kirkcaldy, United Kingdom, 3Tommy’s Centre for Maternal and pathogenic CNVs in prenatal and postnatal cohort. Fetal Health, MRC University of Edinburgh Centre for Reproductive Health, Edinburgh, Methods: During 2010-2016 our clinical hospital-based laboratory perfor- United Kingdom, 4South East of Scotland Clinical Genetics Service, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 5Department of Pathology, NHS Lothian, med 8500 tests on index low-risk prenatal samples (3600), fetuses with Edinburgh, United Kingdom. congenital malformations (2750) and postnatal samples (2150). Recurrent pathogenic CNVs were classified as high-penetrance (>40%; 8 CNVs), mode- rate-penetrance (10-40%; 8 CNVs) and low-penetrance (<10%; 4 CNVs). We Rare developmental disorders are genetically heterogeneous. Genetic te- calculated the prevalence of these CNVs in: I) normal fetuses, II) fetuses with sting following a termination of pregnancy, on account of congenital abnor- malformations, III) individuals with developmental disabilities/congenital malities, often fails to make a molecular diagnosis. In such circumstances, malformations. the recurrence risk for future pregnancies is based on the phenotype alone. Results: CNVs were detected in 2% of prenatal samples (139/6350) and 6% For a suspected autosomal recessive syndrome, the risk to future pregnan- (125/2150) of postnatal samples. Prevalence of high-penetrance CNVs was cies would be reported as 25%, assuming inheritance of one causative allele 0.3% in group I, 0.6% in group II and 2.4% in group III and of moderate- from each parent. We report here results from trio-based exome sequen- penetrance CNVs 0.5% in group I and II and 1.2% in group III. Prevalence of cing of two unrelatdeed n foevtuo ses, each with a suspected recessively-inherited low-penetrance CNVs was similar in all groups - e.g for 15q11 microdeletion developmental disorder, within a larger series of nine trios. In both fetuses, (NIPA1) it was 0.7% in all groups. a combination of a loss of function mutation on one parental haplo- Conclusions: We show that the prevalence of low-penetrance CNVs is simi- type and an inherited loss of function variant on the other parentaDl he anpolvoo- lar in low-risk prenatal and in postnatal cohort, pointing that these CNVs type were identified, respectively, as the cause of the recessively-inherited may have a minor contribution to the overall heritability of developmental developmental disorders, Ellis-van Creveld and Fraser syndromes. disorders. Information on prevalence for different pathogenic CNVs, espe- mutation has only rarely been repodrete ndo avos a contributory cause of recessive cially as it pertains to diagnostic yield in genetic testing, should be useful to disease, but it markedly reduces the recurrence risk for future pregnancies. clinicians considering chromosomal microarray analysis in fetuses with and Our results suggest that causative mutations may contribute to the w  P0
it 1h .o 0u 2t 9 structural anomalies cause of autosomal recessive disease more frequently than has been consi- Offspring of a male 45,XY,der(22;22)(q10;q10) carrier dered hitherto. F. van Erp; Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.  P01
.026 RYR1 related congenital myopathy in two sib fetuses conceived through artificial insemination with donor sperm (AID) M. Romagnoli, E. Pompilii, F. Palombo, E. Bonora, M. Seri; Introduction: In about 5% of the couples with multiple miscarriages a ba- Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, lanced chromosomal aberrations in one of the partners is detected. Italy. Case: In our case, father is carrier of a der(22;22)(q10;q10) and as such can produce gametes with either two chromosomes 22 or none, both leading to a miscarriage due to a trisomy or a monosomy 22, respectively. The couple RYR1-related congenital myopathies present clinical, histological, and ge- had had two miscarriages, however, they also had a healthy son who showed netic heterogeneity: a subset of patients has an antenatal onset form of the a 46,XY karyotype. This might indicate UPD22mat or the presence of a nor- disorder, characterized during pregnancy by decreased fetal movements, mal 46,XY cell line in the gametes of our patient.Results: Paternity testing polyhydramnios and arthrogryposis. confirmed that our patient indeed was the father. To look for a mosaicism We present a case of two sib fetuses, affected by antenatal onset myopathy, with a normal cell line, karyotyping of a skin biopsy was performed and conceived through artificial insemination with donor sperm. The first sib showed also in al cells a der(22;22). In buccal cells no normal cell line was presented a NT of 7,76 mm at combined first trimester screening test. At found either, ,. 12+0 gestational week, ultrasound examination revealed large nuchal sep- The question is whether the children have a maternal UPD22. In literature tated cystic hygromas, mild ascitic effusion, absent fetal movements, con- 4 cases have been described of a UPD22, all as a result of a trisomy rescue tracted limbs and club feet. No cardiac or encephalic malformations were mechanism and never a monosomy rescue. No cases of multiple children detected and biometric parameters were normal. The pregnancy was termi- with UPD22 in one familiy have been reported as yet. nated. Karyotype formula was 46,XY. Testing for myotonic dystrophy (DM1) Conclusion: Normally we tell carriers of a der(22;22)(q10;q10) that they was negative. can not have biological children. Our case show that this isn’t always true. In the second pregnancy, conceived by the same biological parents, first tri- Two explanations therefore could be: there is a normal cell line present in mester ultrasound examination demonstrated comparable clinical features the gametes of the father leading to normal sperm cells, or the healthy child- (cystic hygromas, absent fetal movements and contracted limbs) and the ren have a maternal UPD22. These studies are ongoing. pregnancy was terminated. Karyotype formula was 46,XX. Exome sequen-  P01
.030 cing performed on the second fetus revealed a compound heterozygosity Discordant genotypic sex and concordant phenotypes in two Spanish for two novel mutations in RYR1: a frameshift mutation (g.38951153CG>C) siblings with 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency carrying the and a splice acceptor site mutation (g.39019237G>A). Sanger sequencing most prevalent mutated alleles in Brazilian patients confirmed these mutations and the healthy mother resulted heterozygous M. Fernández-Cancio1, L. Audí1, E. García-García2, I. J. Arnhold3, B. B. Mendonça3, E. carrier of g.39019237G>A. Both variants are predicted to be pathogenetic García-Arumí4, E. F. Tizzano4, A. Carrascosa1; and clinical findings are suggestive of a RYR1-related congenital myopathy. 1Paediatric Endocrinology Unit, Vall d’Hebron Research Institute and Hospital, CIBERER, However, co-segregation studies in the first fetus are needed. Autonomous University, Barcelona, Spain, 2Paediatric Service, Hospital Virgen del Rocío, This clinical case confirms the great diagnostic power of whole exome se- Sevilla, Spain, 3Division of Endocrinology, Hospital das Clinicas of the University of Sao quencing in autosomal recessive disorders and exemplifies the hard challen- Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 4Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Disease Unit, Hospital Vall d´Hebron and CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain. ge of gamete donors’ selection process related to ultra-rare diseases.  P01
.027 CY P17
A1 Estimation of frequencies of 20 known recurrent pathogenic CNVs in Introduction: 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency is a rare form of con- prenatal and postnatal settings genital adrenal hyperplasia caused by mutations in , characterized I. Maya1, L. Basel-Vanagaite1,2,3, M. Shohat4, J. Jeshaaya1, S. Kahana1, T. Tene5, L. Cohen Pbya trieednutcst iaonnd o fM aentdhroodgse:ns, estrogens and cortisol production and mineralo- Vig6, S. Jakobson1, I. Fishman1; corticoid excess. 1Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Campus, Petah Two sisters, phenotypic females, aged 17 and 15, Tikva, Israel, 2The Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University., Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 4The the oldest with 46,XY and the youngest with 46,XX karyotypes, presented Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, tEL aVIV, Israel, 5Genetics Institute, Meir with primary amenorrhea and absent secondary sexual characteristics; the Medical Center, Kfar-Saba, Israel, 6Schneider Children‘s Medical Center of Israel, Petah eldest presented elevated blood pressure. Both had elevated levels of ACTH, Tikva, Israel. gonadotropins, progesterone, corticosterone and deoxycorticosterone, and reduced estradiol, testosterone, androstendione, 17-OH-P, DHEA-S, cortisol, 58 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONaAld, oSsPteAroInNe a| nWd WrenWin .aEcStiHvitGy. .SOanRgGer sequencing was performed to detectABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CY P17
A1 Results: variants/mutations in gene. were determined in DMRT1 gene and rs915034 in NR5A1 gene. Exon analy- Mutational analysis showed that the two sisters were compound sis of one 46,XX SRY-negative male and two 46,XY SRY-positive females are heterozygotes for p.Arg362Cys and Trp406Arg mutations, previously de- in progress. The project “Genetics of Human Disorders of Sexual Develop- scribed as the most prevalent mutations in Brazilian families of Spanish ment” is funded by Swiss National Science Foundation. (p.Trp406Arg) or PorCtYuPgu1e7sAe1 (p.Arg362Cys) descent. The present siblings  P01
.033 were born from parents with origins near Sevilla (Spain). The analysis of Ten-year trends in prevalence of Down syndrome in a developing 8 polymorphisms in in this family and in two Brazilian families, country: impact of the maternal age and prenatal screening homozygote for each of the mutations, suggested that paternal allele with A. Kurtovic-Kozaric1, L. Mehinovic1, R. Malesevic2, S. Mesanovic3, M. Stomornjak- p.Arg362Cys may have a common origin with the Brazilian carriers while Vukadin1, M. Mackic-Djurovic4, M. Peric3, I. Kurtovic-Basic1, M. Kozaric1; the maternal allele p.Trp406Arg did not. 1Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, The clinical and biochemical phenotypes agree with a complete lack of com- 2University Clinical Center Banja Luka, Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 3University bined 17a-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase activities. Estrogen therapy and hydro- Clinical Center Tuzla, Tuzla, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 4Medical Faculty, University of cCoornticslounseio wnesr:e given in both caCsYePs1 a7nAd1 gonadectomy was performed in the Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. oldest. Mutations in should be investigated in pati- ents with mineralocorticoid excess and deficiency of cortisol, andro- This study examines trends in total and live birth prevalence of trisomy 21 gens and estrogens. Regardless of genotypic sex, patients with combined with regard to increasing maternal age and the introduction of prenatal dia- 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency are treated with glucocorticoids gnosis in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The postnatal detection of trisomy 21 and estradiol. has been available since 2005 and prenatal detection since 2008. All centers that diagnose DS prenatally and postnatally in the period from January 01,  P01
.031 2005 to December 31, 2015 were included. In this study, 93 fetuses and 329 A novel NIPT approach based on the methylation differences between babies were diagnosed in the 10-year period. On average, each year 33 DS maternal and fetal DNA individuals were born and 13 DS fetuses were diagnosed prenatally. The cal- A. Keravnou1, E. Papageorgiou1,2, E. Kypri1,2, K. Tsangaras2, A. Achilleos2, P. Mina2, C. culated incidence for the live born DS individuals in Bosnia and Herzegovina Loizides1, M. Ioannides2, G. Koumbaris1,2, P. C. Patsalis1,2; 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2NIPD Genetics Ltd, is 1:999. Between 2005 and 2015, the LB prevalence of T21 was 9.6 per Nicosia, Cyprus. 10000 births (range 6.3-12.3) and the total prevalence of T21 was 19.1 per 10000 births (range 10.8-25.0). The T21 prevalence per 10000 births in- creases exponentially with the advanced maternal age. Prenatal prevalence Introduction: DNA methylation has been shown to influence tissue specific per 10000 births is ~1 for mothers younger than 35, but increases expo- gene expression and differentiation. Taking advantage of tissue-specific me- nentially with advanced maternal age (32 for mothers older than 40 years). thylation patterns, several groups focused their work on the identification The most common indications for invasive prenatal testing were obstetric of fetal-specific markers based on the methylation differences between ma- ultrasound screening combined with biochemical serum analysis followed ternal and fetal DNA for the development of non-invasive prenatal testing by the advanced maternal age. There was an increase in total T21 preva- (NIPT) for fetal aneuploidies. lence, mainly explained by increasing maternal age. Live birth prevalence Materials and Methods: Initially, MeDIP-NGS was applied to characterize r Pe 0m 1a .0in 3e 4d stable over time even after the introduction of prenatal diagnosis. DNA methylation differences between 3 chorionic villus samples (CVS), 3 Differentially expressed miRNAs between normal and trisomy-21 female peripheral blood (WBF) samples and 2 plasma samples. A subset placenta - their potential involvement in Down syndrome pregnancy of differentially methylated regions (DMRs) was confirmed using MeDIP pathologies in combination with a targeted enrichment method followed by NGS. Fur- I. Svobodová1, P. Calda2, M. Brestak3, M. Korabecna1, E. Pazourkova1, S. Pospisilova1, M. thermore, the inter-individual methylation variability of the selected DMRs Krkavcova4, M. Novotna2, A. Horinek1; was investigated and the classification efficiency of the method was verified 1General faculty hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Department of Obstetrics using normal and trisomy-21 spike-in samples. Finally, normal and aneuplo- and Gynecology of the First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Screening center of Prague, id pregnancies (n=32) were used for the detection of fetal aneuploidies (26 Prague, Czech Republic, 4GENVIA genetic laboratories, Prague, Czech Republic. normal, 4 T21, 1 T18, 1 T13). Results: Initially, based on specific selection-criteria 331 hypermethylated- 1fe6tal-specific DMRs were selected and confirmed in 24 samples (p<2x10 Background: The Down syndrome (DS) etiology is still unknown. However, ). Twenty-nine CVS and twenty-eight plasma samples were used to assess all data suggest that the mechanism is more complex than previously sup- inter-individual methylation variability. Trisomy-21 spike-in samples were posed. Epigenetic mechanisms, including miRNAs gene expression regulati- detected with the z-scores increasing as spiked-in percentage increased. Fi- on, are one of potential influencing factors. The aim of this study was to com- nally, this method exhibited 100% sensitivity and specificity for all normal, pare miRNAs expressions in placentas with normal and trisomic karyotype trisomy-21 and trisomy-18 cases. The trisomy-13 case was marginally be- and to associate differentially expressed miRNAs with concrete biological low threshold. pathways. Conclusions: Results show that this approach can potentially be used for the Materials and Methods: In the pilot study, 754 miRNAs were profiled in 30 enrichment of fetal DNA in maternal plasma and the development of a novel chorionic villi samples (CVS) - 14 normal and 16 DS, using real-time PCR NIPT method for fetal aneuploidies. technology and TaqMan Human miRNA Array Cards A and B. Twelve diffe- Funded by ERC-Advanced Grant-322953–NIPD rently expressed miRNAs between compared groups of samples were va-  P01
.032 lidated on 50 independent samples (25 normal and 25 DS) using TaqMan Genetical study of patients with DSD from Ukraine miRNA Assays. The Mann-Whitney test with a cutoff p-value < 0.05 was L. Livshits1, S. Chernushyn1, S. Kravchenko1, G. Livshyts1, V. Pampukha1, L. Tavokina2, A. used for results evaluation. Functional annotation and diseases association Brovko2; of selected miRNAs were performed using several web-based software tools 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine, 2ISIDA-IVF, Kiev, Ukraine. (miRWalk, DAVID, WebGestalt). Results: Eight miRNAs were verified as upregulated in DS placentas; three of these miRNAs are located on chromosome 21 (miR-99a, miR-125b and Disorders of sexual development (DSD) are a very important clinical issue let-7c). Many biological pathways associated with DS complications, as with its different aspects relating to diagnosis, treatment and sex of rearing. neurodegenerative diseases, leukemia, transcriptional regulation or apo- The classification of ambiguous genitalia in patients is difficult because si- ptosis, were identified to be potentially disrupted. Moreover, miRNAs ove- milar or identical phenotypes may have several aetiologies. In one of every rexpressed in DS placenta apparently regulates genes crucial for placenta 4500 births, the genital appearance is abnormal and it is not possible to de- development (GJA1, CDH11, EGF, ERVW-1, ERVFRD-1, LEP or INHA). cide at first glance the sex of the infant. To study the genetical aspects of DSD Conclusion: Our findings suggest possible participation of miRNAs in etiolo- we have collected a cohort of 37 patients with different DSD phenotypes. gy of Down syndrome including DS placenta ectopic development. Using GTG-banded chromosome analysis we identified 4 46,XX males and Supported by the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic RVO VFN64165. 32 46,XY females. The karyotype of one male was 45,Х+mar. After PCR and FISH analysis of SRY gene location there of four 46,XX males were determi- ned as SRY-positive with Xp;Yp translocations and two 46,XY females were SRY-negative. Rest of 46,XY female results of Sanger sequencing reviled that SRY gene was intact. rs279895, rs376 E0
S62 H3G02 ,2 r0s513613 
|6  B46A7R7,C rs
E2 L0
O04N23A5,4  S5
 PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 59ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P01
.035 Polygenic profiles for predicting risk of early menopause T. Laisk-Podar1,2, A. Salumets1,2, R. Mägi3; carried chromosomal aberrations. There were no significant differences 1Women‘s Clinic, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Competence Centre on Health found in the prevalence of abnormalities or the types of aberrations bet- Technologies, Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, ween the groups. The most common chromosomal abnormalities were ba- Estonia. lanced translocations. Additionally no differences were found in the preva- lence of aberrations between the genders. The statistical analysis was done using χ2-test (p<0,05). Introduction. Reproductive aging impacts female fertility and health, and involves a considerable genetic component as evidenced by recent genome- The results of karyotype assessment in patients with fertility disorders wide association studies (GWAS). Currently, no genetic markers are used Infertility IVF failure Miscarriages for predicting menopausal age. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 3698 patients 264 patients 577 patients applicability of polygenic risk scores (PRS) to predict the risk for early me- number % number % number % nopause (before age 45). Translocations 40 1,08% 4 1,51% 8 1,39% Genosomal mosaics 30 0,81% 1 0,38% 7 1,21% Material and methods. PRS were generated using the publicly available Numerical ReproGen consortium menopausal age GWAS meta-analysis summary sta- aberrations of 17 0,46% 0 0,00% 1 0,17% genosomes tistics including data for 2.4 million markers and involving approximately Inversions 7 0,19% 1 0,38% 0 0,00% 70,000 women. Correlation between PRS and menopausal age was tested Other 4 0,11% 1 0,38% 0 0,00% among 3,189 post-menopausal women in the Estonian Biobank. Receiver Deletions 3 0,08% 0 0,00% 0 0,00% operating characteristic (ROC) curves were generated to evaluate the pre- Other mosaics 2 0,05% 0 0,00% 0 0,00% dictive value of PRS for discriminating women with early menopause. Results. Polygenic risk profiles generated using different marker cut-offs Conclusions: This study shows 3,5-fold times higher frequency of chrodmoeos- were significantly correlated with age at natural menopause (p<0.05). The somal abnormalities in patients with fertility disorders in comparison to the same profiles were a good predictor of early menopause (AUC up to 0.70), general population. Since the exact reason for referral or the gender outperforming the predictive value of smoking status (AUC=0.55), which is not influence the prevalence of aberrations, all patients with reproductive one of the most important lifestyle factors affecting menopausal age. When disorders should be referred for karyotype assessment. It must be noted the extremes of the PRS were compared, up to 9-fold difference in risk for that balanced translocations can not be distinguished with any other cur- early menopause was observed. rently used diagnostic method. Conclusion. Polygenic risk profiles show considerable discriminative power  P01
.039 for detecting women at risk of early menopause and have the potential to A non-invasive bioinformatic method for the analysis of fetal become a valuable tool to increase the accuracy of ovarian reserve assess- aneuploidies in maternal blood by NGS ment, leading to more personalized counselling regarding family planning K. Ibáñez1, D. Prieto2,3, J. Silla-Castro1, V. F. Montaño4, E. Vallespín4,3, P. Lapunzina5,3, E. a Pn 0d 1 .p 0a 3ti 6ent management. Mansilla2,3, M. Mori2,3, R. Rodríguez6, Á. Del Pozo1,3, F. García-Santiago2,3; 1Bioinformatics Section, Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), miR-346 and miR-582-3p regulate EG-VEGF-induced cell invasion and Madrid, Spain, 2Cytogenetics Section. Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics migration through repressing matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9 in (INGEMM). Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3Centro de Investigaciones trophoblast cells. Biomédicas en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 4Structural and M. Su; Functional Genomics section.Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM). Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng-Kung University Hospital, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 5Institute of Medical and Molecular Tainan, Taiwan. Genetics (INGEMM), Madrid, Spain, 6Department of Gynecology & Obstetrics. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding small RNAs emerging as posttran- scriptional regulators in various biological processes. Several miRNAs are Fetal aneuploidies constitute over 80% of chromosomal abnormalities at expressed in human gestational tissue and play some role in embryo im- birth. Currently, the plantation and placental development. Some miRNAs are identified to be majority are detected using invasive screening tests, involving both risk to associated with placenta dysfunction and abnormal pregnancy status, such the mother and fetus. Recent studies propose non-invasive methods to de- as intrauterine fetal restriction, preeclampsia, ectopic pregnancy and recur- tect fetal chromosomal aneuploidies in maternal plasma using common NGS rent miscarriages (RM), but the underlying mechanism is not clear. Recently, technologies; whole genome sequencing or the selection of various chro- EG-VEGF was regarded as a critical factor for embryo implantation and pla- mosomal loci using a proprietary methodology (DANSRTM), not available cental development; however, no EG-VEGF related micro-RNAs have been to the general scientific community. Hence, we here present a novel custom published yet. Two microRNAs (miR-346 and miR586-3p) were predicted bioinformatic NGS design for non-invasive prenatal testing. to target on 3’UTR of EG-VEGF, and were confirmed to regulate EG-VEGF Our strategy employs the dosage detection of an unique set of markers along expression by a luciferase system. Moreover, miR-346 and miR-586-3p were chromosomes 13, 18, 21, and X, compared to a control (chromosome 1). The shown to alter intracellular calcium influx and suppress cell invasion abi- design also incorporates chromosome Y markers for sexing, and numerous lity in trophoblastic cells (HTR-8/SV neo and JAR) through repressing the SNPs for fingerprinting and for the determination of the fractional fetal expressions and activities of MMP-2 and MMP-9 using western blotting and DNA concentration. Approximately 1,500 very reliable markers have been gelatin zymography. In conclusion, miR-346 and miR586-3p could regulate selected, with lengths ranging from 100 to 300 bp. The sequences have been the expression of EG-VEGF and trophoblast cell invasion, which may there- captured using Roche NimbleGen EZ library and have been sequenced on fore influence several EG-VEGF related pathophysiology of human pregnancy. a MiSeq Illumina platform. A total of 16 samples, including trisomies and normal controls have been used in the validation.  P01
.038 Due to an error in the library generation, experimental modifications are Frequency of chromosomal abnormalities in 4539 Polish patients still under development, and thus, the performance of the validation has with fertility disorders. A retrospective data analysis been lower than expected. Nevertheless, the results demonstrate a 67% of A. Strychalska, E. Martin, A. Podbioł-Palenta, W. Ratyńska, E. Budek, A. Czaja, M. Ptasiński, E. Hnatkiewicz, K. Czop, B. Sokołowska, J. Swadźba; sensitivity and 70% of specificity. Diagnostyka Sp. z o. o., Cracow, Poland. In conclusion, our design would provide a sensitive and robust method for the fetal aneuploidies detection in maternal blood, and could decrease as well the number of invasive tests. Introduction: Fertility disorders have been a growing issue in modern so- Grant reference: PI13/01964 cieties. The successful treatment of these conditions depends on a thorough  P01
.040 diagnosis, including karyotype assessment. This study is based on 3 years Uniparental Disomy of Chromosome 8 unmasks a homozygous data and evaluates the prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities in 4539 mutation in the Thyreoglobulin gene causing a rare form of fetal patients with reproductive disorders. goiter Methodology: The study includes 4539 patients referred to our laboratory K. Steindl1, R. Müller2, P. Joset1, B. Oneda1, M. Zweier1, A. Rauch1; between 2013 and 2015 for routine karyotype assessment. Study groups 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich-Schlieren, Switzerland, were defined on the basis of three referrals: infertility, IVF failure and mis- 2Private outpatient clinic, Winterthur, Switzerland. carriages. Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes was perfor- med using GTG-banding technique, according to the standard algorythms. R6es0ults: Out of 4539 patients (51,27% females,E 4 S8
H,73G% 2 m0a1le6s)  |1
 B26A (R2, C78
E%L)O NAA s, oSliPdA mIaNss |w WithWinW th.eE fSetHal Gne.OckR oGn second trimester ultrasound scan is aABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index rare finding and can be due to either a teratoma or to a goiter. A goiter is cha- CI (0.564-0.954)). Two cases in which the fetus inherited a mosaic of the al- racterized by it’s typical morphological features, i.e. a homogeneous structu- lele were found. We also found a woman who was not a pre-mutation carrier re symmetric in shape with increased vascularity within the anterior neck. and transmitted the allele in an expanded lengh to her fetus. Fetal goiter can be associated with hyperthyroidism, most frequently caused Conclusions: No correlation was found between AGG number abnormalities by maternal antibodies, hypothyroidism due to maternal antithyroid treat- and allele instability in the tested population. Younger women were found at ment (e.g. Graves’ disease) or with a defect within the fetal thyroid gland greater risk for unstable transmission to their fetus. A case of non pre-muta- hormone biosynthesis. We report a rare case of fetal goitrous hypothyroi- tion carrier that can transmit a CGG expansion was recorded. This unusual dism in a mother without thyroid gland pathology. TSH, fT3 and fT4 concen- finding requires further evaluation. trations in the amniotic fluid were determined with amniocentesis. Chromo-  P01
.043 somal SNP-array analysis on fetal DNA detected isodisomy of chromosome Elevation of GATA-6 and StAR, steroidogenesis pathway genes, in 8 with a long stretch of LOH on the whole chromosome 8. Since UPD 8 may prenatally androgenized rats unmask recessive mutations we searched for genes causing autosomal re- M. Salehi Jahromi1, A. Zadeh-vakili1, F. Ramezani Tehrani2, M. Norouz-zadeh2, M. cessive congenital hypothyroidism and found two, the TG and TRHR genes Zareksh1; mapping on the long arm of chromosome 8q24.22 and 8q23.1, repectively. 1Cellular and Molecular Endocrine Research Center, Reseach Institute for Endocrine At this point we opted for NGS of the Mendeliome which revealed a homozy- Sciences, tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Reproductive Endocrinology Research Center, gous nonsense mutation in the TG-Gene [c.4588C>T]. Our data support the Reseach Institute for Endocrine Sciences, tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. importance of UPD as an underlying mechanism of rare autosomal recessive disorders. Till now not more than 50 different mutations in the TG gene had been described and thyreoglobulin defects due to biallelic mutations have Introduction: Hyperandrogenism, a hallmark of polycystic ovarian syn- an estimated incidence of 1 in 100.000. drome, caused by fetal androgen exposure, is suspected to act via altered expressions of related genes. The aim of this study was to evaluate the ex-  P01
.041 pression of GAGT-6 and StAR genes, involved in steroidogenesis pathway, in Prenatal screening shows a remarkably high FMR1 premutation adult female rats prenatally exposed to androgen excess by comparing them prevalence in the Balearic Islands in different phases of estrus cycle with non-treated rats. D. Heine-Suñer, R. Alfaro Arenas, J. Rosell, Group for the study of FXS in the Balearic Materials and Methods: Eight pregnant Wistar rats in the experimental Islands; Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. group were treated by subcutaneous injection of 5 mg free testosterone on day 20 of pregnancy, while controls (n = 8) received 500 mL of solvent. Adult female off-springs of each mother were divided into four groups based on We conducted a pilot screening study in 3731 pregnant and non-pregnant observation of their vaginal smear. Along with measurement of serum ste- women in childbearing age of the Balearic Islands. The aims of this study roidogenic sexual hormones and gonadotropins levels using ELISA, RNAs were to determine Fragile X syndrome (FXS) CGG repeat alleles and frequen- were extracted from ovarian theca cells and relative expression levels were cies in our population and to determine if TP-PCR is an adequate method to measured using Cyber-green Real-Time PCR. perform generalized population prenatal screening. The molecular results Results: Comparing intervention and control group, relative expression of of the study are: 1) a prevalence of premutation (PM) carriers of 1 in 106 GATA-6 and StAR increased by 2.08 (p<0.001) and 1.4 (p<0.05) fold, respec- which is the highest described to date in any population; 2) Information on tively. Despite changes in expression of each gene in different phases, their the AGG interruptions and CGG repeat numbers that showed that the most trend of expression was almost similar, with the maximum change being frequent alleles are 10A9A9 (38,4 %), 9A9A9 (15,1 %) and 10A9 (10, 5 observed in diestrus. %). Furthermore, alleles with 0 AGG interruptions or with a pure (uninter- Conclusions: This investigation on gene expression changes in ovarian theca rupted) CGG repeat run larger than 34 (presumably more unstable), were cells in prenatally androgenized rats demonstrated elevated expression of highest among PM alleles (10 % and 100 % respectively) compared to nor- the genes studied. Further studies on genes from steroidogenesis and other mal alleles (0, 7% and 0, 07 %, respectively). Collected geographic origins reproduction related pathways are recommended to confirm these findings of participants make it very unlikely that the high prevalence observed in a Pn 0d 1 .t 0o 4 fu 4rther explore prenatal effects of excess androgens. this study is originated by founder effects. As for the psychosocial aspects of A single-tube tetradecaplex panel of highly polymorphic STR markers the study, we found a very high voluntary participation, self-reported high for preimplantation genetic diagnosis of hemophilia A by combined level of satisfaction and low levels of added stress. In addition, we detect mutation detection and linkage analysis low knowledge of the FXS (25%) and irrelevancy of the self-reported health S. S. Chong1,2, M. Zhao1, P. C. Wong1,2, F. S. H. Cheah2, J. Mathew2, M. Chen1, A. S. C. Tan1,2; data. The high level of acceptance and unexpected high frequency of expan- 1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University Health ded PM alleles in females in the Balearic Islands makes a very compelling System, Singapore, Singapore. argument for prenatal and/or preconceptional FXS screening.  P01
.042 Introduction: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) to detect the com- Evaluating the correlation between AGG interruptions in the FMR1 mon hemophilia A (HEMA) inversion mutations represents a major tech- gene promoter and allele stability in the population that was nical challenge. Indirect linkage analysis using polymorphic markers is evaluated in the Institute of Human Genetics at two large hospitals in possible, but is dependent on availability of informative markers. We have Israel during the years 2011-2015 developed a single-tube tetradecaplex panel of highly polymorphic micro- L. Waldman Radinsky1, E. Manor1,2, I. Menashe1, R. Sukenik- Halevy3, L. Fridman3, A. Shtorch- Asor3, A. Koifman1,2; satellite markers for simplified PGD of HEMA by haplotype linkage analysis 1Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer- Sheva, Israel, 2Soroka University Medical with/without mutation detection. Center, Beer- Sheva, Israel, 3Meir Medical Center, Kfar Saba, Israel. Materials and Methods: Twenty-eight markers <1Mb from F8 were selected for initial testing. Compatible markers were optimized into a single-tube pa- nel and genotyped in 135 Chinese females. The panel was also tested on sin- The promotor region of the FMR1 gene is characterized by various lengths gle cell whole genome amplification (WGA) products. PGD was performed of CGG repeats. AGG triplicate can be found every 9 CGG repeats in average, on a couple at risk of transmitting a point mutation, consisting of single-tube usually 1-3 in total. Those triplicate suggested to stabilize carriers of 59-199 multiplex-PCR of fully informative markers and the mutation-site amplicon, repeats. It was previously suggested that a reduction of AGG interruptions followed by GeneScan analysis. Minisequencing was performed on an ali- is correlated to an increased number of CGG repeats and expansion from quot of PCR product to detect the point mutation. carrier to mutated state (>200 repeats). Results: Thirteen markers were optimized into a single-tube PCR panel to- Aim: to determine the correlation between AGG triplets interruption and gether with AMELX/Y. Observed marker heterozygosities ranged from 0.45 allele stability in the Israeli population. to 0.84, and 80% of the studied population were heterozygous for ≥5 mar- Materials and methods: we conducted a retrospective case-control study kers, while 95% were heterozygous for at least one marker on either side of assessing AGG interruptions within the promotor of FMR1 gene and the cor- F8. In the IVF-PGD case, the point mutation was successfully detected from relation of CGG repeats. Results: No correlation was found between mater- single embryo blastomeres and perfectly correlated with a specific marker nal AGG interruptions and allele stability (pv=0.59). A correlation between haplotype. CGG repeat numbers to allele instability was shown (pv- 0.003). Maternal Conclusions: The single-tube tetradecaplex marker panel provides a com- ethnicity (Ashkenazi versus non- Ashkenazi) does not affect the chance mon platform containing sufficient marker redundancy for general appli- for unstable transmission (pv=0.285). We showed a correlation between cation to potentially any PGD of HEMA, through haplotype linkage analysis younger maternal age and a less stabEleS tHraGns m2i0ss1io6n |( pBvA=0R.0 C2
E1 ,L OORN-0A.73, 4S, PAeINith e| rW alWoneW o.rE inS HcoGmb.OinRatGion with mutation detection. 61ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .046 Genetic variation in leptin and leptin receptor genes as a risk factor for idiopathic male infertility molytic disease of the fetus and the newborn (HDFN), a potentially fatal A. Hodžić1, M. Ristanović2, B. Zorn3, C. Tulić2, A. Maver1, I. Novaković2, D. Plaseska- condition. The blood groups mainly responsible for the most severe form of Karanfilska4, B. Peterlin1; HDFN are RhD and Kell. Nowadays fetal Kell genotype can only be detected 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, through invasive procedures, increasing the chance of maternal alloimmu- Slovenia, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Belgrade, nization. Detection of fetal Kell genotype in circulating cfDNA in maternal Belgrade, Serbia, 3Andrology Unit, Reproductive Unit, Department of Obstetrics and plasma would enable prevention of HDFN avoiding risks associated to in- Gynecology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Research Centre vasive procedures. In this study, an innovative test for Kell genotyping was for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Skoplje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. designed and optimized on cffDNA to create a non-invasive prenatal test for prevention of HDFN caused by Kell incompatibility. Materials and Methods: 17 samples: 1 alloimmunized pregnant woman plasma presenting anti-K antibodies, 6 dilution of kell positive DNA in kell Introduction: The current data support an important role of leptin system negative DNA and 10 control blood samples were collected and analyzed. in the pathophysiology of male infertility in animals and humans. The aim Real-time PCR was developed for the allelic discrimination of K1 and K2 and of this study was to examine whether genetic variability in leptin and leptin Kell genotype determination. receptor genes influence male infertility. Results: The K1/K2 genotype was correctly determined in all control samp- Methods: We performed a case-control study and were searching for an as- les. Results on the Kell positive dilution allow to verify the linearity and sociation between polymorphisms of leptin and leptin receptor genes and efficiency of the method. Results on cffDNA from a Kell-negative pregnant male infertility. The study group consisted of 317 patients with idiopathic woman confirmed the Kell-positive genotype of the fetus. Fetal fraction was infertility and a control group of 241 fertile men from Slovenia. Four SNPs determinate using the Kell-positive DNA quantification. in leptin gene and four SNPs in leptin receptor gene were chosen and geno- Conclusions: An efficient and reliable strategy for Kell genotyping is herein typed. Statistically significant SNP was further validated in additional 255 presented. The method was optimized on cffDNA in order to create a non- infertile patients and 168 controls from Serbia and Macedonia. invasive prenatal test which could be routinely used for the prevention of Results: In the Slovenian population we found a statistically significant dif- hemolytic disease of the fetus and the newborn. ference in genotype distribution for rs10244329 polymorphism in leptin gene (recessive genotype model, p value =0.048). The trend toward stati- 
P01 .050 stically significant difference in genotype distribution for rs10244329 po- Clinical findings in Koolen-deVries foetuses lymorphism was found also in the Serbian and Macedonian populations (p F. García Santiago1,2, C. Martínez-Payo3, E. Mansilla1,2, J. Nevado1,2, F. Santos1,2, M. Sanz value=0.09). de Pedro1, S. Pérez1, A. Llorente1, P. Lapunzina1,2; Conclusions: Our data suggest that genetic variability in the leptin gene 1INGEMM, Hospital Universitario la Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, might be associated with male infertility warranting further confirmation 3Ginecology Departament, Hospital Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain. and mechanistic investigations. This study was supported by grant 
P3 -0326 from the Slovenian Research Agency. Introduction: prenatal diagnoses of microdeletion syndromes, which don’t show ultrasound alterations until the third trimester, are always difficult, 
P01 .047 especially if we want to correlate phenotype-genotype. The introduction of Incremetal yield of Genomic Microarray in Early Growth Restricted microarray based technology enabled genome in prenatal diagnosis resul- Fetuses Over Karyotyping ting in the detection of recurrent microdeletions in foetuses. We try to corre- A. Borrell1, M. Grande1, J. Sabrià2, E. Meler3, A. Muñoz3, E. Mazarico2, L. Rodriguez- lation between these ultrasound alterations and Koolen-de Vries syndrome. Revenga4, F. Figueras1; This syndrome is characterized by developmental delay, hypotonia, facial 1BCNatal. Hospital Clínic Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2BCNatal. Hospital Sant Joan Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Universitari Quiron Dexeus, Barcelona, Spain, 4Centre dysmorphisms, epilepsy, heart defects and kidney/urologic anomalies. Diagnòstic Biomèdic. Hospital Clínic Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Materials and Methods: We present 4 foetuses with 17q21.31 microdeleti- on. All of them showed anomalies in the third trimester, 3 ventriculomegaly leve-moderate and one of them T.N. 4.2 mm at first trimester, V.I. hypereco- Introduction: Fetal intra-uterine growth restriction, particularly when early genicity, severe CIR and disgenesis of corpus callosum at birth. Array-SNPs (< 24 weeks) and severe (< 3rd percentile on estimated fetal weight) is as- performed on uncultured amniocytes. Array-SNPs were performanced by sociated with fetal genetic disease. However, scarce information is available HIScan Illumina, ES CYTOSN
P850 k. about this association with microdeletion and microduplication syndromes. Results: All of them revealed a 17q21.31 microdeletion. The aim of this multicenter study is to assess the incremental yield of ge- Conclusions: The appearance of minor malformations in prenatal diagnosis, nomic microarray over karyotyping in early and severe growth restriction. especially in pregnancies over 22 weeks, is a source of uncertainty when Material and Methods: This multicenter study included 139 consecutive it comes to genetic analysis. However, these findings are the only prenatal early and severe growth restricted fetuses, studied during a 3-year period expression of many genetic syndromes, as many of them do not present (January 2013 - December 2015) in 3 centers of Barcelona. QF-PCR and BAC major malformations in this period. From our point of view, it is important (Bacterial Artificial Chromosome) array-CGH (CytoChip Focus Constitutio- to evaluate each case individually and make these genetic studies given the nal, BlueGnome, Illumina) were performed in DNA extracted from amniotic impossibility of another form of screening and its consequences in postnatal fluid after amniocentesis. The incremental yield was defined by the rate of life. To our knowledge, this kind of malformations should be a high marker fetuses presenting with a pathogenic copy number variant below 10 Mb in of this syndrome. normal QF-PCR results, stratified by the presence of fetal malformations. 
P01 .051 Results: In our series 9 pathogenic copy number variants were found. Genetic screening for chromosomal abnormalities, Y chromosome Among non-malformed growth-restricted fetuses, a 5.7% (95%CI:1.3 to microdeletions and copy number variation in infertile male patients 10.1)(6/16) incremental yield of genomic microarray was observed over living in the Trakya region of Turkey karyotyping, while this rate was 9.1% (95% CI: -0.7 to 18.9) (3/33) in mal- H. Gurkan, S. Demir Ulusal, H. Tozkır, E. Atlı, E. I. Atlı, D. Eker; formed fetuses. Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Edirne, Turkey. Conclusion: The use of genomic microarray provides a 5.7% incremental yield in non-malformed restricted fetuses with a normal karyotype, incre- asing up to 9.1% in malformed fetuses. These results confirmed previous Introduction: Male factor plays important role in the infertility of 40-50 % findings of the single large series on growth restricted fetuses (3% and 10% of infertile couples. Genetic factors such as Y microdeletions associated to respectively). Our findings support the use of genomic microarray after a testicular function, chromosomal abnormalities and copy number variati- normal QF-PCR or/and karyotype. ons (CNVs) of genes have been reported to be risk factors or causes of male infertility. 
P01 .048 Materials and Methods: In this study 141 male patients (mean age : 33,7) An innovative test for non-invasive Kell genotyping on circulating included who have been referred to Trakya University Faculty of Medicine fetal DNA by means of the allelic discrimination of K1 and K2 antigens F. Cro‘1, C. Lapucci1, E. Vicari1, G. Salsi2, N. Rizzo2, A. Farina2; Department of Medical Genetics because of infertility between February 1Geneticlab, Noventa Vicentina, Italy, 2Division of Prenatal Medicine Department of 2013- November 2015. 93 of patients (66%) were azoospermic, 48 (34 %) Medicine and Surgery (DIMEC) University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. of patients were severe oligozoospermic. Karyotype analysis (GTG banding with a resolution of 450-500) and Y chromosome microdeletion analysis have been performed for all patients. In addition, CNVs were investigated of In6tr2oduction: Blood incompatibility between mES otH heG r a2 n0 d1 fe6 t u| s B cA auR seC s E hL eO - N3A9, aSzPooAsIpNer m| Wic pWatWien.EtsS (H42G%.)O wRitGhout any structural or numerical chro-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index mosome abnormalities and Y microdeletion abortion in first trimester of pregnancy. This study was supported by the Results: Y chromosome microdeletion or chromosomal abnormality were federal assignment № 6.98.2014/К from Russian Ministry of Science and not found in the severe oligozoospermic patient group. Numerical chro- Education. mosome abnormalities were found 20.4% (19/93), when structural chro- 
P01 .054 mosome abnormalities have been found 3.2% (3/93) and Y chromosome Integrated analysis of miRNA- and mRNA expression profiles in microdeletions have been found 8.6% (8/93) of azoospermic patients. CNVs preeclampsia have been found in the 7 (18%) out of 39 azoospermic patients investigated O. Biro, B. Nagy, J. Rigo; for CNVs. Semmelweis University, 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Budapest, Hungary. Conclusions: Chromosome abnormality ratios have been reported to be bet- ween 1.9-20.86 % in different populations of infertile male patients. Chro- mosomal abnormality frequency was 15.6% (22/141) in our study. Y mi- Background: Preeclampsia is the leading cause of maternal and fetal mor- crodeletion frequency has been reported between 3.15-20.4% in different bidity and mortality, affecting 3-8% of all pregnancies worldwide. Unfortu- studies. One of the CNVs defined in this study was associated with Williams nately, the pathogenesis of preeclampsia is still not clear. miRNAs are small, Beuren Syndrome. non-coding RNA molecules, which negatively regulate gene expression. 
P01 .052 They are associated with several pathological conditions, including preg- MAMLD1 mutations seem not sufficient to explain a 46,XY DSD nancy complications such as preeclampsia. The aim of our study was to find phenotype preeclampsia-related miRNA regulatory mechanisms using bioinformatics N. Camats1, M. Fernández-Cancio1, L. Audí1, P. E. Mullis2, C. E. Flück2; approaches. 1Vall d‘Hebron Institut de Recerca, Barcelona, Spain, 2University Children‘s Hospital Methods: We analyzed miRNA (GS
E57050 ) and mRNA (GS
E73374 ) ex- Bern, Bern, Switzerland. pression datasets, which were created under similar experimental circum- stances. Differently expressed miRNAs were identified for the estimation of their inhibitory effect. We integrated miRNA and gene expression profiles Introduction: The MAMLD1 gene (Xp28) is thought to cause disorder of sex with the MAGIA web tool, and created a bipartite network from the signi- development (DSD) in 46,XY patients, mostly presenting with hypospadi- ficant miRNA-mRNA pairs using the Cytoscape software. Two subnetworks as, and, recently, gonadal dysgenesis. However, there is some controversy were expanded by protein-protein interactions from the HPRD database. about its role in sex development because some MAMLD1 variants are also We analyzed the network elements using different bioinformatics tools and detected in normal individuals, several MAMLD1 mutations have wild-type through literature research. (WT) activity, male Mamld1 knockout mouse have normal genitalia and re- Results: We created a network, which consists of 85 nodes and 80 edges production; and other species with or without DSD harbor also MAMLD1 signalizing the connections between 52 regulated genes and 33 miRNAs. 11 variants in the genome. We aimed to analyse MAMLD1 sequence variations of the genes are preeclampsia-related and 9 of them were targeted by mul- in individuals presenting with a wide spectrum of DSD phenotypes. tiple miRNAs. 8 miRNAs are associated with preeclampsia, and 13 miRNAs Patients and Methods: Sanger sequencing was performed in 108 46,XY regulated more than one mRNA. Hsa-mir-210 was the highest degree node DSD individuals to detect MAMD
L1  gene variations/mutations. Functional in the network and its role in preeclampsia is well-known. experiments were completed in non-steroidogenic and steroidogenic cell Conclusions: We identified several miRNA-mRNA interactions, which may lines. We assessed transcriptional activity (on Hes3 and CY
P17 A1 promot- contribute to the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Further investigations are ers) and expression of WT and mutant MAMLD1. Besides, we tested the needed to validate these mechanisms and to unfold the possibilities of de- MAMLD1 effect on androgen production by testing the CY
P17 A1 activity. veloping potential therapeutic targets. Results: We found 9 MAMLD1 mutations (7 novel) in 9/108 46,XY DSD pa- 
P01 .055 tients. In vitro assays revealed that most MAMLD1 variants acted similarly Contribution of chromosome rearrangements to the etiology of to the WT. Only the 
L210 X mutation showed loss of function in all tests, miscarriages while variants 
L724 V and 
S730 S showed a decrease in CY
P17 A1 promoter A. Soler1,2,3, C. Morales4, I. Mademont-Soler5, E. Margarit1,2,3, M. Papiol1, A. Borrell1,2,3, V. activation. We found no effect of either WT or any MAMLD1 variant on CY- Borobio1, A. Sánchez1,2,3; 
P17 A1 enzyme activity. Also, no difference for MAMLD1 protein expression 1Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBER de enfermedades raras (CIBERER), was found, except for a shorter 
L210 X. Barcelona, Spain, 3IDIBAPS (Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer), Conclusion: Our data support the notion that MAMLD1 sequence variations Barcelona, Spain, 4ThePGDlab Reporductive Genetic Medicine, Jabriya, Kuwait, 5Institut may not suffice to explain the DSD phenotype in carriers. d’Investigació Biomèdica Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain. 
P01 .053 MiR-335-5p, miR-203a and miR-204-5p expression study in fetal and Introduction: Around 10-15% of clinically recognized pregnancies result in maternal tissues of women with spontaneous abortion in the first miscarriage and about 50% of early pregnancy losses has chromosome ab- trimester of pregnancy normalities. Most of them are numerical abnormalities such as autosomal E. P. Omelchuk, E. V. Butenko, K. A. Kovalenko, E. V. Mashkina; trisomies, poliploidies and monosomy X. However, structural chromosome Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. abnormalities are also found in around 5% of the cases, most of them unba- lanced, and identified through karyotyping. Materials and Methods: We describe the chromosome rearrangements de- Introduction. Coordinated work of gene cascades in maternal and fetal tected in a series of 1119 consecutive first trimester spontaneous miscar- cells is crucial for mother-placenta-fetus system formation and functioning. riages, obtained through CV sampling before evacuation and semi-direct Reasons for up to 60% of spontaneous abortions remain unknown. Micro cytogenetic analysis. When an unexpected rearrangement was found in the RNAs act as post-transcriptional gene regulators, and affect gene expressi- CV sample, chromosome analysis of parents was performed. on directly in the cells of their origin or take part in intercellular signaling Results: Cytogenetic result was achieved in 1011 samples, from which 711 through vesicular transport. In current work, we investigated the expressi- showed an abnormal karyotype (70.3%). Thirty-six chromosome rearran- on of three micro RNAs in embryonic, chorionic and decidual tissues after gements were detected (5.1% of the abnormal cases), 5 balanced (0.7%) spontaneous abortion compared to normal first trimester pregnancies. and 31 unbalanced (4.7%). Three of the balanced rearrangements presen- Materials and methods. Bioinformatic study was conducted and miR-335- ted with an additional trisomy. Among the unbalanced rearrangements 5p, miR-203a and miR-204-5p were chosen for further investigation. Samp- there were 10 reciprocal translocations, 5 were previously unknown: 3 of les of chorionic, embryonic tissue and decidua were taken after surgical them turned out to be inherited, 1 de novo and 1 with no information. Two termination of normally progressing pregnancies (n = 14) and spontaneous inversions were unexpected and turned out to be inherited. Only 2 out of abortion (n = 10) in 5-9 week of gestation. Micro RNA expression was ana- the 12 Robertsonian translocations were previously known; among the lyzed using quantitative real-time PCR method. MiR-92a-1-5p was used as unexpected ones, 8 were de novo, 1 inherited and 1 with no information. a reference gene. All experiments were conducted in triplicates. Data were Conclusions: Karyotyping allows the detection and interpretation of such analyzed using the 2-ΔΔCT method. unexpected chromosome rearrangements and adds valuable information Results. The expression of miR-203a-3р was decreased in decidual and em- for the genetic counseling of the couple and their family. bryonic tissues in spontaneous abortion compared to normal pregnancy. This work was partially supported by grant PI11/01841 from F.I.S. of Spa- Expression of miR-204-5p and miR-335-5p was equal in all studied tissues nish Ministerio Sanidad y Consumo. and in spontaneous abortion compared to normal gestation. Conclusion. The results demonstrated that low miR-203a-3р expression le- vel in decidual and embryonic tissues E coS uH ldG be 2 a0 ss1 oc6 ia | t eB dA wR ithC sE pL oO ntN anA eo, u S s PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 63ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .056 Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment,UCL, London, United Kingdom. Placental chromosomal mosaicism in first trimester spontaneous abortions A. Sánchez1,2,3, C. Morales4, I. Mademont-Soler5, E. Margarit1,2,3, M. Rubio1, A. Borrell1,2,3, Introduction: Maternal factors that may lead to abnormal preimplantation M. Muñoz1, A. Soler1,2,3; development include mitochondria, which are the most abundant organel- 1Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBER de enfermedades raras (CIBERER), les in the oocyte. Genes required for mitochondrial function are encoded Barcelona, Spain, 3IDIBAPS (Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer), by both mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and the nuclear DNA (nDNA) neces- Barcelona, Spain, 4ThePGDlab Reporductive Genetic Medicine, Jabriya, Kuwait, 5Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain. sitating the coordination between the two genomes. Mitochondrial-nuclear mismatch has been proposed as a cause of embryonic cell death. Changes in ATP synthesis and metabolic reactions in the mitochondrial electron trans- port chain (ETC) have been linked to female infertility. This study explores Around 10-15% of clinically recognized pregnancies result in miscarriage the effect of differences in mtDNA and nDNA haplotypes in genes involved in and about 50% of early pregnancy losses has chromosome abnormalities. the ETC by assessing preimplantation embryo development. Chromosomal mosaicism in chorionic villi samplings (CVS) is detected in Methods: Maternal and paternal mitochondrial DNA was analysed from 11 1-2% of the cases and can involve different numerical and structural chro- fertile and 12 infertile couples by Long range PCR and NGS. The selected mosome abnormalities. Depending on the distribution of the abnormal nuclear genes were sequenced using SureSelect QXT from Agilent. Each cells lineage among the placental tissues, there are different classes of mo- sample was assigned to a mitochondrial haplogroup using HaploGrep and saicism. The purpose of this work is to identify the rate and spectrum of confirmed by the EMMA software. PGD cycles from the fertile group were placental chromosomal mosaicism involved in first trimester miscarriages compared for the proportions of both oocytes that fertilised and embryos in our population. that developed to blastocyst. We present the placental chromosomal mosaicism found in a series of more Results: Several mitochondrial haplogroups were identified reflecting the than one thousand of arrested pregnancies obtained through chorionic villi diverse ethnic population in London. Overall more couples from the infer- sampling before evacuation. The chromosomal analysis was carried out by tile (4/ 12) had identical mtDNA haplotypes compared to the fertile group semi-direct/short-term (STC) and long-term culture (LTC). (1/11). Within the fertile group the presence of the T haplogroup was asso- Of 1011 CVS samples analysed we obtained results in both cultures in 592 ciated with poor blastocyst formation. Analysis of the selected nuclear gene (58.5%). Among them 21 (3.5%) showed discrepant karyotypes. The chro- sequences as well as investigation of the interaction of the T haplotype SNPs mosome abnormality was present in STC in 9 cases (43%) while the karyo- remains to be investigated before mitochondrial nuclear mismatch can be type obtained in LTC was normal only in two cases (9.5%). In all cases except correlated to embryo development. four, chromosomal abnormality was numerical, and the structural abnorma- lities were present only in LTC. In 33% of cases we found discrepant abnor- 
P01 .059 mal karyotypes between both cultures. Interdisciplinary clinical workup increases diagnostic yield in These data underline the importance of karyotyping both placental layers, increased nuchal translucency also in spontaneous abortions, to obtain a reliable result and a predictive va- D. Niedrist1, J. Wisser2, K. Frontzek3, H. Budka3, N. Rupp4, R. Caduff4, M. Zweier1, B. lue for fetal involvement and provides clinical elements to offer an accurate Oneda1, P. Joset1, R. Asadollahi1, A. Rauch1; genetic counselling. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich - Schlieren, Switzerland, This study was partially supported by Grant: PI11/01841 (IP: A. Sanchez) 2Department of Obstretics, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Institute of Pathology, 
P01 .057 University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Is mitochondrial DNA content in euploid blastocysts established by next generation sequencing (NGS) on Ion Torrent platform applicable as a predictor of successful implantation? Increased nuchal translucency is an early sonographic marker in preg- M. Hruba1, R. Vlckova1, M. Pittrova1, L. Hradecky1, J. Zemanova1, P. Novakova1, V. nancies for chromosomal abnormalities. In case of a normal karyotype, Petrikova1, P. Martinek2, B. Wirleitner3, M. Schuff3, A. Stecher3, M. Murtinger3; increased nuchal translucency may be associated with fetal malformations 1IVF Centers Prof. Zech - Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 2Biopticka laborator, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 3IVF Centers Prof. Zech - Bregenz, Bregenz, Austria. and monogenetic syndromes such as Noonan syndrome. We now report on a 37-year old healthy woman at 13 weeks of gestation. The nuchal translucency was increased, there was growth retardation and Introduction: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content in preimplantation em- oedema of the skin. The chromosomes were found to be normal (Affymetrix bryos, assessed predominantly by qPCR, was recently suggested as a poten- HD 2.65M, resolution of about 100kb). As the sonographic markers beca- tial novel biomarker for selection of the most competent euploid embryo me worse, NGS (TruSight™ One Sequencing panel, 4613 Gene, illumina Inc.) (Fragouli E et al, 2015; Diez-Juan A et al, 2015). The embryos with lower was performed, but still did not reveal the underlying cause. At week 22 the mtDNA content were reported to show significantly better implantation couple decided for termination of pregnancy. The pathological examination rates. Most importantly, embryos with mtDNA amount exceeding a certain revealed a male fetus with low birth weight, microcephaly and severe con- threshold (0.003% by qPCR, 0.070% of total reads by NGS; Fragouli E et al, tractions with webs. The fetal brain was premature with agenesis of corpus 2015) did not implant. callosum and hydrocephalus internus. Materials and methods: We reanalyzed 56 trophectoderm samples from The result of an interdisciplinary case discussion was the clinical suspicion euploid embryos (determined previously by aCGH) by NGS using the Ion of Neu-Laxova Syndrome. Torrent platform allowing simultaneous CNV analysis of both nuclear and Reevaluation of NGS data showed only one deleterious missense mutation mitochondrial DNA. 18 embryos were transferred (10 SETs, 4 DETs with in the PHGDH-gene, and reevaluation of microarray data showed a down- known mtDNA level and transfer outcome for both embryos). We analyzed ward pattern of makers, indicating the possibility of a deletion affecting a putative correlation of the implantation outcome and the level of mtDNA. PHGDH. By MLPA the deletion of exon 12 and 3’UTR of the PHGDH-gene was Results: NGS confirmed euploidy and established mtDNA amount in all 56 confirmed in the fetus and the mother. The healthy father was carrier of the cases (mean 0.064%, median 0.054%). 33% (6/18) of the transferred em- mutation in the PHGDH-gene. bryos implanted, while 67% (12/18) did not. Interestingly, mtDNA amount This case highlights the importance of interdisciplinary clinical discussions. did not differ between implanted and non-implanted embryos (P 0.285). The clinical suspicion may drive the new genetic technologies in finding Moreover, in 2 successfully implanted embryos the suggested 0.070% thres- even rare diagnoses in a time and cost saving way. hold was substantially exceeded (0.368%, 0.146% respectively). 
P01 .060 Conclusions: Although the results obtained by qPCR in two previous studies First clinical application of paired-end MPSS for cfDNA based prenatal indicated the application of mtDNA content as a predictor of embryo com- screening of aneuploidies petence to produce viable pregnancy, the results obtained by NGS using the V. Cirigliano1,2, E. Ordoñez1,2, L. Rueda1,2, I. Castilla1, M. Grau1, C. Fuster2, M. P. Cañadas1; Ion Torrent platform should be further cautiously studied and verified in a 1Labco Diagnostics, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, larger cohort of samples. Barcelona, Spain. 
P01 .058 Investigating the Role of Mitochondria in the Preimplantation Stages Objective: To evaluate the performance of the NeoBona test, a new paired- of Human Embryonic Development end MPSS based assay for cfDNA aneuploidy screening, in an average risk R. S. Jawdat1, W. Parson2, N. Lane3, S. Sengupta1; population. 1Institute for Women‘s Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Institut für Gerichtliche Medizin der Medizinischen Universität Innsbruck (GMI), Innsbruck, Austria, 3Research Methods: A total of 2855 consecutive samples were collected from pregnant women above 10w of gestation (102 twins), regardless their risk category. 64 ESHG 2016 | BARCELON SA a, m S pP leA s wIN er | e W anW alyW sed.E uS siH ngG th.O e NR eG oBona test, a new paired-end MPSS ap-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index proach allowing simultaneous assessment of fetal fraction, DNA fragment Here, we present a false positive fetal SCA (45, X) result caused by maternal size distribution and chromosome counting statistics and providing a novel sex chromosomal mosaicism. Tscore value which quantifies the likelihood for chromosome aneuploidy. Case: A 36-year-old primigravida was offer+e1d NIPT due to advanced mater- Results: Patients choose to only assess risk for autosomal trisomies in 43,2% nal age. The NIPT result was available at 13 weeks and negative for trisomy of cases, screening for XY aneuploidies was requested for 56.8% of samples. 21, 18, and 13. However, Turner syn+d5rome (45, X) was reported in NIPT. She Twelve cases were not suitable for analysis, 2843 were tested and results underwent an amniocentesis at 15 weeks in order to confirm the identi- obtained for 2779 (97,8%). Patient redraw following test failure provided fication of 45, X obtained through the analysis of NIPT and the result of am- valid results in 88% of cases. A total of 71 aneuploidies were detected, 63 niocentesis showed that the fetus was normal (46, XY). For discordant result autosomal trisomies, 8 involving the sex chromosomes. High-risks results between fetal karyotyping and NIPT, full karyotyping analysis of her peri- were confirmed by invasive procedures in all but 7 cases of autosomal triso- pheral blood was additionally performed. Among the 178 G-banded karyo- mies and 1 false positive trisomy 21 result was observed (0.03%). types randomly selected, 173 (97.2%) were normal (46, XX), but 5 (2.8%) Invasive procedures were performed in 5/8 cases of XY chromosomes aneu- were abnormal (45, X), indicating that maternal mosaicism for aneuploidy ploidies (3 45,X, 1 47,XXY and 1 47,XXX) and no false positive results were could result in discordant NIPT results. observed. No follow up available on normal pregnancies, the majority of Conclusion: Our findings indicated that maternal mosaicism of sex chromo- which are still ongoing. some could cause discordant SCA associated with NIPT. We highly recom- Conclusions: The new analysis algorithm of the NeoBona test, including fe- mend that maternal karyotype should be confirmed for the cases with ab- tal fraction, size distribution, chromosome counting and sequencing depth, normal results in NIPT. proved highly efficient allowing detecting chromosome aneuploidies with 
P01 .063 extremely low false positive and failure rates. Implementation of a targeted enrichment method for the detection of 
P01 .061 microdeletion and microduplication syndromes for NIPT Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) may detect unexpected diagnosis M. Neofytou1, K. Tsangaras2, E. Kypri1,2, L. Charalambos1, P. Mina2, M. Ioannides2, A. of CAIS/PAIS Achileos2, G. Koumbaris1,2, P. C. Patsalis1,2; F. Lalatta1, D. Quagliarini2, V. Nicotra3, S. Salmona4, S. Guerneri5, L. Colombo6, C. Giavoli7, 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2NIPD Genertics LTD, G. Manzoni8, V. Pasterski9; Nicosia, Cyprus. 1Clinical genetics Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 2Obstetrics Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 3Centro di Riferimento Regionale diagnosi e cura delle malattie genetiche, Introduction: Novel targeted enrichment technologies have been recently Università degli Studi di Catania, Catania, Italy, 4Obstetrics, Fondazione IRCCS Cà developed and applied for the detection of chromosomal aneuploidies. Ho- Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 5Genetic Laboratory Fondazione wever, only few studies have examined the possibility of applying targeted IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 6Department of technologies for the detection of clinically relevant copy number variants Neonatology, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 7Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases Unit, University of Milan, Fondazione (CNVs). The purpose of this study was to develop and validate a targeted en- IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 8Pediatric Urology richment method in combination with NGS to enable the detection of CNVs Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 9Department using cell free DNA from maternal plasma. of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Materials and Methods: Synthetic microdeletion and microduplication syn- drome samples were created by spiking DNA from affected samples into cfDNA derived from non-pregnant female samples. We created 63 samples Introduction: From the first trimester of pregnancy, free DNA of fetal origin simulating 5%, 10% and 20% fetal fraction pregnancies. Enrichment probes (cell free fetal DNA, cffDNA) is present in maternal blood and can be recove- spanning the critical region of twelve microdeletion and microduplication red non-invasively. NIPT is increasingly utilized to screen for the most com- syndromes were developed and used to perform targeted enrichment using mon fetal aneuploidies, including those involving sex chromosomes. Here in-solut:i on hybridization. A statistical analysis pipeline that simultaneously we report a case in which we resolved a discrepancy between the foetal ge- tests for aberrations in any of the syndromes was also developed. notype and phenotype detected using NIPT. Results The overall preliminary detection rate ranged from 59% at ff 5% Case description: a 32-year-old primigravida was referred to our unit at to 95% at ff 20%. 20 weeks to further investigate a 46,XY karyotype concurrent with female- Conclusion: These preliminary results, illustrate the feasibility of this novel typical genitalia as visualized in routine ultrasound. Considering possible targeted technology for the detection of pathological CNVs in cfDNA from complete/partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS/CAIS), the AR was maternal plasma. analysed, identifying a novel mutation. Disclosure of the CAIS diagnosis took 
P01 .064 place at 22 weeks and included participation of specialists in paediatrics, Prenatal detection of tetrasomy 12p using Non-Invasive Prenatal genetics and a paediatric urology. At 30 weeks, a psychological assessment Testing (NIPT) was carried out for both parents. There was evidence of elevated somatiza- Y. Torres1, X. da Silva1, J. C. Cigudosa1,2, J. Suela1; tion and anxiety in the mother and both parents showed notable traumatic 1NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, stress. However, both expressed a degree of relief at going into the birth with Spain. knowledge of the diagnosis and requested a “birth plan” allowing for privacy with respect to (public) discussion of the diagnosis. The pregnancy was car- ried to term and the birth was uncomplicated. INTRODUCTION: Non invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) is a recent prenatal Conclusions: Both parents reported satisfaction with the prenatal diagno- screening procedure that estimates the risk of several fetal cytogenetic ab- stic process and were relieved to have a sense of knowledge and control errations by means of analyzing the circulating cell-free fetal DNA (ccfDNA) in planning for the child’s birth and clinical management. Nevertheless, present in maternal blood. Although NIPT have been used to mainly detect notable levels of traumatic stress were observed as they acclimated to the chromosomal aneuploidies such as trisomy 21, 18 or 13, the implementati- diagnosis. on of deeper and more robust next generation sequencing (NGS) protocols 
P01 .062 and algorithms are showing that other chromosomes and genomic regions Discordant results between fetal karyotyping and non-invasive can be analyzed with a reasonable sensitivity and specifitity. prenatal testing by maternal sex chromosomal mosaicism (45, X and METHODS: Fetal DNA was extracted from plasma obtained in a BCT DNA 46, XX) free tube (Streck). Library preparation and sequencing proceedings were S. Jung1, K. Lee2, K. No1, K. Lee1; performed according to BGI NIFTY protocol. NIFTY algorithm was used to 1Molecular Diagnostics Testing Center, Seegene medical foundation, Seoul, Korea, analyze the risk for fetal trisomies and other aneuploidies. Genomic results Republic of, 2Department of Physics, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea, were validated with DNA extracted from 16th gestational week amniotic Republic of. fluid using a custom Agilent 60k array-CGH platform designed for prenatal : diagnosis. RESULTS: NIFTY algorithm informed of a high risk for duplication of the Background Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) is a novel accurate scree- whole short arm of chromosome 12 (dup12p). Array-CGH confirmed the ning technology for early detection of fetal chromosomal aneuploidies, aberration and informed of a tetrasomy 12p, compatible with a Pallister-Kil- but the test performance of NIPT for sex chromosomal abnormality (SCA) lian syndrome. Further ultrasound scanning confirmed the presence of dia- is not as good as it is for trisomy 21, 18, and 13. For the diagnosis of SCA, phragmatic hernia and other abnormalities compatible with the syndrome. the maternal or fetal mosaicism, maternal chromosomal abnormalities, and CONCLUSSION: Although NIPT was initially designed for the estimation of multiple pregnancies have been considEeSreHdG as 2 a 0co1n6fo |u nBdAinRg CfaEctLoOr iNn NAI,P TS. PAfIeNta l| tWrisWomWies.E T
S21 H, GT1.8O oRr GT13, whole genome sequencing can success6fu5llyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .067 Clinical potential of effective non-invasive exclusion of KE
L1  positive detect other microscopical aberrations such as tetrasomy 12p. Further stu- fetuses in KE
L1  negative pregnant women dies and reports must be done in order to dillucidate the role of this techni- R. Vodicka1, J. Böhmova1, M. Lubusky1, R. Kratochvilova1, E. Krejcirikova1, M. Janikova1, L. que in prenatal care Dusek2, R. Vrtel1, M. Prochazka1; 1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University Institute of Biostatistics and Analyses, Brno, Czech Republic. 
P01 .065 Non Invasive Prenatal Testing by digital counting of fluorescently labeled DNA molecules F. Dahl; Objective: The clinical importance of assessing the fetal KEL genotype is to Vanadis Diagnostics, Sollentuna, Sweden. exclude “K” positive fetuses (genotype KE
L1 /KE
L2 ) in “K” alloimmunized pregnant women (genotype KE
L2 /KE
L2 ). Non-invasive assessment of the fetal KEL genotype is not yet available in the Czech Republic. The aim of this Several countries have implemented Non Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) study is to assess the fetal KE
L1 /KE
L2  genotype from cell-free fetal DNA in to analyze chromosomal abnormalities in high-risk pregnancies. The majo- the plasma of KE
L2 /KE
L2  pregnant women. rity of these tests are performed using sequencing technologies that pro- Methods: The fetal genotype was assessed by minisequencing (a dilution vide both superior specificity and sensitivity compared to traditional first series including control samples). A total of 138 pregnant women (between trimester screening. However, in order to provide all women with high the 8th and the 23th gestational week) were tested by minisequencing. The performance prenatal screening, the NIPT assay cost and complexity need fetal genotype was further verified by analysis of a buccal swab from the to be dramatically reduced. We present a platform that reduces the cost of newborn. the analysis by an order of magnitude making the assay available for high Results: Minisequencing proved to be a reliable method. In 2.2 % of the throughput diagnostic laboratories. examined women (3/138), plasma sample testing failed; 94.8 % of wo- Our solution, called Smart NIPT technology, provides a very high assay men (128/135) had the KE
L2 /KE
L2  genotype, and a total of 3.1 % fetuses precision by counting individual fluorescently labeled DNA molecules. The (4/128) had the KE
L1 /KE
L2  genotype. Sensitivity and specificity reached technology uses DNA probes to specifically convert chromosomal targets of 100 %, p <0.0001. interest into DNA circles. These circles are then clonally expanded into dis- Conclusion: Minisequencing is a reliable method for the assessment of the crete fluorescently labeled DNA objects. The DNA objects are immobilized fetal KE
L1  allele from the plasma of KE
L2 /KE
L2  pregnant women. on a transparent nanopore filter and finally imaged and counted through the Funding statement: Funding for this study and publication was provided by bottom of the well. By capturing thousands of DNA targets from each chro- grant agency IGA MZ CR: NT12225 
P01 .068 mosome, PCR amplification can be avoided with increased assay precision Development of a novel targeted assay for non-invasive prenatal and reduced contamination risks as a result. testing of fetal trisomies exhibits near-diagnostic accuracy We applied the technology to analyze 183 blinded plasma samples of which G. Koumbaris1,2, E. Kypri1,2, K. Tsangaras1, A. Achilleos1, P. Mina1, M. Neofytou2, V. 15 were from women pregnant with a trisomy 21 fetus. All positive samples Velissariou1, G. Christopoulou1, I. Kallikas3, A. González-Liñán4, E. Benusiene5, A. were classified correctly, separated from the normal samples with a mini- Latos-Bielensk6, P. Marek7, A. Santana8, N. Nagy,Márta Széll9, P. Laudanski10, E. A. mum of 6.6 standard deviations. No false positives were called. Papageorgiou1,2, M. Ioannides1, P. C. Patsalis1,2; In conclusion, the Smart NIPT platform, supported by convincing clinical 1NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3AAK Ultrasound and Fetal Medicine Center, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Andros data, is a new solution that holds promise to provide NIPT to all pregnant Day Surgery Clinic, Palermo, Italy, 5Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 6Center for women. Medical Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 7University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 
P01 .066 8Childhood Hospital Materno-Infantil, Las Palmas GC, Spain, 9University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 10Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland. Non Invasive Prenatal Testing : incidental finding of multiple myeloma. M. Imbert-Bouteille1,2, J. Chiesa1, J. Gaillard1, V. Dorvaux3, L. Altounian4, E. Mousty5, S. Finge6, P. Bourquard7, E. Legius8, P. Vandenberghe8; Introduction: There is a great need for the development of highly accurate, 1Medical Genetics Department, Carémeau University Hospital Center, Nimes, France, cost effective technologies, which can facilitate the widespread adoption of 2Genetics Department, Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, CHRU, Montpellier, France, Non Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT). We hereby present a novel cost ef- 3Haematology Department, Mercy Hospital Center of Metz-Thionville, Metz, France, fective assay of unparalleled accuracy which overcomes the limitations of 4Cytogenetics Department, Mercy Hospital Center of Metz-Thionville, Metz, France, current technologies. 5Multidisciplinary Prenatal Diagnosis Department, Carémeau University Hospital Center, Nimes, France, 6Biology and Immunology Department, Carémeau University Materials and Methods: This method enables the targeted analysis of selec- Hospital Center, Nimes, France, 7Clinical Haematology Department, Carémeau University ted genomic regions at very high sequencing depth and allows highly accu- Hospital Center, Nimes, France, 8Human Genetics Department, Center for Human rate fetal fraction determination to ensure extremely accurate aneuploidy Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. detection. The analytical performance of the assay was evaluated in a blind study, which comprised 631 samples derived from pregnancies of at least 10 weeks of gestation that had also undergone invasive testing. Nowadays, genome-wide approaches are part of Non Invasive Prenatal Results: The blind study exhibited 100% sensitivity and specificity and Testing (NIPT), analyzing fetal cell-free DNA (cfDNA) through a maternal correctly classified 52/52 (95% CI: 93.2-100%) cases of trisomy 21, 16/16 blood sample. Technical issues are not the keypoint anymore. Ethical questi- (95% CI: 79.4-100%) cases of trisomy 18, 5/5 (95% CI: 47.8-100%) cases of ons, about their large-scaled implementation and potential diagnosis of sub- trisomy 13, and 538/538 (95% CI: 99.3-100%) normal cases. The test also chromosomal imbalances, do occupy a major place. Another critical issue is correctly identified fetal sex in all cases (95% CI: 99.4-100%). One sample about unexpected finding on maternal cfDNA, which is screened altogether failed pre-specified assay quality control criteria, and 19 samples were non- with fetal cfDNA, far away from the original test aim. reportable due to low fetal fraction. We report the case of Mrs R., a French forty-year-old pregnant woman, wi- Conclusions: The clinical impact of free fetal DNA (ffDNA) testing has been thout any medical history. She underwent NIPT, prescribed because of ma- significant as indicated by its quick adoption in prenatal care. Our novel ternal age in Luxembourg where she lives, and performed in Belgium. technology overcomes limitations of current technologies and exhibits near By massive parallel sequencing of cfDNA, an abnormal genome-wide repre- diagnostic performance. We believe that this method enables accurate and sentation profile was detected with a gain of 1q, 6p, and chromosome 15 cost-effective non-invasive fetal aneuploidy detection of trisomy 21, 18 and and the loss of 13, 14 and 22q. This specific abnormalities association, remi- 13, which is critical for wide-spread adoption of NIPT. niscent of acquired chromosomal imbalances, indicated a possible Multiple 
P01 .069 Myeloma (MM). Clinical, biological and radiological assessments confirmed Non-invasive prenatal testing or microarray? Additional benefit of a smouldering lambda-type free light chain MM. Array Comparative Geno- microarray analysis in prenatal diagnostic of fetuses with increased mic Hybridization and Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization were performed on risk of common aneuploidies tumor plasma cells from bone marrow puncture : they revealed the same Z. Vlachová, J. Graakjaer, D. Svaneby, A. Bojesen; anomalies as those detected by NIPT. Lillebaelt Hospital, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. This case-report reminds that global medical and ethical thinking is highly required to plan safeguards against possible abuses allowed by these new techniques. It shows the potential power of this tool, whose consequences Introduction: Microarray analysis enables detection of copy number varia- should be anticipated so as to enrich prior information given to patients. tions, aneuploidies and unbalanced translocations. In prenatal diagnostic, The real medical benefit of incidental findings that may arise out needs ca- microarray analysis is considered most beneficial in pregnancies with ul- re6fu6l assessment. ESHG 2016 | BARCELON tA ra, S ouP nA dI N n| oW rmW alW itie. sE S WH eG re.O poR rtG s ab . chromosomal abnormalities detectedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index by single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array in fetuses with increased phrosis. NIPT: high t18 probability. risk of common aneuploidies without ultrasound abnormalities. We focus Second case: 36-year-old primigravida, IVF-ICSI-pregnancy, mildly-in- on chromosomal abnormalities that would not be detected by non-invasive creased nuchal-translucency. NIPT: normal male. Later sonogram demon- prenatal testing (NIPT). strated thickened nuchal-fold. Materials and Methods: We performed SNP-array analysis in 358 pregnant Third case: 28-year-old, normal first, second trimester screening. 15 week women, who underwent chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis bet- ultrasound: cardiac-echogenic-focus and choroid-plexus-cyst. NIPT: t21. ween July 2013 and January 2016. The high risk (HR) group (n=165) inclu- Results: First case: declined invasive testing, at delivery baby showed mi- ded fetuses with abnormal ultrasound findings as defined by Danish Society nor t18 signs, however lacked classic features. Neonate died of respiratory of Fetal Medicine. The group with increased risk (IR) (n=193) consisted of complications at 3 weeks.Cord-blood-karyotype: 46,XX,der(14)t(14;18) fetuses without ultrasound abnormalities with risk assessment for common (p10;q10) (Partial t18). aneuploidies (Astraia) higher than 1/300. SNP-array analyses were perfor- Second case: Karyotype and CMA (amniocytes): atypical Klinefelter syn- med by using Illumina CytoSNP-12 version 2.1. drome, with isochromosome-X. Results: Abnormal SNP-array results were more prevalent in the HR group Third case: amniocyte QF-PCR: normal, however, full-karyotyping: low level 14.5% (n=24) compared with IR group 5.7% (n=11) (p-value 0.007). Within t21 mosaicism (50%). the IR group, nine cases were evaluated as pathogenic. Four of the nine pa- Conclusions: Many factors limit NIPT accuracy. One main limitation is ge- thogenic chromosomal abnormalities detected by SNP-array, would not be netic discrepancy between fetal and placenta tissue. This is true in simple detected by NIPT or other diagnostic methods (aneuploidy screening, tradi- aneuploidies, moreover in incomplete/mosaic trisomies. tional karyotyping). However, all four conditions resulting from these chro- In the first case, although chromosome 18 only partially-duplicated, it was mosomal abnormalities are known to have variable penetrance. correctly identified by NIPT. Conclusions: In comparison with NIPT, SNP-array can potentially identify However, rare isochromosome Xq Klinefelter induced false-negative NIPT, additional genetic abnormalities in fetuses with increased risk of common consistent with lower performance of NIPT for detection of rare sex-aneu- aneuploidies without ultrasound abnormalities. However, the variable pe- ploidies. Xq-duplication probably causes even lower detection-rate than netrance of the additionally detected chromosomal abnormalities by SNP- complete duplication. array makes genetic counseling challenging. For low-level mosaicism, NIPT detected a level of mosaicism of t21, below QF-PCR detection-threshold. These unusual cases are examples that demonstrate NIPT strengths and 
P01 .070 w
P0  e1 ak.0 n7 e2 sses. A free fetal DNA - Real Time PCR based - approach for prenatal False positive result of trisomy 13 by non-invasive prenatal testing diagnosis of beta globin gene mutations in embryos at risk for (NIPT) due to confined placental mosaicism C. C. Hung1, Y. N. Su1,2, H. W. Su3; Thalassaemia 1Sofiva Genomics, Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan, 2Dianthus Maternal Fetal Medicine Clinic, F. Strikou, L. Ikonomopoulos, A. Floratos, C. Chassanidis, E. Voskaridou, A. Balassopoulou, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taichung Veterans General E. Boutou; Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Laiko Hospital, Athens, Greece. Introduction: Recently, non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) has been pro- Thalassaemias, the most common genetic disorders worldwide, are inheri- posed to be a powerful alternative to screening of aneuploidy with its high ted in a recessive autosomal manner. Therefore, prenatal diagnosis of em- sensibility and specificity. However, there is a small chance of false posi- bryos at risk presents the most common method of disease prevention and tive results due to placental mosaicism. is predominantly based on genetic analysis of cells of fetal origin. This mate- Methods: A 31-year old women went for NIPT at 19 weeks of gestation. The rial is mainly obtained through invasive procedures with 1-2% probability positive NIPT result was noted and Z-socre value was 7.36 for chromosome of miscarriage. Therefore, non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) approaches, 13. After informing the elevated risk for fetal trisomy 13, the pregnant wom- based on analyzing fetal DNA circulating in the maternal plasma, were de- an accepted invasive diagnosis by amniocentesis to confirm the result. Am- veloped. niotic fluid cells were used for karyotyping by GTG-banding and oligo array Here, we present a novel approach for detecting beta globin gene mutations comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). present in free fetal DNA (ffDNA). This method is based on High Resolution Results: The karyotype was 46,XY and aCGH result showed arr[hg19] (1-22) Melting (HRM) combined with quantitative analysis. x2, (X)x1, (Y)x1 on amniocentesis for the fetus. Following an abnormal NIPT ffDNA was isolated from maternal serum (Qiamp method) and screened for result, both of the karyotype and aCGH genotype were inconsistent. Then the presence of β globin gene parental mutations based on an in-house HRM the case underwent genotyping for the placenta and cord blood after child- developed approach. In addition, previously described SNPs in the vicinity birth. Interesting, the genotype was arr[hg19] 13q12.11q34 (20,407,324- of β globin gene, for which parents presented distinct haplotypes, were also 115,092,619)x3, (X)x1, (Y)x1 which is compatible with trisomy 13 for pla- determined. centa, and had normal genotype for cord blood. Preliminary results from 12 cases of male embryos carrying the paternal Conclusion: The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) mutation succeeded in obtaining the same diagnosis with the preceded ana- recommended that abnormal NIPT results should be confirmed by invasive lysis of corresponding chorionic villus sampling. Interestingly, the presence procedures. This study show a false positive NIPT finding due to confined of SRY gene was clearly detected in mixtures of 0,5% of male with female placental mosaicism because the fetal cell-free DNA present in maternal genomic DNA while ffDNA is estimated to be no less than 3% of the maternal plasma is mainly derived from placenta. free DNA. The described approach may be directly applied for NIPT of cases where 
P01 .073 the embryo is male and has inherited the paternal β globin gene mutation. Fetal hydrops in combination with gonadoblastoid testicular Further development of the method is expected to cover the rest of the ca- dysplasia may represent a lethal type of Noonan syndrome ses. T. Reischer1, M. Schmid1, M. Nistal2, S. Balendran3, J. Vodopiutz4, E. Krampl-Bettelheim45, N. Popitsch6, S. Liebmann-Reindl7, B. Streubel3; 
P01 .071 1Department of Obstetrics and feto-maternal Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) in unusual aneuploidy cases: Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Pathology, Hospital La Paz, Universidad Autónoma partial trisomies and low-level mosaicism de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, R. Michaelson-Cohen; Vienna, Austria, 4Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Hebrew University, Jerusalem Israel, Jerusalem, Israel. Austria, 5Fetomed - Center for Fetal Medicine, Doebling Private Hospital, Vienna, Austria, 6Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7Core facility genomics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Background: NIPT for aneuploidies is extremely efficient, particularly for trisomy 21(t21) and t18, with sensitivity and specificity >99%. Clinical uti- lization of NIPT has grown rapidly. Objectives: Fetal gonadoblastoid testicular dysplasia is a rare finding. The Patients and methods: In our referral center, women undergo NIPT for sev- combination with typical features of Noonan syndrome has never been de- eral indications. We describe performance in 3 cases. scribed so far. We performed genetic testing including whole exome sequen- Three rare aneuploidies were diagnosed combining NIPT (USA-based-labo- cing in two cases with fetal hydrops, congenital heart disease and gonado- ratories), karyotyping. blastoid testicular dysplasia. First case: 42-year-old woman , integrated-first-second-trimester screen- Methods: Exome sequencing was performed in the index case, where high ing: high t18 risk. Ultrasound: atrioveE nS trH icG ula 2 r 0 se1 p6 ta l| dB eA feR ctC aE ndL O hyN drA on, eS -PA qIN ua l| i tW y DW NAW w.E aS s H isoG la. tO edR fG rom fetal blood. In the second case and in6 f7iveABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .076 An intronic variant in T
P73  is not associated with ovarian reserve or further gonadoblastoma samples, conventional Sanger sequencing was per- response markers in females undergoing assisted reproduction formed on DNA isolated from formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tissue. D. Tohlob1,2, P. Pemberton3, L. Mohiyiddeen4, W. G. Newman2; Results: Whole exome sequencing of the index case revealed a pathogenic 1Mansoura faculty of medicine, Mansoura, Egypt, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic mutation in the RIT1 gene (c.270G>A (p.Met90Ile)), leading to the diagno- Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Department of sis of Noonan syndrome type 8. In case 2, Sanger sequencing of RIT1 did Clinical Biochemistry, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Department of Reproductive Medicine, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS not show any disease causing mutations. Sequencing of PTPN11 revealed a Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. heterozygous frameshift mutation (c.1098delA, p.K366Nfs*12). Successful sequencing of four gonadoblastoma samples revealed mutations in RIT1 in two cases. The p53 family members are involved in many important biological proces- Conclusions: Here we present a lethal form of Noonan syndrome in two fetu- ses, including cell regulation and apoptosis. T
P73  has been associated with ses with typical features combined with severe hydrops and gonadoblastoid the size of the follicular pToPol7, 3o vulation rate and testicular dysplasia. Gonadoblastoid testicular dysplasia may be an additio- maintenance of genomic stability. In a recent Brazilian study, homozygosity nal feature of Noonan syndrome, which has not been described so far, but for an intronic variant in (c.i2n8 v3it-r5o855G>A, analysis of more cases is needed. Moreover, we have demonstrated a poten- rs4648551) was associated with diminished ovarian reserve dTuPri7n3g the as- tial role of RIT1 in the pathogenesis of gonadoblastoma. sessment of females undergoing fertilization (IVF) [1]. 
P01 .074 The aim of our study was to investigate whether this intronic variant Azoospermia and Varicocele in Noonan Syndrome was associated with the ovarian reserve markers: follicle stimulating hor- F. Hazan1, E. Pariltay2, B. S. Ada3, E. Ataman2, A. Tukun3; mone (FSH), antral follicle count (AFC), and anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH), 1Medical Genetics, Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey., izmir, Turkey, 2Ege and early outcome measures: number of eggs retrieved, and gonadotropin University Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics, izmir, Turkey, 3Duzen Laboratories dose required to cTonPt7r3o lled ovarian hyper-stimulation and late outcom e Group, Division of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. measures, including live birth rate. We genotyped the variant by Taqman allelic discrimination assayin 603 females, attending a reproductive medicine unit for their first cycle of Noonan Syndrome (NS) is a syndrome having autosomal dominant inheri- controlled ovarian hyper-stimulation for IVF/ICSI. We did not detect any tance, characterized by typical facial dysmorphic features, short statue and significanTt Pd7if3fe rences (p<0.05) in FSH, AFC, AMH, the number of eggs cardiac abnormalities. PTPN11, SO
S1 , RAF1, KRAS, NRAS, and BRAF are the retrieved, the gonadotropin dose used or the live birth rate in women with genes responsible for this syndrome, in which genetically heterogeneity is different variantgenotypes. considered. PTPN11 gene mutation is seen approximately in 50% of the Our results indicate that there is insufficent evidence to support genotyping patients. Although fertility seems normal in females, males have decreased this variant to individualize the treatment protocols of females undergoing fertility. The incidence of undescended testes (UT) ranges between 60-77% IVF/ICSI. that is the most responsible cause of impaired male fertility. Besides the stu- Ref: Vagnini et al. PLoS One. 2015;10 (3):e0120048. dies reporting the functional impairment of sertolian cells, according to the Funding: Nil hormonal evaluation of NS during adulthood; there are studies remarking the functional impairment of leydig cells. The seminal analysis of male pa- 
P01 .077 tients with NS was reported in 3 studies (8 patients). Three of these cases Novel sequence of Pregnancy-Associated Glycoprotein-like family were normal, whereas half of them having azoospermia and one with severe (PAG-L) identified in the human genome oligospermia. Here we present a father having PTPN11mutation, screened M. Majewska1, A. Lipka2, G. Panasiewicz2, M. Gowkielewicz3, M. Jozwik3, A. Bossowska1, after having a child diagnosed as NS. Father had normally placed testicles, B. Szafranska2; 1Department of Human Physiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Warmia azoospermia and bilateral varicocele in his history. He had a child with in- and Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland, 2Department of Animal Physiology, Faculty of Biology tra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) practice, after varicocele operation. and Biotechnology, University of Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland, 3Department As far as we know, this is the only NS case had the ICSI practice in the litera- of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Warmia and ture. In this page we report the clinical presentation of the father and his girl Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland. case with literature review. 
P01 .075 Findings of Oligo array CGH study of de novo small supernumerary Intoduction: The PAG-L genes encode chorionic proteins belonging to as- marker chromosomes detected prenatally partic proteinases(AP), together with pepsin A,C,F, renin and cathepsin D. H. Zolghadr, A. Rajaee, A. Moshtagh, N. Sadatian, G. Abbasi, m. bazregar, s. gholami, A. Conservative structure of the AP genes comprises promoter, 9 exons and 8 Kariminejad, R. Kariminejad; introns named A-H. The aim was to identify unknown nucleotide sequences Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. of the PAG-L gene family in the human genome. Material and Methods: Human gDNA templates (N=6) were isolated from leucocytes. The gDNA templates were used for PCR of the PAG-L sequence One of the most problematic findings in prenatal chromosomal studies is the with primers that should amplify the region from 5’UTR to exon 2 (with presence of non- hereditary small supernumerary marker chromosomes. It exon 1and intron A), according to AP gene structures(769-1556 bp). After is common practice to identify the status of these chromosomes by perfor- electrophoresis and UV-visualization, dominant amplicons (approx. 700bp) ming routine C- and NOR banding. Recently we have encouraged all couples were gel-out purified, precipitated and sequenced in both directions. All to have oligo array comparative genomic hybridization testing for all not chromatograms were analyzed with Geneious software. Obtained gDNA se- bisatellited markers. quences were compared to PAG-L cDNAs identified by NGS (Illumina). Overall we have done it for eleven samples in the past two years. All eleven Results: Sequencing of amplicons (197-680bp) permitted to identify novel had markers that were not present in chromosomal study of either parent, sequence of the human PAG-L (named hPAG-L). This region of exon 1 re- the presence of genomic material was hard to detect and would fall into the vealed homology (88-99%) only to the pepsinogen family (especially PepA) category of sSMCs. In all these cases the sSMC was present in more than in the primates. The identified sequence of the entire intron A (486bp) 15% of the studied cells. shared high homology (72-100%) to different gDNA clones of homo sapiens We performed oligo array cgh testing on DNA extracted from chorionic vil- and PepA in some other mammals, including 76% homology (exon 1) and li samples or in many cases cultured amniotic fluid cells. Oligo array was 51% performed on Illumina Cytochip 4X44 or 8X60 ISCA platforms according to homology (intron A) to the porcine PAG2 gene. manufacturer’s protocol. Conclusions: This is the first report describing sequence identification of the The results show normal genomic content in all but two cases that we detec- hPAG-L/PepA gene fragment (exon 1 and intron A). Further complex studies ted pericentromeric genomic duplication. One showed a 13 Mb gain and the are required to discover the entire structure of the hPAG-L gene, as potential other, a 2 Mb gain on chromosome 8. Considering the size of the imbalance useful novel marker for genotyping. in the first case, the parents opted for abortion. In the second case only four *Supported by UWM(WNM#1501.801). genes were present in the region and the pregnancy is ongoing. Our findings suggest that despite the small size of the marker chromosomes and their cytogenetically similar appearance, genomic analysis is necessary to help predict their possible role and phenotypic contribution. 68 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .078 
P01 .080 EvE: Reducing the cost of array-based preimplantation genetic An efficient protocol for the detection of junction fragments in PGD diagnosis for chromosome rearrangements (preimplantation genetic diagnosis) for gross deletion mutations A. R. Jones1, A. Corrigan2, S. Bint2,3, A. Davies2,3, P. Renwick3,4, C. Mackie Ogilvie3,4, J. Ahn1; S. Peleg-Schalka, V. Gold, T. Frumkin, A. Carmon, S. Assaf, A. Amit, M. Malcov; 1Clinical Bioinformatics, Guy‘s & St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Racine IVF Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital. Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Kingdom, 2Genetics Laboratories, Viapath, London, United Kingdom, 3Guy‘s and St Israel. Thomas‘ Centre for Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis, London, United Kingdom, 4Genetics Department, Guy‘s & St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. Introduction: In PGD for monogenic disorders the causal mutation is usu- ally diagnosed by restriction enzymes or GeneScan analyses. However, in familial gross deletions, Introduction: The Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ Centre for Preimplantation Genetic primarily diagnosed by MLPA or SNP arrays, the exact breakpoints location Diagnosis (PGD) offers PGD for carriers of balanced chromosome rearran- is unknown and identifying the deleted region is challenging. gements. Aim: To present an effective and simple protocol to detect gross deletions in Currently, the service uses an array CGH platform to detect imbalances, hy- PGD by amplifying junction fragments. bridising DNA derived from embryo biopsies against Promega DNA as a re- Methods: Four couples carrier of gross deletions in chromosomes 11, 16, ference sample, prepared in the same way as the biopsy. As only a few cells FANCA and MSH2 opted for PGD. Deletions ranged between 6-241kbp. In are biopsied, whole genome amplification is required to generate sufficient order to confine the junction fragments 6-25 primers, flanking the deleted detectable signal; however, this introduces noise, which is compounded by regions, were purchased. The closest primers were designed 500bp from differences between quality and nature of biopsy and reference material. the positive probe/ SNP, followed by several primers in a similar distance. We have developed the embryo versus embryo algorithm (EvE) which Following amplification of a junction fragment, amplicons‘ sizes were re- enables the use of an in silico reference, and removes the need to prepare stricted by moving toward the breakpoints. Results: In 3 cases we managed a reference sample for each embryo, significantly reducing labour and con- to create a junction fragment and applied it to PGD. Amplification failure in sumable costs. one Method: Two embryos are hybridised to an array. EvE takes the fluorescence case was due to extended duplication regions homologues to the deletion. intensity data for each embryo and for a stored reference embryo and per- Six PGD cycles were performed. One couple with deletion in chromosome forms an in silico hybridisation, which can be analysed within standard ar- 16 achieved pregnancy and another couple with simultaneous detection of ray CGH analysis software. 2 FANCA mutations and HLA matching has delivered one healthy child and Results: EvE was validated by retrospective analysis of 74 abnormal em- BMT was performed successfully.Discussion: For maximal accuracy in PGD, bryos. Subsequently, EvE was trialled prospectively for three months (46 direct detection of mutations along with haplotype analysis is required. embryos). Overall, EvE demonstrated sensitivity >99% (95% CI 97.6-100) Whenever informative polymorphic markers are absent in the deleted re- and specificity >99% (95% CI 98.4-100). gions, we applied an effective protocol for junction fragments detection by Conclusions: We have validated and successfully completed a prospective scanning large DNA regions. This turns PGD for gross deletions a reliable trial using EvE for chromosome rearrangement PGD, which increases effici- and simple procedure. ency and reduces costs for this test. Furthermore, as an optimal reference can be used for each embryo, there is potential to improve quality and ana- 
P01 .081 lytical sensitivity. Benefits of combined preimplantation genetic screening and endometrial receptivity assessment on IVF outcome for complicated 
P01 .079 reproductive history patients Preimplantation genetic diagnosis by aCGH in woman with familial L. Volozonoka1,2, L. Kornejeva2, N. Novikova3,2, V. Fodina2; complex translocation - 46,XХ,t(3;6;7) 1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2“IVF Riga” Reproductive Genetics Clinic, Riga, S. P. Hadjidekova1,2, G. S. Stamenov2, S. Y. Yaneva Staykova2, B. B. Rukova1,2, R. G. Latvia, 3Latvian University, Faculty of Medicine, Riga, Latvia. Staneva1,2, K. S. Nikolova2, D. I. Toncheva1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2“Nadezhda” Women’s Health Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. Introduction: The mechanism of recurrent implantation failure (RIF) still remains a mystery in many cases of IVF treatment. Embryonic factor exclu- sion by preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) is relevant step in achie- Introduction: Complex chromosome rearrangements (CCRs) are very rare ving considerably good results; however failure rates do not fade away. Te- in humans. In three-breaking-point translocations the hexavalent meiotic sting of endometrial transcriptome (ERA-test) has been launched recently configuration allows four patterns of segregation: 3:3, 4:2, 5:1 and 6:0. 64 to catch skewed implantation window. different gametic chromosomal combinations can arise of which only 2 are The aim of our study was to evaluate the endometrial receptivity as an im- normal/balanced. Carriers have an increased risk of producing embryos plantation failure factor in infertile couples after negative post-PGS embryo with unbalanced karyotype. PGD enables the selection of balanced/normal transfer (ET). embryos for transfer, enhancing the possibility for a healthy child. Materials and methods: IVF was performed by ICSI technology. PGS was Materials and methods: A couple suffered from two early miscarriages. The applied to 80 families. Trophectodermal cells were analyzed according to woman was found to carry CCR: 24Sure protocol (Illumina). Endometrial biopsies for ERA-testing were per- 46,XX,t(3;6;7)(3pter→3q13.2::7p22→7pter;6pter→6q21::3q13.2→3qter;7 formed according to manufacturer’s (Igenomix) instructions. qter→7p22::6q21→6qter). Her first cousin had the same translocation. The Results: 19 couples (23%) had no euploid embryos after PGS (female age couple went through stimulated and Natural-Cycle-IVF. Embryo biopsy was 41.06±3.42). 20 families are waiting for ET; 41 ET has been performed, 25 carried out on Day 5, collecting 5-7 trophectoderm cells. The cells were am- of them resulted in clinical pregnancies (61%, female age 33.77±5.14, BC plified by whole-genome amplification through SurePlex. The amplification amount 5.58±3.22, euploid embryo amount 2.33±1.55). In control group products were processed by 24sure+ microarrays (Illumina) and analyzed (679 couples, female age 38.25±5.4, no PGS, no ERA) clinical pregnancy rate by BlueFuseMulti software. was 37.86%. Half of the patients with negative ET post factum showed non- Results: In total 36 ova were retrieved and two ICSI-PGD procedures were receptive endometrium. performed. From the first cycle 9 ova were aspirated and 4 embryos were Conclusions: Results suggest that PGS analysis can exclude one of the lea- biopsied, none was normal/balanced. The second ICSI-PGD procedure has ding infertility causes - embryo chromosomal incompetence. Great amount started with 27 eggs, 11 embryos were biopsied. We found three normal/ of RIF patient has skewed implantation window, assessment of which is balanced embryos. Two were transferred on Day 6 after fertilization. The crucial in successful implantation establishment. RIF patient subgroup is third normal/balanced embryo was frozen for future transfer. The women heterogeneous and options such as PGS should be applied carefully based conceived with one embryo. She refused prenatal diagnosis but after birth on embryo amount and quality, managing infertile couples in individual the cytogenetic analysis confirmed normal male karyotype 46,XY. patient-tailored manner. Conclusion: The application of aCGH for PGD is an efficient test for CCRs carriers. It reduces the risk of chromosomally imbalanced offsprings, mis- carriages and enhances the baby take home rate. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 69ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .082 
P01 .084 Uniparental disomy of chromosome 12 which leads to a Isomerism, intellectual disability and clinical features associated with phenylketonuria case mutations in the Polyglutamine-binding protein 1 (PQB
P1 ) gene S. Azadmehr1, T. Shirzad1, E. Davoudi-Dehaghani1, S. Dabbagh-Bagheri1, Z. Sharifi1, L. Martinez Ribot1, P. Fernández Álvarez1, M. Sánchez Duran2, S. Arévalo Martínez3, T. A. Bandehi Sarhadi1, L. Rejali1, F. Mollazade1, F. Golnabi1, H. Bagherian1, M. Fallah1,2, S. Vendrell Bayona1, A. Cueto González1, M. Borregan Prats1, F. Lopez Grondona1, E. Tizzano Zeinali1,3; Ferrari1; 1Dr. Zeinali’s Medical Genetics Lab, Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), 1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Disease Unit, Hospital Vall Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Cellular and Molecular Endocrine Research Center, d´Hebron Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain, 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Hospital Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Vall d´Hebron Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain, 3Fetal Medicine Unit, Hospital Vall Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotech d´Hebron Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain. Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. Introduction: A 31-year-old woman was referred to our center at 20 weeks Introduction: Phenylketonuria (PKU) is one of the most prevalent amino of gestation because of a male fetus presented congenital heart defect, left acid metabolism disorders caused by deficiencies in the PAH gene loca- isomerism and ventriculomegaly. No consanguinity was reported but as fa- ted on chromosome 12(12q23.2). Affected persons are born from carrier mily history, her brother and a maternal uncle had mental retardation of parents with autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. unknown cause and similar physical characteristics. Material and method: A 9 -year -old boy who was identified to be affected Methodology: Genetic prenatal studies performed in the fetus (karyotype through newborns screening for PKU referred to our laboratory. Sanger and CGH-array) were normal. The differential diagnosis of the fetus was in- sequencing of PAH gene was performed by extracted DNA from peripheral terpreted not only based in the autopsy findings but also mental retardation blood sample. Linked STRs and VNTR analysis were done in parallel. MLPA present in the two males. PQB
P1 , an X-linked gene, was considered to be a (Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) technique was utilized potential candidate cause. Sanger sequencing of the coding region of PQB
P1  to detect probable deletion in PAH gene. Performance of DNA fingerprinting (six exons, GenBank accession no. NM_005710.2) as well as the flanking in- by evaluation of 16 different DNA markers for the child and his mother. tronic sequences were performed from fetal genomic DNA and after in DNA Result: PAH: c.782G>A mutation was detected in patient. His father was he- of the consultant, her brother, mother, maternal uncle and aunt. terozygote for the same mutation while surprisingly his mother was normal. Results: A 5’UTR mutation (c.-20A>C; NG_015967.1:g.5579A>C) was identi- DNA fingerprinting confirmed maternity with over 99.9% certainty. MLPA fied in the fetus, the patient, her mother and both males affected with men- results did not show any deletion for the affected child and also his mother. tal retardation. No common haplotype in STR analysis and same number of repeats in VNTR The mutation identified was not described before in the scientific literature. was found for the affected child and his mother. The probability of uniparen- It is considered as possible pathogenic because its location in the promoter tal disomy of chromosome 12 was verified observing homozygous haploty- region of the gene could affect the transcription/ traduction of the protein. pe in STR analysis linked to two other genes on chromosome 12, VWF gene Apart from cognitive impairment, physical similarities were found in both 12p13.3 and MMAB gene 12q24. males. All these features are described in patients with other PQB
P1  mu- Conclusion: tations. Paternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 12 is a rare chromosomal ano- Conclusions: PQB
P1  should be considered as a candidate to study when an maly. This study highlighted the importance of STRs and VNTRs analysis X-linked unknown cause of mental retardation is associated with clinical along with mutation detection to specify necessity of prenatal diagnosis. features such as isomerism, short stature and microcephaly. 
P01 .083 
P01 .086 Study of the genetic etiology of primary ovarian insufficiency (POI): The clinical utility of preimplantation genetic diagnosis with human FMR1 and FMR2 genes leukocyte antigen matching (PGD-HLA): an ESHRE PGD Consortium M. Barasoain1, G. Barrenetxea2, I. Huerta1,3, M. Télez1,3, E. Ortiz-Lastra2, J. González2, B. multicentre retrospective cohort study Criado4, M. Arrieta1; J. Traeger-Synodinos1, G. Kakourou1, S. Kahraman2, G. C. Ekmekci2, H. A. Tac2, G. 1Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, Faculty of Kourlaba3, E. Kourkouni3, A. Cervero San4, J. M. Rodriguez4, A. Hellani5, H. Malmgren6, Science and Technology, University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 2Department C. Giménez7, V. Gold8, F. Carvalho9,10, C. Billi11, J. F. C. Chow12, X. Vendrell13, G. Kokkali14, J. of Medical-Surgical Specialities, Faculty of Medicine, University of the Basque Country, Liss15, J. Steffann16,17; Bilbao, Spain, 3Virgen de Begoña Clinical Analysis Laboratory (Medikosta), Erandio, 1Medical Genetics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece, Spain, 4Cooperativa de Ensino Superior Politecnico e Universitario (CESPU), Porto, 2Istanbul Memorial Hospital, IVF and Reproductive Genetic Unit, Istanbul, Turkey, Portugal. 3Collaborative Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Outcomes Research (CLEO), 1st and 2nd Departments of Pediatrics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 4IGenomix, Valencia, Spain, 5Viafet, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 6Stockholm Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is an ovarian dysfunction defined as ir- PGD Centre, Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, regular menses and elevated gonadotrophin levels before or at the age of Sweden, 7Reprogenetics, Barcelona, Spain, 8PGD Lab, Racine IVF Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 9Department of Genetics, 40 years. The FMR1 intermediate (35-54 CGGs) and premutation (55-200 Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 10I3S - Instituto de Investigação CGGs) alleles have been related with the development of this condition. The e Inovação em Saúde, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 11AlfaLab Molecular Biology FMR2 alleles with 11 or less CCG repeats are also a possible genetic cause and Cytogenetics Center, Athens, Greece, 12Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, of POI. A group of 68 women with ovarian dysfunction of unknown etiology, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, 13Sistemas divided into three groups concerning their ovarian condition, and 47 con- Genomicos ltd, Reproductive Genetics Unit, Valencia, Spain, 14Reproductive Medicine trol women from the Basque Country were analyzed. The FMR1 gene, in- Unit, Genesis Athens Clinic, Athens, Greece, 15INVICTA Fertility Centre, Warsaw, Poland, cluding the length of the repeat and the AGG interspersion pattern, and the 16Paris-Descartes University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 17INSERM U781, Necker- Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France. number of CCG repeats of the FMR2 gene were evaluated. Considering the FMR1 gene, the frequency of alleles with 35-200 CGG repeats was statisti- cally higher in the patient group and in the three subgroups. Moreover, these Since the first cases of PGD-HLA in 2001, >1000 cases have been performed, alleles appeared to have two interruptions, the first AGG located in the 10th making it a well-established procedure. However, limited publications pre- position and more than 15 CGG at the 3’ end with the predominant structure clude evaluation of parameters (assisted-reproduction, embryology, gene- 9+9+n. The patient group presented, in general, more unstable alleles and tic probability) influencing positive outcomes: donor-live-born babies and therefore the FMR1 gene appeared to play a role in the etiology of POI in the haematopoietic stem-cell transplantation (HSCT). This retrospective mul- patient group. Regarding the FMR2 gene, we have not found a clear associa- ticentre cohort study, co-ordinated by the ESHRE PGD-Consortium, aims tion with the development of an ovarian dysfunction. to address this. In 2014, 30 PGD centres with published/known PGD-HLA This work has been supported by the Vicerectorate for research of The Uni- activity were invited to participate. Fourteen centres submitted data bet- versity of the Basque Country (GIU 10/05 and UFI 11/32). ween February-September 2015, using a custom-designed secure database (Redcap). Data parameters covered assisted-reproduction procedures, em- bryology, genetic diagnosis, donor-babies born and HSCT for 704 PGD-HLA cycles (364 couples), analysed using STATA SEv.11. HLA-matching with con- current exclusion of monogenic disease accounted for 81%. Mean maternal age was 33years, 7.5% couples were infertile, with 1.93 PGD- HLA cycles/ couple. 9751 oocytes were retrieved (13.89/cycle), 5552 embryos (7.88/ cycle) were analyzed (85% on day-3), using PCR-based protocols (97% cycles). Of 4392 embryos diagnosed (79% of analyzed), 644 were geneti- 70 ESHG 2016 | BARCELON cA a, ll yS P suA itI aN bl e| W (16W .2%W o.E f S thH osG e . aO naR lyG sed for HLA alone; 10% of those ana-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .089 Walker-Warburg syndrome as a cause of prenatally detected lysed for HLA with monogenic disease exclusion). 56.6% of couples had an hydrocephalus in two Roma families embryo-transfer (598 embryos in 382 cycles), producing 163 HCG-positive J. Laštůvková1, A. Klímová1, M. Tóthová2, T. Nix2, M. Fišer2, V. Čejnová1, V. Harmaš1; pregnancies (pregnancy-rate/embryo-transfer: 42.67%, pregnancy-rate/ 1Masaryk Hospital, Ústí nad Labem, Czech Republic, 2GENvia, s.r.o., Praha, Czech initiated cycle: 24.3%). To September 2015, 127 babies were born and 30 Republic. pregnancies ongoing. HSCT was performed in 55 cases (7.8% cycles in- itiated), 76.1% without complications. This first multicentre study evaluates clinical utility of PGD-HLA. Genetic probability remains a major limitation Walker-Warburg syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive inherited condi- to overall success, but further data analysis is expected to highlight other tion characterised by brain and eye abnormalities and severe congenital factors. Acknowledgement: ESHRE funded database customization and data muscular dystrophy. Most of affected individuals die before the third year of analysis. age. Disorder is caused by mutations in several different genes, one of them is ISPD gene. 
P01 .087 Our patients are two unrelated young women of Roma origin. Both of them Identification of mutated genes in consanguineous families with were referred to genetic examination because of ultrasound detection of hy- premature ovarian failure drocephalus of foetus in the second trimester of gravidity. Diagnosis was S. Caburet1,2, F. Fauchereau11,2, A. Todeschini1,2, B. Legois1,2, M. Fellous3,4, R. A. Veitia1,2; also confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging. Both women decided to ter- 1Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France, 2Université Paris Diderot-Paris VII, Paris, France, 3Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 4Université Paris Descartes-Paris V, Paris, France. minate their pregnancy. Karyotype of both foetuses was normal, but Array CGH identified homozygous a 290kb deletion of ISPD gene at chromosome 7, which is one of causes of Walker-Warburg syndrome. Mothers and their Premature ovarian failure is the endpoint of premature ovarian insufficien- partners are heterozygous carriers of this deletion. Genetic counselling was cy (POI) and represents the complete loss of ovarian function. Although POI provided in affected families. They were informed about possibility of assi- is a multifactorial condition, the existence of familial cases shows that it can sted reproduction and PGD and about possibility of early prenatal detection be inherited as the result of a genetic defect. The genetic analysis of families, of Walker-Warburg syndrome from CVS. Unfortunately, in the subsequent particularly very informative consanguineous families, is therefore invalu- gravidity of both our patients the foetal hydrocephalus was again confirmed able to identify genes involved in the pathology. in the second trimester. We analysed two consanguineous families from Middle-East, respective- The overall incidence of Walker-Warburg syndrome is unknown, but for ly with 4 and 2 affected sisters. Combining linkage analysis, homozygosi- example in the Ashkenazi Jewish population it is 1 in 60500 with frequen- ty mapping and exome sequencing, we identified in the first family a 1-bp cy of heterozygous carriers 1 in 149. There is no study about frequency of deletion in the STAG3 gene, leading to a truncated coding sequence. STAG3 Walker-Warburg syndrome in Roma population. encodes a meiotic component of the synaptonemal complex, a ring that ent- Walker-Warburg syndrome should be considered in a differential diagnosis raps sister chromatids and is required for proper pairing of homologous of prenatal detected hydrocephaly and it would be useful to assess frequen- chromosomes during meiosis. STAG3 loss of function as the cause of POI was cy of ISPD gene deletion in Roma population. confirmed by the Stag3-deficient mouse model, in which both sexes were 
P01 .091 infertile due to loss of germ cells and degenerative gonads. In the second fa- A QF-PCR/aCGH strategy for the diagnosis of chromosome imbalance mily, this approach highlighted a premature stop codon in MCM9, encoding in products of conception (POC) and fetal tissues the minichromosome maintenance complex component 9, recently implica- C. Donaghue1, N. Davies1, J. Ahn2, H. Thomas1, C. Mackie Ogilvie2, K. Mann1; ted in POI associated with short stature. Furthermore, Mcm9-deficient mice 1Genetics, VIAPATH, London, United Kingdom, 2Genetics, Guys and St Thomas Hospital, were sterile with empty ovaries. Therefore, our results provided the first London, United Kingdom. confirmation of the implication of MCM9 mutations in POI, expanding the phenotypic spectrum to females with normal height. The genetic analysis of consanguineous families combining linkage analysis In the UK, karyotype analysis of couples with recurrent miscarriage has and exome sequencing is a powerful way to unravel genetic etiologies, espe- been replaced by genetic investigation of POCs and fetal tissues. As a con- cially in highly heterogeneous conditions such as POI. sequence, sample numbers for these tissues have increased by 69% in our laboratory since 2012. We have replaced karyotype/MLPA testing of mis- 
P01 .088 carriage products with QF-PCR for chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, X Current dilemmas in prenatal diagnosis revealed through new and Y, followed in the case of normal results by aCGH. All array imbalances genomics applications and a single center‘s 30 years’ experience and >1Mb and any fully penetrant clinically significant array imbalances <1Mb 90,000 cases are reported. In an 18 month period, 1391 samples were tested using this C. Konialis, C. Pangalos; approach. 25.9% of samples were found to be abnormal on QF-PCR and InterGenetics-Diagnostic Genetics Center, Athens, Greece. aCGH identified a further 9.4% of samples with clinically significant imba- lance, giving an overall abnormality rate of 35.3%. The initial QF-PCR test is rapid, cost-effective and clinically indicated, detecting triploidy (4%) and Introduction: Recent developments in genomics and the wealth of data ac- maternal cell contamination in addition to the common aneuploidies. The cumulated from the application of various diagnostic molecular approaches aCGH analysis approach minimises the number of unknown and reduced in prenatal diagnosis, combined with the advent of novel non-invasive pre- penetrance CNVs that are reported; 0.7% of samples were reported to have natal screening tests (NIPT), have introduced new challenges in this highly an imbalance of uncertain clinical significance. Overall, our QF-PCR/aCGH sensitive field. We provide a perspective of prenatal diagnosis derived from strategy has a lower failure rate and higher detection rate than karyotype or a single center’s evolving experience from more than 90,000 consecutive MLPA strategies. Detection of chromosome imbalance provides reasons for prenatal cases and we highlight important issues and current dilemmas. pregnancy loss and fetal abnormalities, minimising further investigations Materials and Methods: Prenatal cases were referred for various indications and informing risk of recurrence of both miscarriage and fetal abnormality. and more than 90,000 clinical investigations were performed by a combina- tion of standard karyotype, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplifica- 
P01 .092 tion (MLPA), standalone array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) Recurrent miscarriage and implantation failure-Could the etiology be and exome sequencing. maternal intolerance itself? Results: Classic karyotype revealed 1.7% and 7.9% of pathological cases P. Ata1, S. Soysal2, A. Turkyilmaz1, K. Delil1, G. Ilhan3, B. Geçkinli1, M. Vural2; in amniotic fluid and CVS samples, respectively, common aneuploidies ac- 1Dept of Medical Genetics, Marmara University Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, counting for 59.6% and 64.3% of the total abnormal. Molecular approaches 2Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Marmara University Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Marmara University Faculty of Medicinee, increased the diagnostic yield by 0.6% for MLPA and 1.6% for aCGH, unco- Istanbul, Turkey. vering pathogenic chromosomal abnormalities undetectable by karyotype analysis. Finally, exome sequencing provided a further beneficial increase in our diagnostic capabilities. Recurrent miscarriage and recurrent implantation failure (RIF) is one of Conclusions: Current molecular diagnostic capabilities and the recent in- the most controversial issues in assisted reproduction. Herein our aim is to troduction of NIPT point to one current major dilemma in prenatal diagno- search the factors affecting maternal tolerance to pregnancy. sis, with serious implications in genetic counseling of parents, relating on We investigated 34 infertile couples with recurrent miscarriage, admitted the one hand to reaping the benefits from the high detection rate afforded to assisted reproduction between July 2014 to January 2016. Male factor is through new powerful diagnostic techniques, but accepting an invasive risk, excluded.Karyotyping and thrombophilic mutations (Prothrombin, Factor V and, on the other hand, offering a lower detection rate practically for Down invasiveE rS isH k.G 2016 | BARCELONA, SPALINeid |e Wn, MWTWHF.RE 
S67 H7G, 1.2O9R8 Gmutations) were analyzed. HLA and KIR ty7pi1ng syndrome only, with minimalABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .096 Fetal imaging in the diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias and of the couples and Panel Reactive Antibody (PRA) level of the females were craniosynostosis - a case series performed. For HLA and KIR typing Sequence Specific Primer (SSP) techni- V. Ward1, M. Irving1, A. Beleza1, S. Sankaran2, P. Kyle2, G. J. Lee3, C. Walsh4, S. Allouni4, C. que is used. Natural Killer Cell quantitation and PRA levels are determined Ogilvie5, K. Mann5, D. Shears6, J. Carmichael7, M. Holder-Espinasse1; by Flowcytometric analysis. 1Clinical Genetics, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Of the 34 couples we had 10 couples who had three and more miscarriages Kingdom, 2Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Neonatology, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, and implantation failure and the remaining 24 couples had one or two mis- London, United Kingdom, 4Molecular Genetics, Viapath, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS carriges after assisted reproduction. There were more patients with MTHFR Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5Genetics laboratories, Guy‘s Hospital, Guy‘s mutations at the second group than the first (p< 0,05). There were no pa- and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 6Clinical Genetics, tients with Factor V Leiden and Prothrombin mutations. Five couples had Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7Paediatric chromosomal rearrangements of three inversion chromosome 9 and two Radiology, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. translocations. Patients at the second group having more miscarriages had maternal KIR typing as AA haplotype and paternal HLA-
C2  typing as predis- posing factor for the “fetal rejection” compared to the first group patients There are more than 450 skeletal dysplasias ranging in severity and degree (8/10 versus 5/24 respectively, ) (p< 0,05). of associated complications, and although individually rare, collectively Herein our results support that there is a worse effect of KIR and HLA-C they have a birth incidence of around 1 in 5000. Prenatal diagnosis is often mismatch on fertility and those patients with MTHFR mutations had more prompted by the finding of short long bones on ultrasound scanning or in miscarriages compared to wild type MTHFR carriers. cases with a family history of skeletal dysplasias. Specific diagnosis can be 
P01 .093 difficult and relies on clinical, radiological and molecular criteria. Change to guidelines for investigations for recurrent miscarriage - Craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of cranial sutures, has a prevalence effect on solid tissue referrals of 1 in 2000 and around 15% of these are syndromic and associated with N. Davies, C. Donaghue, R. Pain, L. Allan, A. Bergbaum, K. Mann, K. Pawliczak; Viapath, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. other anomalies. Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of craniosynostosis can be difficult and so a definite diagnosis relies on DNA testing. The use of fetal MRI and CT scan imaging has advantages over ultrasound In April 2011 the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) imaging and can provide excellent tissue resolution and a greater field of published new recommendations for investigation and treatment of couples view. Detailed imaging allows for a clear differential diagnosis to be esta- with recurrent miscarriages; cytogenetic analysis should now be performed blished as early as possible, enabling further investigations such as mole- on products of conception rather than the couple’s blood samples. Inheri- cular diagnostic testing to be considered. This can allow for the distinction tance studies are only recommended if an unbalanced structural chromoso- between lethal and non-lethal dysplasias, and permit further discussions mal abnormality is detected in the products of conception. with parents around prognosis and management. These recommendations were implemented in the SE Thames region in We report 4 prenatal cases of Saethre-Chotzen and Carpenter syndromes, April 2012. Hypochondrogenesis, and Metatropic dysplasia with their clinical, radio- We experienced an increase in the total number of products of concepti- logical and molecular features. We show the first UK case where fetal CT on samples from 2011/12 to 2012/13 (42.3%) and a further increase from scan was performed as well as MRI images. The findings demonstrate the 2012/13 to 2013/14 (18.4%), with concomitant increase of products with importance of fetal imaging in helping to reach a prenatal diagnosis and the sample quality insufficient for analysis. impact it has on subsequent clinical management. Gestation was given for 1126 (61%) samples; the first trimester samples 
P01 .097 increased from 109 in 2011/12 (39.4%) to 181 in 2012/13 (51%) to 239 QF-PCR and SNP array offer a superior method for detection of in 2013/14 (52.1%). Of the samples received, with a known gestation, follo- copy number variant and copy number neutral abnormalities in a wing the release of the new guidelines, 207 (11.3%) samples were classed consanguineous family as unsuitable, of which 71 were from the first trimester. Overall, the number G. A. M. Nimmo1, N. Martin2, A. Staines2, N. Watkins3, A. Noor3, D. Chitayat1,2, E. of tests which did not yield a result rose from 9.6% in 2012/13 to 12.3% in Kolomietz3; year 2013/14. 1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, The Poor morphology, or lack of fetal or placental material in these early gestati- University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, on samples are the likely causes of the increase in failure to obtain a diagno- Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount sis. Nevertheless, cause of miscarriage was identified in 35.3% of cases, in Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. the period following the new recommendations. 
P01 .094 Relevance of SNP on p53, IL-11, IL-10, VEGF and APOE in patients with repeated implantation failure (RIF) and pregnancy loss (RPL) Background: Chromosome microarray analysis can identify submicroscopic B. Lledo1, J. Ortiz1, R. Morales1, A. Turienzo1, J. Llacer2, R. Bernabeu1; genomic imbalances that may not be detectable by karyotyping. Because of 1Instituto Bernabeu Biotech, Alicante, Spain, 2Instituto Bernabeu, Alicante, Spain. this increased yield, microarray analysis is emerging as a first-line test for prenatal diagnosis in pregnancies with fetal anomalies or with invasive te- sting for another indications. Furthermore, single nucleotide polymorphism INTRODUCTION: In a population of RIF and RPL patients a high incidence (SNP)-arrays offer the ability to detect copy neural chromosomal aberrati- on different gene polymorphisms was observed. The aim of this work was ons such as uniparental disomy and absence of heterozygosity. Our centre investigate whether single nucleotide polymorphism on p53, IL-11, IL-10, offers combined rapid aneuploidy screening, by quantitative fluorescence- VEGF and APOE have a higher prevalence among women with a history of PCR (QF-PCR), with SNP-array as a first line test in women undergoing inva- recurrent implantation failure (RIF) and pregnancy loss (RPL). sive prenatal testing.Report: We describe a consanguineous couple, known MATERIAL AND METHODS: SNPs genotyping (rs1042522-p53-R72P; to be carriers for a recessive disease by family history, presenting with mul- rs1800896-IL-111082AG; rs1570360-VEGF-1154AG; rs11668344-IL-10; tiple fetal abnormalities at 12 weeks gestation. The fetal abnormalities were rs429358-APOE-R112C; rs7412-APOE-R158C) using TaqMan-assays has not in keeping with disease known to segregate within this family. Combined been studied in 255 women. The control group included 89 oocyte donors. aneuploidy screening performed on chorionic villus sampling was suggesti- In the study group included 166 women: 77 with RIF and 89 with RPL. RIF ve of monosomy 21. SNP-array subsequently demonstrated normal chro- was defined as a total of four transferred cleaved good quality embryos with mMKosSo1me copy-number and near complete absence of heterozygosity (AOH) negative hCG. RPL was defined as two or more miscarriages. of chromosome 21. Further testing revealed homozygous mutations in the RESULTS: The frequency of 
P72 /
P72  genotypes on p53 gene among women gene known to cause Meckel-Gruber Syndrome.Discussion: The initi- experiencing RIF was 9.5% compared with 13.5% for those with a history al QF-PCR result of monosomy 21 would have predicted a low recurrence of RPL and 6% in controls (p<0.05). The frequency of 
E4  isoform on APOE risk for this family. SNP-array demonstrated a significant proportion of the gene among RIF was 18.6% compared with 28.9% for those with RPL and genome with AOH. This information, along with the findings from additio- 13.5% in controls (p<0.05). A tendency between the frequency of genotypes nal molecular testing identified that this couple was a carrier for a second distribution with respect to VEGF and IL-11 was shown with no statistical recessive disease. The combination of both tests allowed for more accurate significance difference. As for IL-10 no differences were reported. counselling in this and future pregnancies. CONCLUSION: This investigation reveals that in RIF and RPL patients 
P72  on p53 gene and 
E4  isoform on APOE are more prevalent than fertile popu- lation. This information together with some additional markers will allow developments of diagnostic tests for detect risk for RIF and RPL before in- 72 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG fertility treatment is initiated.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .098 Prenatal diagnosis of a de novo, interstitial duplications of 10q24.32, associated with split hand and foot malformation by array The first pregnancy of unrelated healthy parents (25 and 24 years) was comparative genomic hybridization referred to invasive prenatal diagnosis due to significant aneuploidy M. Smyk1, P. Węgrzyn2, K. Sobecka1, M. Kędzior1, E. Obersztyn1, B. A. Nowakowska1; risk calculated from multi-marker screening results in 2010. Diagnostic 1Dep. of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Dep. of procedure was declined by the family and the newborn karyotype was Obstetrics and Gynecology of the Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. 46,XX,+21,der(21;21)(q10;q10). Both parental karyotypes were normal (46,XX and 46,XY). QF-PCR using peripheral blood of the newborn proved maternal origin of trisomy with non-disjunction in meiosis I. Introduction: Split hand and foot malformation (SHFM) is a condition char- In the consecutive pregnancy 2014 chorionic villi sampling (CVS) was per- acterized by hypoplasia or aplasia of central digital rays, clefts of hands and formed due to history and high risk for trisomy 21 of first-trimester com- feet and variable fusion of remaining digits and occurs in 1:20000 new- bined screening. Fetal karyotype was again 46,XX,+21,der(21;21)(q10;q10) borns. In 2004 Roscioli et al. characterized a large autosomal dominant and the pregnancy was electively terminated. However, in this case the tri- pedigree segregating split-hand/foot linked to chromosome 10q24. Since somy of chromosome 21 was proved to be of the maternal origin resulting then postnatal cases with duplication of this region and SHFM phenotype from meiosis II error. So the derivative chromosome 21 turned out to be have been described. Herein we present for the first time two prenatal cases most likely an isochromosome 21 with a corresponding karyotype descrip- of a de novo interstitial duplication of 10q24.32 and SHFM. tion 46,XX,i(21)(q10). Materials and Methods: In both cases amniocentesis was performed at 16 Due to the plausible high recurrence risk of maternal meiotic errors the fa- weeks gestation, due to the presence of fetal SHFM, detected by ultrasound mily meets the criteria for preimplantation aneuploidy screening (PGS) in scan. Chromosome analyses were performed on cultured amniotic cells at prospective reproduction. approximately 350 band resolution. Array CGH was performed using com- 
P01 .101 mercially available array (CytoSure, OGT, UK). Confirmatory FISH analyses Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 2 mosaicism: discrepancy between were performed in cultured amniotic cells and peripheral blood lympho- FISH study on uncultured amniocytes and karyotyping of cultured cytes from parents, using BAC clone specific for the 10q24.32 region. amniocytes Results: G-band chromosome analyses revealed normal karyotypes, where- N. Marle1, A. Mosca-Boidron1, C. Thauvin2, T. Rousseau3, D. Lehalle2, J. Thevenon4, N. Jean- as the array CGH detected duplication at chromosome 10q24. In the com- Marçais2, F. Harizay5, N. Laurent5, L. Faivre2, P. Callier1; mon duplicated region 3 genes are mapped: BTRC, POLL and FBXW4, the 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Plateau Technique de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, results were confirmed by FISH. 2Centre de Génétique et Centre de référence „Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Conclusions: The detailed second trimester ultrasound scan can detect ma- Malformatifs“, Hôpital d‘Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Maternité du Bocage, jor fetal malformations and is offered for routine prenatal care. Array-CGH CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Centre de Génétique et Centre de référence, Dijon, France, allowed a precise chromosomal diagnosis, confirming this analysis as a first 5Laboratoire d‘Anatomo-Pathologie, Plateau Technique de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France. tier approach to clarify molecular bases of fetal malformations. This work was granted from Ministry of Science and Higher Education (3942/E-215/S/2014 to BAN). True trisomy 2 mosaicism is rare and has been reported in only one in 
P01 .099 58 000 cases of second-trimester amniocenteses. We report on a healthy Preimplantation diagnostics after genomic analysis in spontaneous 38-year-old G2
P1  woman who underwent chorionic villus sampling (CVS) abortions at 14 weeks of gestation because she presented an abnormal first trimester I. Dimova1, T. Milachich2, M. Savova2, T. Timeva2, M. Yunakova2, A. Shterev2; maternal serum screening (1/196). A non-mosaic 47,XX,+2 karyotype was 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2SAGBAL Hospital „Dr.Shterev“, Sofia, Bulgaria. found on direct cytogenetic analysis and on long-term CVS culture. Amnio- centesis was performed at 16 weeks of gestation. FISH analysis on uncultu- red amniocytes revealed the trisomy 2 at a non-significant level. However, Spontaneous abortions, defined as embryonic or fetal loss before 20 weeks conventional cytogenetic and FISH studies on cultured amniocytes detected of gestation, occur at a frequency of 10-15% of confirmed pregnancies. mosaic trisomy 2 in two independent cultures. Detailed ultrasonographic Establishing their etiology is essential for proper clinical decision in each examination at 18 weeks of gestation showed an eutrophic fetus, without case. About 10% of women with one miscarriage are at risk of recurrent malformation. The patient declined the option to conduct a fetal ultrasound spontaneous abortions, which is a great physical and emotional burden. The follow-up and decided to terminate the pregnancy. most common causes of this condition are fetal genetic abnormalities. In Genetic counseling for mosaic trisomy 2 remains delicate because of the the present study we performed whole-genome analysis by array CGH in rarity of published cases and the difficulty to determine if the trisomy in- 10 abortive tissues. We detected the following genomic anomalies: 2 cases volves fetal tissues or only the amniotic epithelium. Moreover, it has been with 47,XУ, +22 [arr(22)x3]; 1 case with 47,XХ, +20 [arr(20)x3], 47, XY, +16 established that presence of autosomal trisomy in amnion correlates with [arr(16)x3] and 46,XY,arr(7p)x3. Since the last case represents a structural poor outcome even when the fetus appears to carry only diploid cells. aberration we assumed a carriership of balanced chromosomal aberration To date, 19 cases of mosaic trisomy 2 detected by amniocentesis have been and performed cytogenetic analysis of the parents. The karyotype of the mo- reported. Of these, 10 cases were associated with prominent phenotypic ab- ther showed balanced translocation with breakpoints 7q11 and 10p13 - 46, normalities. There were only four births with a normal phenotype. XX, t(7;10)(q11;p13), explaining the observed fetal anomaly. Based on this Here, we conduct an exhaustive analysis of all published observations plus result we performed preimplantation diagnostics in the family using array the present case in search of elements with prognostic value that may faci- CGH and only balanced embryo was transferred. The patient has successful litate genetic counseling. ongoing pregnancy. Conclusion: We detected chromosomal aberrations in 50% of the analyzed 
P01 .102 cases. Among them were present both frequent (such as trisomy 16 and Mosaicism of trisomy 21 due to an isochromosome 21 with the 22) and less common (trisomy 20) anomalies. The structural anomaly re- normal cell line resulting from a two-step rescue vealed constitutional aberration which needs PGD for patient’s safety and B. S. Kristiansen1, J. R. Fagerberg2, C. R. Fagerberg1; 1Odense University Hospital, Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Odense, Denmark, 2Odense successful pregnancy. We conclude that genomic analysis is an effective tool Katedralskole, Odense, Denmark. in the complex diagnostic approach in spontaneous abortions and could be first line analysis with grate impact on decision making. 
P01 .100 Introduction: In a pregnancy with NT of 6,7mm and maternal serum markers Reccurent de novo translocation trisomy 21 in the same family indicating high risk of aneuploidy, the aneuploidy screening with QF-PCR on I. Soldatova, J. Horáček, E. Zemánková, M. Klápová, D. Stejskal, M. Koudová; chorion villus sample (CVS) showed trisomy 21 and chromosomal analysis GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic. showed isochromosome 21 to be the cause. However, in the aborted fetus, QF- PCR seemed compatible with normal quantities of chromosome 21. We present how additional QF-PCR analysis reveals the structural anomaly. Rapid detection of aneuploidies of chromosomes 13,18, 21, X and Y (RAD) Materials and Methods: CVS, different tissue samples from the fetus, and using Quantitative Fluorescent Polymerase Chain Reaction (QF-PCR) has blood samples from the parents. been routinely performed in our laboratory since 2002. Rapid aneuploidy screening with quantitative fluorescence PCR (QF-PCR). Here we present a case of recurrent translocation trisomy 21 (Down syn- (Devyser Compact kit) drome) in one family resulting from two different maternal meiotic division Standard chromosomal analysis errors. In both cases origin and mechanism of non-disjunction was elucida- Results: Trisomy 21 based on an isochromosome 21 was found in CVS. QF- ted by the QF-PCR . ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPA PIN CR | aW naW lysW is o.E f S DNH AG f. rO omR G different tissues from the aborted fetus sho7 w3 edABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P02  Sensory disorders (eye, ear, pain) normal or borderline normal results by QF-PCR, the pattern of markers being slightly different between different tissues. Chromosomal analysis 
P02 .01 was not available for the aborted fetus. The parents had normal karyotypes. The ABCA4 c.5461-10T>C substitution in intron 38, frequently seen in The pattern of markers in the QF-PCR-analyses was compatible with mo- Stargardt disease patients, is a splice site mutation causing skipping saicism of trisomy 21, the normal cell line resulting from a two-step rescue of exon 39-40 and reduced protein level with loss of the maternally derived isochromosome 21 and doubling of the I. Aukrust1, R. W. Jansson2, C. Bredrup2, S. Berland1, H. E. Rusaas1, A. Jørgensen3, M. G. paternal chromosome 21. The ratio between the two cell lines in different Haug4, E. Rødahl2,5, G. Houge1, P. M. Knappskog1,6; tissues was calculated. 1Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Conclusions: In a fetus with trisomy 21 mosaicism, QF-PCR results could Bergen, Norway, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Haukeland University Hospital, wrongly be interpreted as normal. We show that the QF-PCR results reflec- Bergen, Norway, 3Division of Child and Adolescent Health, Medical Genetics Department, ted mosaicism of a cell line with a maternally derived isochromosome 21 University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 4Department of Pathology and and a normal cell line resulting from a two-step rescue of the trisomy 21. Medical Genetics, St. Olav´s University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway, 5Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 6Department of Clinical Science, 
P01 .103 University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. Detection aneuploidies in trophoblast cells in the model experiment ABCA4 E. Musatova, A. Martynov, Z. Markova, N. Shilova; Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Medical Genetics», Moscow, Introduction: One intronic A sBuCbAs4titution, c.5461-10T>C in intron 38, Russian Federation. with a minor allele frequency of 0.039% (non-Finnish, European popula- tion), is the third most common variant observed in patients with SAtBaCrAga4rdt disease, but its functional effect is unknown. Introduction: Non-invasive prenatal testing implies obtaining informati- Materials and methods: Fibroblast samples from patients carrying the on about the genetic status of developing fetus without damage of the fe- variant c.5461-10T>C were analyzed by isolating total RNA, follo- tal membranes. Trophoblast cells circulate in blood of pregnant women. wed by RT-PCR using specific primers spanning the variant. For detection It should be noted, that trophoblasts, in contrast with other fetal cells in of ABCA4 proAteBiCnA, 4fibroblast samples were lysed and analyzed by SDS-PAGE maternal blood, are epithelial cells that are characterized by large size and followed by immunoblotting using a monoclonal ABCA4 antibody. distinctive morphology. For assessment opportunities of trophoblasts’ iso- Results: The variant c.5461-10T>C causes a splicing defect resulting lation from the peripheral blood of pregnant women followed by analysis of in reduction of full-length mRNA in cells from patients and the presence of these cells the model experiment was performed. alternative spliced mRNAs where exon 39-40 is skipped. The splicing defect Materials and methods: There were used 11 samples of artificially created is causing a reduced level of full-length ABCA4 protein compared to controls mixtures. The artificial mixtures were prepared by mixing samples of pe- not carrying the variant. ABCA4 ripheral venous blood of adult with cells’ samples of chorionic villus with Conclusions: This study describes the functional effect and the molecular known karyotype. There were selected two artificial mixtures for followed mechanism of the pathogenic variant c.5461-10T>C. The variant is analysis of genetic material: for preparation these samples were used cho- functionally important as it leads to splicing defects and reduced level of rionic cells with karyotypes 47,XX,+13, and 47,XY,+21. There was used fil- ABCA4 protein. tration through polycarbonate filters with a pore diameter of 8 µm to iso- This study was supported by Helse Vest. late trophoblasts from artificial mixtures. Detection of trophoblasts on the filters was carried out by immunocytochemical staining with monoclonal 
P02 .02 antibodies to the cytoplasmic protein cytokeratin 7. Isolation of single cy- Mutations in the amino acid transporter LAT2 (SL
C7 A8) cause age- tokeratin7-positive cells was performed by laser microdissection followed related hearing loss by a whole genome amplification step. Analysis of genetic material isolated M. Espino-Guarch1, E. Prat2,3, M. Font-Llitjós2, E. Errasti4, G. Girotto1, C. Vilches2, A. M. cytokeratin7-positive cells was performed by comparative genomic hybri- Celaya5, L. Gónzalez2, D. Vuckovic1, I. Sahún6, S. Murillo-Cuesta5, M. López de Heredia2, S. Bodoy4, M. Dierssen6, I. Varela-Nieto5, P. Gasparini1, M. Palacín*4,7, V. Nunes*2,3, *authors dization. sharing seniors leadership; Results: The profiles of hybridization of the genetic material isolated cells 1Experimental Genetics, Sidra Medical and Research Center, Doha, Qatar, 2Human corresponded karyotype chorionic cells that were used for the preparation Molecular Genetics Laboratory, IDIBELL, U730 Centre for Biomedical Network Research of an artificial respective mixtures. on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 3Genetics Conclusion: The obtaining results show that isolated cells were fetal origin. Unit, Physiological Sciences II Departament, Medicine Faculty, University of Barcelona, 
P01 .104 L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 4Institute for Research Biomedicine (IRB Ethnic patterns of Y chromosome microdeletions in Iranian infertile Barcelona), U731 Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), men with azoospermia/severe oligospermia Barcelona, Spain, 5Neurobiology of Hearing Group, Institute for Biomedical Research F. Asadi, M. Seddighi Gilani, A. Ghaheri, F. Reihani-Sabet, J. Roodgar Saffari, M. “Alberto Sols” CSIC-UAM. U761 Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Zamanian; Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 6Cellular and Systems Neurobiology, CRG, PRBB, Royan Institute, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. U716 Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 7Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Biology Faculty, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: Y chromosome microdeletion (Yq) is the most common mole- SL
C7 A8 cular genetic cause for severe male infertility and covers three regions of AZFa, AZFb and AZFc, each of which contain various genes involved in sper- IDnFtNroAd5u3ction: LAT2 ( ) is a neuStrLaCl7 aAm8ino acids transporter expressed matogenesis. Ethnic pattern of Yq microdeletions has not been widely stu- in inner ear and it has been associated with non syndromic deafness locus died in Iranian population. The present study aimed to reveal these patterns . Here we demonstrate that is Silncv7oal8ved in age-related hea- in Iranian infertile men with azoospermia/severe oligospermia. ring loss phenotype. -/- Stria Vas- Materials and Methods: 3636 infertile men referred to Royan institute with cMualaterrisials and Methods: A null mouse model ( ) was generated. SL- azoospermia/severe oligospermia were examined for Yq microdeletions in 
C7 A8 transporter has been localized in the basal layer cells of the using multiplex PCR and different STS markers. The patients were catego- and in the organ of Corti, both essenSLtiCa7l Ast8ructures for proper audito- rized into ethnic groups based on their origin of birth and spoken language ry function. Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR), has beeInn uvsietrdo to measure in three male generations namely Azeri, Fars, Kurd, Gilak/Mazani, Lor and the integrity of hearing process. Human mutations screening was Arab. done in 325 individuals aged more than 50 years old. functional Results: Among 3636 infertile men, 177 cases of Yq microdeletions (4.8%) characterization of mutations found haSsl cb7eae8n done overexpressing SL
C7 A8 were diagnosed, including 60 from Azeri origin (33.8%), 55 from Fars origin mutants in HeLa cells and quantifying the ala-n/-ine uptake. (31%), 23 from Kurd origin (12.9%), 10 from Gilak/Mazani (5.6%), 18 from Results: ABR analysis confirmed that mice suffSelrc 7hay8poacusis ear- Lor origin (10.1%), and 2 from the Arab origin (1.1%). There were also 6 lier than CS
L5 C77
BAl/86 old wild type mice, which suffer age-related -h/-e aring losIns cases of non-Iranian (Afghan & Iraqi) origin. In 177 Iranian infertile men (vAitRroHL). Concomitant with the phenotype observed in mice, four with AZF microdeletions we detected 157 microdeletions in AZFc (70%), 57 different missense mutations had been found in ARHL patients. in AZFb (25.4 %) and 10 in AZFa (4.6%) regions. mutations functional studSielcs7 dae8monstrated a total or partial loss of Conclusion: Statistical analysis did not reveal any difference in the frequen- LAT2 activity. -/- cy and pattern of Yq microdeletions among various Iranian ethnic groups. Conclusion: Characterization of mice reveled how unbalanced ami- Furthermore, the frequency and pattern of Yq microdeletions in Iranian po- no aciSdL Cco7nAt8ent in cochlea could affect auditory system and proved that pulation seems to be similar to the other world regions with AZFc as the LAT2 is involved in hearing mechanism. The finding of ARHL patients’ carri- m7o4st common type. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONeArs, SofP AIN | mWuWtatWion.E aSndH tGhe. OfunRcGtional studies are robust evidences thatABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index SL C7
A8  P02
.05 Microdeletions in patients with aniridia and other eye anomalies point out the significance of in auditory system. These data open V. I. Damyanova1, M. Mihaylova1, A. Popova2, R. Vajarova3, S. Ivanov3, L. Balabanski3, S. new perspective where amino acid transporters could be new potential tar- Hadjidekova1, R. Staneva1, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella4, R. Tincheva5, M. Malinov3, D. Toncheva1; gets to unravel uncharacterized congenital deafness. 1Department of Medical genetics, Medical university of Sofia, sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Medical University of Sofia, sofia, Bulgaria, 3Genomic  P02
.03 laboratory, SBALGAR “Malinov”, sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Clinical genetics- Modifiers of gene expression as potential mechanism underlying University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University of Sofia, sofia, Bulgaria, 5Department incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity in retinal of Clinical genetics-University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University of Sofia, sofia, dystrophies Bulgaria. P. Llavona1, S. Kohl1, M. Pinelli2, M. Mutarelli2, V. Singh Marwah2, S. Schimpf-Linzenbold1, K. Nieselt3, D. di Bernardo2, S. Banfi2, B. Wissinger1; 1Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tuebingen, Germany, 2TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 3Center Introduction: Aniridia is a rare, bilateral, congenital ocular disorder causing for Bioinformatics, Tuebingen, Germany. incomplete formation of the iris, usually characterized by iris aplasia/hypo- plasia. In the majority of cases, it is caused by mutation in the PAX6 gene, but it can also be caused by microdeletions that involve the 11p13 region. Hereditary retinal dystrophies are frequently associated with incomplete One-third of cases are sporadic and result from de novo mutations. penetrance and variable expressivity phenomena. Underlying mechanisms Materials and methods: We tested 6 patients with aniridia (full and partial may include environmental, epigenetic and genetic factors with the latter forms), glaucoma and myopathia, and 1 patient with dysgenesis mesoder- being independent or linked to the primary disease causing gene such as va- malis oculi with SNP microarray Illumina Human CoreExome-12. riants involved in gene regulation. Therefore, identification of retinal disea- Results: Aberrations were observed in 4 patients. Two patients with full ani- se genes that show allelic expression imbalance (AEI) in general population ridia were found to harbor heterozygous deletion in 11p13 sized 167.108 kb is a powerful approach for the identification of cis-acting expression quan- encompassing genes PAX6 and EL P4
. One patient with partial aniridia had titative trait loci (cis-eQTL). Our aim is to determine which cis-eQTLs could loss of heterozygosity in part of 20p11.1p11.21 sized 1.266678 Mb, contai- act as disease behavioral modifiers. We performed RNA-Seq from retinal ning VSX1 gene. VSX1 mutations have been previously reported in patients RNA obtained from 52 healthy eye donors of European background. After with abnormalities of the anterior segment and keratoconus. A heterozy- filtering SNPs displaying extreme imbalanced allelic ratios, that are defined gous deletion in 6q22.31q22.32 sized 659.704 kb., including genes: HEY2; as lower than 0.3 and higher than 3.4 based on top 5% values, we validated NCOA7; HINT3 was found in one patient with dysgenesis mesodermalis ocu- heterozygosity by SangCeDrH sReq1uenciEnMg Ca1nd AEI by pyrosequencing. Our RNA- li. Gene HEY2 is involved in the signal transduction pathway of PAX6, FOX C1
 Seq results revealed that among 301 known retinal disease genes, 64 sho- and PITX2 genes, associated with the disease. wed evidence for AEI. and , displaying some of the highest AEI Conclusion: In our study of patients with eye disorders we found in additi- frequencies (100% and 67% respectively), have already been positively va- on to a microdeletion of PAX6, two new deletions encompassing HEY2 and lidated by pyrosequencing. In both cases AEI iCs Da HfeRa1ture excInlu ssiilviceoly present VSX1 genes. in specific gene isoforms. Comparative sequencing revealed an intronic SNP, rs4562752, strongly associated with AEI in -002. analysis  P02
.06 predicts an impact of this variant on splice site selection and thus, explains Whole exome sequencing (WES) and downstream analysis in a family the AEI observed for this isoform. Our results indicate that allelic transcrip- with suspected “x-linked” cone rod dystrophy (CORD) reveals two tional alterations caused by cis-eQTLs can indeed be traced by RNA-Seq ana- disorders caused by compound heterozygote mutations in CERKL and lysis. Validation of further relevant retinal genes is still ongoing. CRB1  P02
.04 J. C. Gardner1, V. Plagnol2, M. Aguilà1, A. R. Webster1,3, M. Michaelides1,3, A. J. Hardcastle1; F P7
-PEOPLE-2012-ITN under grant agreement 317472. Deep next generation sequencing of the whole mitochondrial genome 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 2UCL Genetics Institute, in Polish patients with aminoglycoside-induced hearing impairment London, United Kingdom, 3Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, M. Rydzanicz1, A. Pollak2, U. Lechowicz2, P. Stawinski2,1, M. Wrobel3, I. Wojsyk-Banaszak4, United Kingdom. R. Ploski1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Molecular genetic analysis of a family with apparRePnGt RX -linkeRdP i2nheritance of Poland, 3Department of Otolaryngology and Laryngological Oncology, Poznan University CORD was performed in order to establish the cause of visual impairment. of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of Pulmonology, Pediatric Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Negative mutation screening of X-linked genes CERaKnLd C iRnB t1he male proband was followed by WES which revealed possible compound heterozy- gous mutations in two autosomal candidate genes: and CER.KL Segregation analysis in the extended pedigree demonstrated the proband Introduction: Mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are associated with and his affected brother were coCmRBpo1und heterozygotes for the va- aminoglycoside-induced hearing impairment (AIHI). However, in many riants, ENST00000  C4
R1B00187:c.[863_864del];[1160-1G>A] that could account studies only MTRNR1 gene is analyzed. We performed whole mtDNA se- for their condition, however the variants were bothC EoRn KthLe same (ma- quencing for identification of known and novel AIHI mutations, mtDNA het- ternal) haplotype, :ECNRSBT100000367399:c.[exon2:493_501del;exon4:1 eroplasmy assessment and haplotype prediction. 024G>A]. An affected male cousin did not inherit either variCaRnBt, 1but Materials and Methods: Hearing impairment patients with aminoglycoside had inherited the variant haplotype. The cause of his coCnRdBit1io n was exposure history (n=130) and normal hearing controls treated with ami- therefore unresolved. Sanger sequencing of the coding regions of in noglycosides without ototoxic effect (n=100) were enrolled into the study. this individual did not reveal any additional mutations in other exons, All participants were Caucasian. MtDNA was enriched by long-range PCR however, cloning and sequencing of exon 2 revealed a heterozygous frames- and sequenced. MToolBox was used for haplogroup assignment, functional hift deletion ENST00000367399:c.[613_619del] on the paternally derived and prioritization analysis of identified variants, and heteroplasmy fraction haplotype, that had been masked by thCeR Bd1el etion variant of the maternally assessment. derived haplotype. The phenotype in the cousin was therefore caused by Results: Mean coverage per mtDNA genome was >1000x in each subject. compound ChEetReKroLzygouCsR Bm1utations of . We found homoplasmic AIHI m.1555A>G mutation in MTRNR1 (5/130) and Our analysis has identified novel disease-causing compound heterozygous several putative AIHI-related candidates, including m.7445A>G in MTT S1
 variants in and and shows two autosomal recessive retinal dis- precursor (1/130, familial case) previously not associated with AIHI. Het- orders masquerading as an X-linked condition in this pedigree, thus creating eroplasmy analysis trough the whole mtDNA genome and haplotype predic- issues for genetic counselling. This illustrates the importance of segregation tion revealed higher heteroplasmy frequency in HI patients and recurrent analysis in the extended family for the successful interpretation of WES data. haplotypes not observed in control subjects (H7c - 3/130, HV10 - 2/130, This work was supported by Moorfields Special Trustees. R0a - 3/130, W3a - 3/130, W6a - 2/130). We also identified patient harbor- ing low level heteroplasmy of m.3243A>G mutation in MTT L1
 associated with MELAS syndrome. This mutation was missed in previous Sanger se- quencing screening and patient was misclassified to our AIHI group. Conclusions: NGS technology is a powerful tool for mtDNA analysis in AIHI patients allowing for known and novel mutations detection. Heteroplasmy frequency and specific haplogroups observed in AIHI patients may be an ad- ditional factors modifying personal susceptibility to AIHI. Support: NCN2013/09/D/NZ5/00251 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 75ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.07 Phoenix, AZ, United States, 6Keck Medicine of USC, Los Angeles, CA, United States, Next generation sequencing discovers novel splice variants causing 7University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. deafness in the Middle Eastern population N. Danial-Farran1,2, L. Tamer2, Z. Brownstein3, F. T. A. Martins2, M. Khayat1, G. Ast2, S. Allon-Shalev1, K. B. Avraham2; In order to overcome the lack of knowledge on the molecular bases of com- 1Genetics Institute, Ha’Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel and Rappaport Faculty of plex hearing traits (Normal Hearing Function-NHF, Age-Related Hearing Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 2Department of Human Loss-ARHL), a fruitful gene discovery strategy is proposed: new candidate Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, genes/variants identified through GWAS/metanalysis are then validated by Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Afula, Israel. targeted re-sequencing (TRS) and functional studies in animal models. GWAS on NHF (quantitative) and ARHL (qualitative) on 4150 subjects from different cohorts (Italian isolates, Belgium, Caucasus and Central Asia) were performed. Two strongly significant loci (p-value~2e-8) were identified, The numbers of reported pathogenic variants causing genetic disorders one of which (top-SNP:rs11520167) includes a gene causing hearing loss have increased dramatically since Next Generation Sequencing has beco- in mice and affecting cochlear outer hair cells. Interestingly, it is the first me available. The Middle Eastern population, known to exhibit high rates example of a hearing-loss gene modulating NHF. of consanguinity and comprised of isolated ethnic groups, has contributed To further investigate the role of candidates identified we developed a cu- dramatically to the discovery of pathogenic variants causing deafness. We stom TRS panel of 46 genes and analysed ~500 ARHL patients from our applied targeted genomic enrichment (TGE), along with massively paral- cohorts. 56 mutations of interest were identified: 5 frameshift indels, 2 lel sequencing (MPS), of 284 genes on unrelated Middle Eastern families. nonsense and 49 missense affecting 22 different genes and 128 patients. Our results doubled the number of genes associated with deafness in this According to the complex genetic structure of ARHL, three scenarios were population. A number of these required functional validation to determine detected: 1)different mutations in the same gene, 2)the same mutation in the consequences of the variants. One of these was a synonymous alteration different patients and 3)different mutations in the same patient. Finally ge- located in the 5’ splice site of the MYO15A gene. Our challenge was to prove nes were prioritised and included for expression analysis in the otic vesic- the consequences of this variant, since we could not check the splicing in le of Zebrafish larvae and for the generation of Knock-Out/In models and the patient’s RNA, due to the inaccessibility of human inner ear tissue and their accurate phenotypic characterisation. Results from the first series of lack of MYO15A expression in lymphoblasts. As a result, a functional spli- genes (e.g. SL C44
A2 and SL C9
A3R1) will be presented and discussed. cing assay was performed to determine the consequences of the variant on These results strongly support the usefulness of our approach to detect and splicing. Due to the high GC content surrounding the splice site, we created validate new genes involved in NHF and ARHL. a modified human cell line expressing the wild type and mutant forms of the genomic region. Our results indicate that the mutation abolishes intron  P02
.10 retention, an event that is likely to be a functional alternative splicing event. Evaluation of a progressive diagnostic strategy to identify the genetic Considering the importance of providing evidence for pathogenic variants, etiology of hearing loss our study demonstrates the use of a robust tool for investigating splicing J. S. Crettaz1, R. Muguerza1, L. Otaolea1, Z. Martinez2, M. Abrego2, Y. Ramirez1, R. Saez1; variants, particularly for genes expressed in inaccessible tissues. 1Genetics Department, Donostia University Hospital, San Sebastian, Spain, Supported by NIH/NIDCD grant R01-D C011835
. 2Otorhinolaryngology Department, Donostia University Hospital, San Sebastian, Spain.  P02
.08 Exon-skipping allows passing complete CE P290
 loss-of-function in an Introduction: Hearing loss is the most prevalent sensory deficit and is individual with unusually mild retinal disease caused by genetic, environmental or multifactorial etiologies. It traditionally X. GERARD1, I. Perrault1, A. Munnich2, C. Hamel3, J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1; presented a challenge for genetic testing due to its heterogeneity. 1Institut Imagine - Lab of Genetics in Ophthalmology - Inserm U1163 - Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2Institut Imagine - Genetics department - Inserm U1163 Materials and Methods: Seventy-one patients with early-onset sensorineu- - Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3Maladies Sensorielles Génétiques, CHRU - ral hearing loss were enrolled. First Tier approach includes the study of INSERM U1051, Institute for Neurosciences, Montpellier, France. m.1555 and m.1494 mitochondrial mutations and MLPA study for identi- fication of duplications/deletions and common point mutations in GJB2 and GJB6 genes. Second Tier was performed using a custom NGS panel of 92 Introduction. CE P290
 is pivotal in the assembly/maintenance of primary genes on 16 negative patients. Haloplex technology (Agilent Technologies) and motile cilia in a wide range of cell systems. Biallelic CE P290
 mutati- was used for exons and flanking intronic sequences enrichment and sequen- ons cause a wide spectrum of devastating ciliopathies ranging from mono- cing was performed on a MiSeq (Illumina). symptomatic retinal dystrophy to multi-visceral sometimes embryo-lethal Results: First-tier strategy detected 1 homoplasmic m.1555 mutation in syndromes. The CE P290
 retinal disease manifests invariably as a conge- MT-RNR1 gene (1,5%) and 8 pathogenic conditions in GJB2 and GJB6 genes nital and dramatically severe cone-dominant disease with visual function (12%). Second-tier produced a coverage of targeted exons for >20 reads of reduced to light perception. Using targeted-NGS in individuals with retinal 96,3% and a mean depth coverage of 454x. By our filtering strategy, the pa- dystrophies, we identified a homozygote CE P290
 1pb deletion (c.1666del; tients were classified as follow: 5 resulted with a pathogenic variant (31%), p.Ile 556Phefs*17) in a 15 year-old girl having a rod dominant disease with 5 with uncertain variants (31%) and 6 with irrelevant findings (38%). All preserved cone function (visual acuity = 6/10). The present study aimed at relevant variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and characterizati- understanding the molecular bases of this observation. on of novel variants is in course. Material and Methods. RT-PCR, RTqPCR, Western blot and cilia analyses Conclusions: Diagnostic capacity of NGS is indubitable although the pro- were performed from patient and control fibroblasts. gressive approach presented here may be useful to maintain a cost-effective Results. Analysis of the CE P290
 mRNA in patient fibroblasts revealed low strategy and to cover all the technically excluding needs (mitochondrial, lar- levels of an altered splice form in which exon 18 was skipped (5% of the ge copy number variants, single nucleotide variants). Preliminary results of amount of the wildtype mRNA in controls) and Western blot detected low our testing strategy reached an overall diagnostic yield of 44%. levels of a CE P290
 protein around 290 KDa. The number of patient fibro-  P02
.11 blasts producing a cilium under serum starvation was in the normal range. Distribution of pathogenic variants in non-SL C26
A4/PDS hearing Conclusions. The mutation identified in the patient is predicted to encode a impaired patients with inner ear abnormities: initial results from a premature stop codon in exon 18, downstream of the 1bp deletion in exon Czech cohort 17. The skipping of exon 18 with the upstream 1bp deletion allows produ- R. Pourová1, J. Paděrová1, J. Sabová1, R. Katra2, M. Jurovčík2, M. Havlovicová1, M. Macek, cing low levels of CE P290
 mRNA with an intact open reading frame and of a jr.1; minimally shortened protein which expression may explain the preservati- 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech on of central vision. Republic, 2Department of ENT, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.  P02
.09 Unravelling human complex traits: the case of hearing function and age related hearing loss Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) is the most common inborn sensory deficit D. Vuckovic1, A. Morgan2, M. P. Concas3, M. Ciullo4, T. Nutile4, M. Pirastu3, M. J. affecting about 1 in 300 neonates with a strong genetic aetiology (up to Huentelman5, I. Schrauwen5, R. A. Friedman6, E. Fransen7, G. Van Camp7, P. Gasparini1,2, G. Girotto2,1; 75%) and is mainly associated with AR- and non-syndromic pattern inhe- 1Sidra Medical and Research Centre, Doha, Qatar, 2University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, ritance. However, de novo AD pathogenic variants may also be found, while 3Institute of Population Genetics, CNR, Sassari, Italy, 4Institute of Genetics and Biophysics syndromic features could be rather mild or even misleading during child- ‚A. Buzzati-Traverso‘, CNR, Naples, Italy, 5Translational Genomics Research Institute, hood. 76 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONFAiv, eS fPamAiIlNies | f WromW thWe .cEoShoHrGt o.fO SRLCG26A4/PDS negative patients with HHLABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index compounded by inner ear abnormalities (IEA) were analysed. One family a 105-gene diagnostic NGS test for IRD. We assess the diagnostic yield, the has AR-, another AD trait; in three cases the occurrence of HHL was appa- spectrum of clinical referrals, the variant analysis burden, and the genetic rently sporadic. Four cases did not have syndromic signs, while one case had heterogeneity of IRD. We retrospectively analyze disease-causing variants, a syndromic form of HHL. including an assessment of variant frequency in ExAC. Extended gene panel next generation sequencing (NGS) was carried out in Findings:Individuals were referred from 10 clinically distinct classifica- all studied cases (TruSight One, Illumina, USA), verified by Sanger DNA se- tions of IRD. Of the 4,542 variants clinically analysed, we have reported 402 quencing in detected variants. mutations as a cause or a potential cause of disease in 62 of the 105 genes We have identified likely pathogenic variants in all examined families. Most surveyed. These variants account or likely account for the clinical diagno- commonly compound heterozygous pathogenic variants were found in sis of IRD in 51% of the 537 referred individuals. 144 potentially disease- MYO15A (2 families) associated with AR NSHL, while compound heterozy- causing mutations were identified as novel at the time of clinical analysis, gous MYO7A variants linked to Usher syndrome 1B and de novo AD EYA1 demonstrating a clear advantage of diagnostic NGS approaches for IRD but and CHD7 variants causing BOR- and CHARGE syndromes respectively, were also highlighting the need for further evidence to assist clinical interpreta- observed. tion. Only 15% of molecular diagnoses are accounted for by mutations in In conclusion, this pilot study provided evidence that the genetic aetiology the 33 genes identified as a cause of IRD post-2005, suggesting that whilst of inner ear disorders is heterogeneous. Although BOR- and CHARGE syn- the continued addition of new disease-causing genes will of course improve dromes are well documented causes of HHL with IEA, pathogenic variants diagnostic services, there is a need to survey intronic and regulatory regions in MYO15A and MYO7A have not been reported, thus far. Further studies of genes known as a cause of IRD. utilising NGS are thus warranted. Interpretation:Our findings illustrate the continued powerful utility of cus- Supported by FNM00064203, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022, NF-CZ11- tom-gene panel diagnostic NGS tests for IRD in the clinic, but suggest clear PDP-3-003-2014, LD14073 and GAUK_165815. future avenues which will increase diagnostic yields.  P02
.13  P02
.15 Distinct clinical and radiological phenotype associated with POU3F4 Whole genome sequencing findings in Spanish families affected with mutations Retinal Dystrophies A. Pollak1, U. Lechowicz1, A. Kędra2,3, P. Stawiński1, M. Rydzanicz2, M. Mrówka4, P. R. Sanchez-Alcudia1, N. Bedoni2, B. Royer-Bertrand2, M. Corton1, A. Avila-Fernandez1, R. Skarżyński5,6, M. Furmanek7,8, H. Skarżyński4, R. Płoski2, M. Ołdak1; Perez-Carro1, N. Sanchez-Bolivar1, O. Zurita1, K. Nikopoulos2, S. Balzano2, C. Rivolta2, C. 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw/ Ayuso1; Kajetany, Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, 1Department of Genetics, IIS-Fundacion Jimenez Díaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, Poland, 3Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Warsaw Medical University, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Warsaw, Poland, 4Oto-Rhino-Laryngology Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw/Kajetany, Poland, 5Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 6Department of Heart Failure and Cardiac Rehabilitation, To study the genetic basis and to identify pathogenic mechanisms of Retinal Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 7Bioimaging Research Center, World Dystrophies(RD), a total of 10 Spanish families, remaining uncharacterized Hearing Centre of the Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw/ Kajetany, Poland, 8Department of Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging, Medical Centre for by Whole Exome Sequencing(WES), were analyzed by Whole Genome Se- Postgraduate Education, Warsaw, Poland. quencing (WGS). The WGS data were processed following an expert in-house in silico pipeline developed by the University of Lausanne. We were able to characterize 4 out of 10 (40%) of the families. Biallelic single nucleotide va- POU3F4 mutations (DFNX) are the most prevalent cause of hearing loss riations (SNV), undetected by WES due to the low-depth coverage of the spe- among all the X-linked loci. The aim of the study was to screen for POU3F4 cific region, were detected in an X-linked Retinitis Pigmentosa and two auto- mutations in a large group of hearing loss patients, analyze audiological and somal recessive RD families with mutations in the NYX, DFNB31 and ACBD5 radiological features in patients with HL caused by POU3F4 defects and to genes, respectively. The identification of a nonsense mutation in the NYX present our experience on cochlear implantation in these patients. Muta- gene, responsible for congenital stationary night blindness, led to the reas- tions in the POU3F4 gene were first analyzed in a selected group of pati- sessment of the clinical diagnosis. Interestingly, the WGS analytical pipeline ents with gusher or gusher-like incidence (n= 26) through sequencing of in combination with homozygosity mapping analysis were able to identify the whole gene. Subsequently, the identified mutations were screened for a novel homozygous mutation in the ACBD5 gene in a maternal isodisomy in a cohort of two thousand males with HL The molecular techniques used case, leading to a new phenotype-genotype association. A combination of a to detect POU3F4 mutations included whole exome sequencing, Sanger se- non biallelic SNV and a structural variation was found in an additional arRD quencing and real-time PCR. Three novel (p.Glu187*, p.Leu217*, p.Gln275*) family. Affected members of this family were compound heterozygous for a and one known p.Ala116fs141* POU3F4 mutations were detected. One of missense variant and a ~56kb deletion involving exons 32 and 33 in the EYS the novel mutations was revealed to be a de novo event. All probands with gene. In this study, we show the power of WGS coupled with homozygosity POU3F4 defects suffered from bilateral prelingual severe to profound HL. mapping in solving recessive cases. Moreover, we demonstrate not only that Morphological changes of the temporal bone in these patients presented a WGS allows the detection of structural events, but it also has a more uniform similar pattern, including malformations of the internal auditory canal, ve- and reliable sequencing coverage compared to WES. stibular aqueduct, modiolus and vestibule. Two of the patients with POU3F4 FIS(PI:13/00226),CIBERER,FJD_HOSPITAL_BIOBANK,ISCIII(CD12/00676), mutations received cochlear implants with good outcome. In summary, ex- EMBO,SNSF GRANT310030-156260 tensive clinical and genetic investigations show that POU3F4 mutations fre-  P02
.16 quently occur in patients with particular temporal bone malformations. In Improving the management of Inherited Retinal Dystrophies by this group of patients sequencing of the entire POU3F4 gene is necessary targeted sequencing of a population-specific gene panel due to specific requirements and an increased risk of complications during C. Mendez-Vidal1,2, N. Bravo-Gil1,2, L. Romero-Perez1, M. Gonzalez-del Pozo1,2, E. otologic surgery. Rodriguez-de la Rua3, J. Dopazo4,5, S. Borrego1,2, G. Antiñolo1,2; Support: NCN 2012/05/N/NZ5/02629, NCN 2011/03/D/NZ5/05592, NCN 1Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, University Hospital Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University 2013/09/D/NZ5/00251 of Seville, Sevilla, Spain, 2Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Sevilla, Spain, 3University Hospital Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain, 4Centro  P02
.14 de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 5Centre for Biomedical Network Molecular findings from 537 individuals with inherited retinal Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain. disease J. M. Ellingford1, S. Barton2, S. Bhaskar2, J. O‘Sullivan1, S. G. Williams1, J. A. Lamb1, B. Panda3, P. I. Sergouniotis1, R. L. Gillespie1, S. P. Daiger4, G. Hall2, T. Gale2, C. Lloyd1, P. N. Introduction: Molecular diagnosis of Inherited Retinal Dystrophies (IRD) Bishop1, S. C. Ramsden1, G. C. M. Black1; has long been challenging due to their extensive clinical and genetic hete- 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Central Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3GANIT Laboratories, Institute for rogeneity. Here, we describe an efficient next generation sequencing (NGS)- Bioinformatics and Applied Biotechnology, Bangalore, India, 4University of Texas, Texas, based diagnostic tool for the identification of causative mutations in a Spa- TX, United States. nish cohort with diverse IRD. Methods: We used a custom NGS panel comprising 64 IRD-associated ge- nes in our population, and three disease-associated intronic regions for the Background:Inherited retinal diseases (IRD) are a clinically and genetically molecular diagnosis of 32 families with a wide range of IRD. Targeted bases heterogeneous set of disorders, for which diagnostic next-generation se- were captured and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform. Subsequent- quencing (NGS) services have been developed worldwide. ly, bioinformatics and co-segregation analyses were performed to identify ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 77 Methods:We present the molecular findings for 537 individuals referred to causative variants.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results: A total of 37 pathogenic mutations (14 novels) were found in 73% nine in the exon 36 of the LTB P2
 gene (c.5439_5440insA). Familial study by of IRD patients ranging from 50% for autosomal dominant cases, 75% for the polymorphic markers confirmed a common haplotype associated with syndromic cases, 83% for autosomal recessive cases, and 100% for X-lin- this mutation previously not described. Conclusion: The LTB P2
 gene has ked cases. Additionally, unexpected phenotype-genotype correlations were been described in non-European families as a responsible of IEL associated found in 6 probands, which led to the refinement of their clinical diagnoses. with megalocornea or congenital glaucoma (OMIM#251750). Panel-based Furthermore, intra- and interfamilial phenotypic variability was observed. NGS approach has allowed the identification of a new mutation in the LTB P2
 Finally, two cases unsuccessfully analysed by exome sequencing were resol- gene, which confers a different phenotypic variation to IEL: no megalocor- ved by applying this panel. nea or congenital glaucoma. Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that this hypothesis-free approach  P02
.19 based on frequently mutated, population-specific loci is highly cost-efficient Variants in SK P1
, PROB1, and I L17
B associated with familial for the routine diagnosis of this heterogeneous condition and allows the un- keratoconus identified by linkage analysis combined with whole biased analysis of a miscellaneous cohort. The molecular information found exome sequencing here has aid clinical diagnosis and has improved genetic counselling and J. A. Karolak1,2, T. Gambin3,4,5, J. A. Pitarque6, A. Molinari6, S. Jhangiani4, P. Stankiewicz4, J. patient management. R. Lupski7,8, M. Gajecka2,1; Funded by: PI11-02923 (ISCIII), CIBERER, CDTI FEDER-Innterconecta, CTS- 1Department of Genetics and Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Poznan University of 1664 (Government of Andalusia) and Foundation Ramón Areces. NB-G is Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy supported by fellowship FI12/00545 from ISCIII. of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Computer Science, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor  P02
.17 College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Unraveling the genetic basis of simplex cases of Retinitis Pigmentosa Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 6Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital N. Bravo-Gil1,2, M. González-del Pozo1,2, C. Méndez-Vidal1,2, M. Martín-Sánchez1, S. Metropolitano, Quito, Ecuador, 7Department of Molecular & Human Genetics; Human Borrego1,2, G. Antiñolo1,2; Genome Sequencing Center; Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, 1Department of Genetics, Reproduction and Fetal Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine of Houston, TX, United States, 8Texas Children‘s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States. Seville, University Hospital Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville, Seville, Spain, 2Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Seville, Spain. Keratoconus (KTCN) is a protrusion and thinning of the cornea, resulting in impairment of visual function. The extreme genetic heterogeneity makes it Introduction: The purpose of this study was to elucidate the genetic cause of challenging to identify factors unambiguously influencing the KTCN pheno- the diseased ein n Sopvoanish patients with simplex (isolated) Retinitis Pigmentosa type. To identify a potential genetic susceptibility component which may be (RP), allowing to determine the proportion of these cases with autosomal involved in familial KTCN, we used linkage analysis, whole exome sequen- recessive, autosomal dominant or X-linked RP. cing (WES), and Sanger sequencing in an Ecuadorian family with KTCN. We Materials and Methods: A capture panel containing 68 genes associated applied WES in two affected KTCN individuals from the family that showed with Inherited Retinal Dystrophies (IRD) in Spanish population was used a suggestive linkage between the KTCN phenotype and the 5q31.1-q35.3 lo- for the molecular diagnosis of 24 simplex cases of RP. Targeted bases were cus. Putative rare variants identified in WES analysis were confirmed and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform. further evaluated for segregation in this family using Sanger sequencing. Results: Gene panel sequencing generated a mean coverage of 915x and Exome capture discovered a total of 173 rare (MAF <1% in control popula- a mean of reads on target of 96.98%. A total of 19 pathogenic mutations, tion) nonsynonymous variants in bSoKtPh1 affected individuals. Among th PeRmO,B 116 including point mutations, frameshift mutations and large deletions, were SNVs were selected for further stuILd1y7. BSegregation analysis revealed that va- found in 13 out of 24 patients, obtaining a diagnostic rate of 54.17%. Of fa- riants c.475T>G (p.Cys159Gly) in , c.671G>A (p.Gly224Asp) in , mdei lnieosv osolved, 69.2% were autosomal recessive cases, 15.4% carried mutati- and c.527G>A (p.Cys176Tyr) in in the 5q31.1-q35.3 linkage region ons in X-linked IRD genes and 15.4% were autosomal dominant cases with co-segregated with the phenotype. We demonstrate that a combination of mutations. linkage analysis, WES, and Sanger sequencing, significantly narrowed re- Conclusions: Our results indicate that the most common pattern of inheri- duced the list of the putative variants. Moreover, since the analyzed locus tance of simplex cases of RP is autosomal recessive but, due to family im- overlapped two other chromosomal regions previously recognized in dis- pact, other options should not be overlooked. To our knowledge, this is the tinct KTCN studies, our findings further suggest that this 5q31.1-q35.3 locus first study to apply next-generation sequencing to seek for causative mutati- might be linked with KTCN. ons in Spanish simplex RP cases, deciphering the prevalence of the different Support: National Science Centre in Poland, grants 2013/10/M/NZ2/00283 modes of inheritance behind these types of pedigrees and improving the and 2013/08/T/NZ5/00754; US National Human Genome Research In- subsequent clinical management of patients and respective families. stitute (NHGRI)/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) grant Funded by: PI11-02923 and PI15-01648 (ISCIII), CIBERER, CTS-1664 (Go- HG006542 to the Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics. vernment of Andalusia). NB-G is supported by fellowship FI12/00545 from ISCIII.  P02
.20 A targeted-resequencing gene panel for the genetic diagnosis of Leber  P02
.18 congenital amaurosis Panel-based NGS reveals: a new mutation in the LTB P2
 gene causing M. Plumari1, A. Asaro1, S. Zucca1, M. Valente1, G. S. Grieco1, S. Signorini2, C. Cereda1; Isolated Ectopia Lentis in a Spanish consanguineous family 1Center of Genomics and post-Genomics, C. Mondino National Neurological Institute, S. Bernal1, J. Crespi2, L. Alías1,3, L. González-Quereda1,3, P. Gallano1,3, M. Baiget3; Pavia, Italy, 2Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, C. Mondino National Neurological 1Genetics Department. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, Institute, Pavia, Italy. 2Ophthalmology Department. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3U705-CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is a group of early-onset childhood retinal dystrophies characterized by vision loss, nystagmus and Introduction: The ectopia lentis is a rare disease characterized by the pre- severe retinal dysfunction. Currently, mutations in over 20 genes have been sence of crystalline bilaterally smaller and more spherical than the normal reported to cause LCA, mostly with an autosomal recessive pattern of inheri- size (microspherophakia). The lens subluxation can lead refractive error, tance, although a genetic diagnosis is hard to achieve because of the genetic glaucoma due to pupillary block and vision loss. Although it is generally heterogeneity. The aim of this study was to obtain a fast and accurate strat- associated with systemic disorders (Marfan, Weill-Marchesani syndromes egy for genetic diagnosis of LCA. or homocystinuria), it is also described an isolated form (IEL) showing an Materials and Methods: coding regions of 24 genes implicated in LCA were autosomal recessive inheritance, and characterized by a high phenotypic va- analyzed in a cohort of 27 unrelated patients referred to our laboratory, by riability and genetic heterogeneity (ADAMTS L4
, FBN1, LTB P2
, ADAMTS L10
 performing a TruSeq Custom Amplicon (Illumina) assay for targeted-rese- and ADAMTS L17
). Material: All members of a Spanish consanguineous fami- quencing. ly were studied, of which two sons were affected by IEL without megalocor- Results: two and one mutations were detected in 16 and 6 patients, respec- nea. Methods: 1) Next generation Sequencing (NGS) by TruSight One panels tively. Sanger sequencing of uncovered regions identified further mutati- (Illumina) of the patient samples. 2) Validation of the NGS results by Sanger ons in 4 patients. The segregation analysis was performed on the available sequencing method. 3) Confirmation of a common origin of the detected parents. Twenty cases were fully diagnosed: 7 homozygotes and 12 com- mutation in the LTB P2
 gene using the polymorphic markers D14 S43
 and pound heterozygotes (recessive genes), and one heterozygous subject (do- D14 S999
. Results: Several genetic variants were identified by NGS, only one minant genes). Overall, 32 different pathogenetic variants were identified sh7o8wed a pathogenic effect. This mutation invoElSveHs Gth e2 i0ns1e6rt i|o nB oAf RanC aEdLeO- N(Ah,a lSf PofA wINhi c|h W wWereW n.eEwS mHuGta.OtioRnsG); nonsense, missense, frameshift andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index splicing mutations were found mostly in 6 genes (AIP L1
, CE P290
, GUCY2D, of GHL in North Oman and the strategy described could have primary impli- NMNAT1, RPGRI P1
, SPATA7). cations for an efficient design of GHL diagnosis in Oman. Conclusions: in a high percentage of confidently diagnosed LCA patients,  P02
.23 mutations may be found in known recessive genes; our targeted-resequen- Targeted/Whole Exome Sequencing plus Animal Models for the cing gene panel allows to detect a high number of described and new muta- molecular characterisation of Hereditary Hearing Loss (HHL) tions, turning out to be a valid method for genetic diagnosis of LCA. A. Morgan1, D. Vozzi2, E. Rubinato1, M. Khalifa Al-Kowari2, M. Di Stazio1, R. Badii3, K.  P02
.21 Abdulhadi3, M. La Bianca4, P. Gasparini1, G. Girotto1; 1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Sidra medical research, Doha, Qatar, 3Hamad Genetic heterogeneity in autosomal dominant familial Meniere Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 4IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. Disease C. Martín-Sierra1, T. Requena1, A. Gallego-Martinez1, A. Lysakowski2, J. Lopez-Escamez1; 1GENYO, Granada, Spain, 2Dept. of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Univ. of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States. HHL is characterised by clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Here, 70 Italian and Qatari HHL families were screened by analysis of 113 HHL-genes by Targeted Re-Sequencing (TRS) followed, in negative cases, by Whole Exome Introduction: Meniere’s Disease (MD) is a complex disorder characterized Sequencing (WES) to discover HHL-candidate genes and by in vitro and in by recurrent attacks of spontaneous vertigo associated with sensorineural vivo validation of them. hearing loss and tinnitus, with a strong familial aggregation (prevalence Ion Torrent PGM™(4.356 amplicons ensuring approximately 92,6% cove- of 8-10% of familial cases). We have performed whole-exome sequencing rage of the target region) and Ion Proton™(293.903 amplicons ensuring (WES) analysis in three different families with autosomal dominant inheri- approximately >99% coverage of the target region) were used for TRS and tance pattern of MD, to study the genetic causes of this disorder, identifying WES, respectively. Genomic variants were annotated by ANNOVAR and filte- the candidate variants segregating the MD phenotype. red according to:a) pedigree pattern of inheritance, b) allele frequency data, Materials and Methods: WES data were processed in SOLiD 5500xl platform. c) pathogenicity prediction. Functional studies were carried out in Zebrafish We filtered the Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) by dbSNP 142, ExAC da- (expression and generation of K/O-K/I). tabases and our in house control database, using a minor allelic frequency TRS allowed us to characterise 9/25 Italian and 8/15 Qatari families (over- MAF > 0.0001. To prioritize candidate variants we used the following bioin- all detection rate of 43%) while for other 30 TRS-studies are in progress. formatics tools: Pathogenic Variant –PAVAR score, an in house scoring sy- As regards to WES, 19 cases entered the pipeline. Some new genes (i.e. stem based upon seven tools (SIFT, PolyPhen2, Grantham’s Matrix, GERP+, BD P1
; PSI P1
) and several strong candidates (e.g.TB L1
Y, PIEZO1, LAM C1
, Mutation taster, PhastCons and PhyloP) estimating the effect in protein PL S1
) for which final functional validation is in progress were identified. structure and phylogenetic conservation; and bioinformatics tools that in- Preliminary data include: 1) expression studies for PL S1
 in Zebrafish larvae clude phenotype information such as Exomiser v2 and Variant Annotation revealing a strong gene-expression in the hair cells of the otic vesicle; 2) Analysis and Search Tool (VAAST) + Phevor. All variants were validated by RT-PCR on TBLY1 showing a cochlear expression in the Human cDNA and Sanger sequencing technology in a 3130 Genetic Analyzer. transfection of HEK cells displayed that the mutation alters the stability of Results: After filtering and prioritizing, we have genera, ted a list of candidate the protein itself. These findings highlight the relevance of the combined pathogenic SNVs, and we confirmed the expression of these genes in inner approach based on NGS and animal model validation in understanding the ear human tissue. The top candidate genes are PRKCB SEMA3D and DPT. genetics of HHL. Updated data will be presented and discussed. Conclusion: Our results support genetic heterogeneity in familial MD.  P02
.24 Acknowledgments: Funded by PI-0496-2014 (Consejería de Salud), Targeted Next Generation Sequencing for Diagnosis of Patients with Meniere’s Society UK and NIH D C013181
. Congenital Eye Malformations  P02
.22 M. Tarilonte1, A. Gomez1, L. Rodrigues Jacy da Silva1,2, C. Villaverde1,3, C. Velez1,3, A. Gimenez1,3, V. Lopez4, M. Ballesta4, J. Rosell5, E. Guillen4, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1,3, F. Blanco- WES and mutation analysis in 26 families reveal a new founder Kelly1,3, C. Ayuso1,3, M. Corton1,3; MYO15A frameshift duplication as the major cause of Genetic Hearing 1Genetics Department, IIS-Universitary Hospital Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Loss in Oman Spain, 2University of Mogi das Cruzes, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Spanish Centre for Biomedical F. Palombo1, T. Pippucci1, N. Al-Wardy2, M. Oppo3,4, M. Al Kindi2, A. Angius3,5, K. Al Lamki2, Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 4Medical Genetics G. A. Gnecchi Ruscone6, T. Giangregorio1, M. Benelli7, F. Cucca3,4, A. Magi8, M. Seri1, M. Department. University Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 5Genetics Sazzini6, M. Al Khabori9, G. Romeo1; Department. University Hospital Son Espases., Palma de Mallorca, Spain. 1Medical Genetics Unit, Polyclinic Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 2College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 3Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 5Center for Introduction: Congenital eye malformations are highly heterogeneous con- Advanced Studies, Research, and Development in Sardinia (CR S4
), Parco Scientifico ditions displaying a wide spectrum of overlapping phenotypes. Mutational e Tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, Italy, 6Laboratory of Molecular Antropology, load is not well known due to lack of systematic molecular characterization University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 7Department Laboratory, Careggi University of large cohorts. Our aim is to perform comprehensive molecular screen- Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 8Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University ing for eye developmental causal genes using a next-generation sequencing of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 9Department of ENT, Al Nahda Hospital, Ministry of Health, (NGS) gene panel. Muscat, Italy. Methods: 82 uncharacterized patients with several ocular phenotypes (A/M, aniridia, ocular coloboma, anterior segment dysgenesis and nerve GJB2 optic malformations) were analysed. Six positive cases carrying previously The prevalence of Genetic Hearing Loss (GHL) in Oman is estimated to be known mutations or CNVs were included for validation. A custom targeted 6/10000 and mutations in are known to be absent; however a tho- enrichment system for 121 genes was used, followed by sequencing on Illu- rough molecular genetic assessment of GHL in Oman is lacking. Families of mina platforms. Sanger validation and custom Agilent CGH arrays were used children with GHL have high consanguinity rates, indicating a major role for to validate candidate variants and CNVs, respectively. autosomal recessive forms. We recruited 43 GHL patients from 26 North Results: Currently we have findings for 44 patients. Targeted NGS identi- Omani consanguineous families and analyzed one of these by Whole Exome fied pathogenic mutations or novel potentially damaging variants in 44% of Sequencing (WES), identifying a novel homozygous frameshift duplication patients. After segregation analysis and phenotyping, we characterized the (c.1171_1177dupGCCATCT) in MYO15A, a gene associated with autosomal 30% of cases, mainly those suffering from A/M. A total of 19 different causal recessive deafness (DFNB3). This was then found in 8/26 (28%) families, mutations, being 63% of them novel, were found in 17 genes. Complete het- in heterozygous state in 2/190 subjects from North Oman and absent in erozygous deletion of OTX2 and SIX6 was also been identified by NGS in a 94 subjects from South Oman. The duplication was within a 849 Kb foun- patient with syndromic bilateral anophthalmia. Further aCGH analysis con- der haplotype and using SNPs located on a 1Mb genomic interval including firmed a 6.2Mb microdeletion at 14q22.3-q23.2 encompassing both genes. MYO15A to infer haplotypes in disease individuals and in around 2,500 Conclusions: Our custom NGS gene panel represents an accurate tool for healthy worldwide subjects we reconstructed a median joining network to genetic analysis of eye developmental diseases, allowing for a better under- get insights into the origins and evolutionary history of the MYO15A dupli- standing of pathogenic mechanisms, deciphering of novel phenotypic asso- cation. We then performed WES in 12 families out of the 18 non MYO15A- ciations and improving molecular diagnosis of these rare conditions. mutated and identified mutations in different genes which are likely to be Grants: ISCIII (C P12
/03256), MINECO (SAF2013-46943-R), Fundación Mu- causative of GHL in 7/12 families with an overall diagnostic rate of 58% tua Madrileña. (15/26). In conclusion, the MYO15A duplication, found in 28% of families and with a carrier population frequenEcyS oHf G1% 2, 0em1e6r g|e Bs aAs RthCe EmLaOjoNr cAau, sSe PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 79ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.25 The importance of NGS in the diagnosis of syndromic deafness T. Likar1, N. Teran1, A. Maver1, M. Hasanhodžić2, B. Peterlin1, K. Writzl1; pain threshold (least stimulus intensity) and pain tolerance (maximum 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2UKC Tuzla, Tuzla, Bosnia and tolerance stimulus intensity) in 1,114 previously genotyped subjects from Herzegovina. the 10,001 Dalmatians cohort. The subjects were genotyped with either Hu- manHap 300v1 or 370CNV-Quad. QC protocol included removal of indivi- duals with less than 97% genotyping rate, call rate below 98%, minor allele Objective: 30% of patients with hereditary hearing loss have the syndromic frequency below 2% and P-value for Fisher‘s exact test of Hardy-Weinberg form thereof. This means, that they have clinical signs of illness in at least equilibrium below 10E-10. Since subjects originated from three different one other organ system. Hearing loss has been described in more than 400 groups, we performed a fixed effects meta-analysis. different syndromes but its severity varies widely. Our aim was to demon- Results: The results suggested one marginal hit for pain tolerance on chro- strate the importance of NGS in the diagnosis of syndromic deafness when mosome 2, belonging to ROCK2 gene (rs4260216, P=5.3x10-7). The effect the patient‘s phenotype is atypical. size of this SNP was comparable among all subsets, with similar allele fre- Methods: We enrolled 19 patients with HL who had previously been quencies and with very low heterogeneity (I2=0, P=0.540). This SNP also screened to exclude pathogenic mutations in the GJB2 gene and whose clini- showed nominal significance association with pain threshold (P=6.8x10-4). cal symptoms indicated a form of syndromic deafness. Exon library con- There were no other SNPs in this region with suggestive significance, due to struction and enrichment were performed using the Illumia TruSight One very low regional LD patterns. targeted panel and sequencing was subsequently carried out on the Illumi- Conclusion: This gene was previously implied in cytokinesis, smooth muscle na MiSeq Sequencer. Variant analysis and filtering were performed using a contraction and focal adhesion, thus suggesting a plausible biological role bioinformatic pipeline designed at our Institute. in nociception, which was also recently implied in mice study. Replication Results: Our exome sequencing study led to the identification of 9 causative efforts on humans should focus on independent population, larger sample pathogenic variants among the 19 patients giving us a diagnostic yield of sizes and possibly even patients with chronic pain. 47%. Variants were found in 8 different genes including CHD7, NEFL, MITF, Funding: Medical Research Council UK, Croatian Science Foundation grant HDA C8
, SF3B4, USH2A, TSHZ1, and RYR1. 8875 and EFIC-EGG grant for young investigators. We gratefully acknow- Discussion: Our results coincide well with previous findings that NGS has a ledge contribution from the Institute for Anthropological Research, Croatia. high potential in the diagnosis of syndromic HL. We demonstrate that NGS is  P02
.28 especially useful in the diagnosis of patients with atypical phenotypes and Three major mutations and their rapid detection of the SL C26
A4 gene in cases of uncertainty of weather the HL is part of a syndromic case or a in East Asian patients with Pendred syndrome/enlarged vestibular separate condition altogether. aqueduct syndrome  P02
.26 T. KANAM E1
, K. Yanagi1, A. Ganaha2, M. Higa2, M. Iso1, Y. Matsui1, F. Koiwa1, Y. Kuroki1, M. Noonan syndrome and related disorders associated with coloboma: Suzuki2, Y. Matsubara1; seven case reports and review of literature 1National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 2University of the Y. Capri1, H. Dridi1, F. Guimiot2,3, D. Héron4, M. Till5, N. Philip6, H. Dollfus7,8, E. Schaefer7, D. Ryukyus Graduate School of Medicine, Okinawa, Japan. Timbolschi7, L. Vera9, P. Bitoun10, H. Cave11,12, A. Verloes1,3; 1Clinical genetics, CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France, 2Biologie du développement, CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France, 3INSERM UMR 1141, Paris, France, 4Clinical genetics, CHU Pendred syndrome (PS) and hearing loss associated with enlarged vestibu- La Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France, 5Cytogenetics, CHU Lyon, Bron, France, 6Clinical lar aqueduct (EVA) are caused by mutations in the SL C26
A4 gene. We ex- genetics, CHU La Timone, Marseille, France, 7Clinical genetics, CHU Strasbourg, amined the SL C26
A4 gene in 30 patients with PS or EVA in Okinawa Islands, Strasbourg, France, 8CARGO, Strasbourg, France, 9Pediatric ophtalmology, CHU whose clinical history, findings of physical and otoscopic examinations, hea- Robert Debre, Paris, France, 10Pediatric department, CHU Jean Verdier, Bondy, France, 11Molecular genetics, CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France, 12INSERM UMR  S1131
, Paris, ring test, and computed tomography (CT) scan of the temporal bones were France. recorded, by Sanger sequencing and/or next-generation sequencing. We found that a mutation of IV S15
+5G>A was the major allele in Okinawan pati- ents and the 2nd was p.H723R, which was the major mutation allele in main Noonan syndrome (NS) is a multiple congenital malformation disease Islands of Japan and in Korea. As ancestral differences have been reported whose incidence is evaluated from 1/1000 to 1/2500 living births, quite between people from Okinawa Islands and those from the main islands of frequent among the rare diseases. Characteristic features are short statu- Japan, the mutation type of SL C26
A4 was also different. According to our re, facial dysmorphism, heart defects and cryptorchidism. Orthopedic, renal results and previous reports, the three mutations, IV S15
+5G>A, p.H723R malformations, development delay and intellectual disability are also obser- and IV S7
-2A>G, accounted for more than 60% of SL C26
A4 mutations in the ved. Eyes complications are less described but very common since 95% of East Asian patients. Thus, we constructed a simple and rapid detection sy- patients with NS displayed at list one or more ophthalmologic findings. Most stem based on high resolution melting method for the three mutations. The of those findings are external features belonging to the characteristic facial detection system will be able to detect more than 95%, 60%, 90%, 65%, and dysmorphism of NS (hypertelorism, ptosis, down slanting palpebral fissu- 80% of SL C26
A4 mutations in the Okinawan, Japanese, Korean, Chinese and res and epicanthic folds). Strabismus and refractive errors (myopia, hyper- Taiwanese patients, respectively. The system will be cost effective and will metropia and astigmatism) are also frequent. Fundus changes are reported be applied to first screening/genetic testing of PS/EVA. less frequently. Few cases of iris and/or optic disc coloboma in patients with  P02
.29 NS or related disorders have been described since 1987. Only one study fo- Molecular study of 14 families with Perrault syndrome: genotype / cused on eye abnormalities in NS had found coloboma in 4% (2 cases among phenotype correlations 51 patients). None of the previously NS cases with coloboma was confirmed L. Jonard1, S. Marlin1, J. Lerat1, A. Munnich1, D. Lacombe2, S. Christin-Maitre3, C. Goizet2, by molecular analysis. L. Van Maldergem4, S. Gherbi1, P. Touraine5, J. Bonnefont1; We describe 7 new cases of NS (or related disorders) with iris and/or optic 1Necker Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 2Bordeaux Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 3Saint disc coloboma and review the 10 previously reporter cases. Elevated inci- Antoine Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 4Besancon Hospital, Besancon, France, 5Pitié dence of NS could let thought this association would be fortuitous but the Salpetriere Hospital, APHP, Paris, France. 2 familial cases (one family previously reported and one new family) may suggest that coloboma is a rare complication of Rasopathy. Perrault syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the  P02
.27 association of bilateral sensorineural hearing loss and female gonadal dys- Experimental pain threshold and tolerance analysis points to ROCK2 genesis. The prevalence of this syndrome is probably underestimated due as a novel gene involved in nociception to the discovery of secondary ovarian failure and no sign associated with M. Kirin1, A. Miljković1, A. Relja1, A. Gelemanović1, C. Hayward2, M. Braš3, I. Rudan4, I. deafness in boys. Kolčić1, O. Polašek1; Recently five different genes: c10ORF2, CLPP, HAR S2
, HSD17B4, and LAR S2
 1Medical School, University of Split, Split, Croatia, 2Institute for Genetics and Mollecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3Medical School, were involved in Perrault syndrome. A sixth candidate gene has been sug- University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 4Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, gested: LON P1
. Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Thanks to NGS technique, we analyzed the five known genes and the addi- tional candidate gene in a cohort of 17 patients (14 families) with a clinical picture suggestive of Perrault syndrome, 6 patients presented with neuro- Introduction: The aim of this study was to investigate the genetic basis of logical signs. This is the first study of all the genes involved in Perrault syn- acute pain. drome in a cohort of patients. M8a0terials and methods: We measured experimEeSnHtaGlly -2in0d1uc6e d| BmAecRhaCnEicLaOl NWAe, SshPoAwIeNd m| uWtaWtioWns .iEnS 8H faGm.iOlieRs. GLAR S2
 seems to be the most frequentlyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.32 Linkage analysis of Pakistani families with autosomal recessive implicated gene and we haven’t found any mutation in the candidate gene retinal dystrophies LON P1
. 8 of the 10 mutations found in our study had not been described Z. Ravesh1,2,3, B. Wissinger2, V. Yassaee1,4, M. Ansar3; previously. 1Genomic Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Thanks to our results and literature data (18 mutations, 31 patients, 12 fa- Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tübingen, Germany, milies), we found correlations between the presence of neurological mani- 3Department of Biochemistry, Lab of Genomics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan, 4Dept. of Medical Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of festations and mutations in HSD17B4 and c10ORF2 genes. Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. The absence of mutation in the studied genes in several families could be due either to a fortuitous association between ovarian dysgenesis and deaf- ness in sporadic cases, or the existence of other genes involved. In favor of Introduction: Hereditary retinal dystrophies (RD) are a group of heteroge- this hypothesis, a linkage study of a large family of patients allowed to exclu- neous disorders caused by mutations in over 200 genes. RDs can be subdivi- de the six known loci.  P02
.30 ded into different groups based on the primary degeneration of rod or cone Genetics of Congenital Glaucoma in Saudi Arabia, phenotype- photoreceptor cells. This study was conducted to investigate the underlying genotype correlation RD genes and mutation in consanguineous families from Pakistan. L. Abu Safieh, L. Aljasim, O. Owaydha, D. Edward‎; Material and Methods: Families were recruited after informed consent. Pe- King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, riyadh, Saudi Arabia. ripheral blood was collected and genomic DNA was extracted according to standard procedures. Homozygosity mapping was performed using Affyme- trix Gene Chip Human Mapping 250 K-NspI arrays. The data were analyzed Purpose: Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is an autosomal recessive dis- using Homozygosity Mapper software. Primers for amplifying all exons and order, affects children between birth and 3 years old and cases improper intron boundaries of all genes were designed with Primer3plus software development of the eye’s aqueous outflow system that results in optic nerve followed by PCR and Sanger sequencing. Minigene splicing assay and DNA damage and significant vision loss. PCG is predominantly caused by muta- walking were performed on respective samples. tions in the CY P1
B1 gene. Aim was to understand more about the genetic Results: Homozygosity mapping identified a novel locus in family A, one no- factors verse the phonotypic presentation that affect the development and vel gene ( C8
ORF37) in family B and a large novel genomic deletion of the PCG in Saudi patients for proper diagnosis and patients care. (LCA5) gene in family C. Methods Conclusion: Our study indicates the heterogeneous nature of retinal dystro- In this study we screened CY P1
B1 in 75 PCG families at KKESH. DNA was phies in Pakistan. The amalgamation of traditional and modern molecular extracted from affected individuals and available relatives. We performed techniques is required for accurate identification of mutations. It is anticipa- PCR and sequence analysis to detect mutations and perform genotype/phe- ted that these findings will contribute to future genetic testing in Pakistani notype correlation. families to minimize the risk of recessive disorders. Results: This study describes a missense mutation to be responsible for di- sease in less than 1% of the cases, the previously reported p.G61E mutation  P02
.33 was found to be responsible for approximately 40% of all cases, emphasi- Generation of retinal dystrophy mouse models by CRISPR/Cas9 sing on the founder effect expected from a consanguineous population like genome editing M. López-Iniesta1,2,3, P. Escudero-Ferruz1, G. Marfany1,2,3, R. Gonzàlez-Duarte1,2,3; the Saudi population. Screening our cohort against the previously reported 1Dept. de Genètica, Fac. Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de p.R469W mutation showed that it is responsible for approximately 1% of Biomedicina (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBER-ER (Instituto the cases. Approximately 34% were negative for CY P1
B1 mutations, disease Carlos III), Barcelona, Spain. in these cases would be either due to regulatory or deep intronic mutations in CY P1
B1 gene or other glaucoma known genes. Conclusion: These results with the clinical evaluations are being used in ge- Introduction: Mutations in over 200 genes are associated to inherited mo- notype phenotype correlation and genetic counselling for family with PCG. nogenic retinal degenerative diseases (prevalence 1:3000 worldwide), but We analysed age of onset, vision severity, myopia and other clinical features, we are still far from completely understanding their ethiopathology. There- s Pi 0gn 2i .3fic 1ance was found between the 3 mutations group. fore, animal models are an essential tool to complement in vitro and cell cul- Clinical and molecular characterization of the ABCA4-associated ture assays. We aimed to generate two different mouse models by genome dystrophies: novel genotype-phenotype correlations editing of CERKL and NR2 E3
, two retinal dystrophy genes, to dissect and M. Riera, A. Bures-Jelstrup, J. C. D‘Antin, P. Mendez, B. Corcostegui, R. Navarro, E. characterize their precise role in photoreceptor cells. Pomares; Methods: We have generated mouse models by the new approach RNA- Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular, Barcelona, Spain. guided endonuclease CRISPR/Cas9 system. For CERKL, we performed a full gene deletion of nearly 100 kb. For NR2 E3
, we aimed to delete some of the functional domains. After zygote injections and embryo transfer, mosaic Purpose: Mutations in ABCA4 gene cause a wide range of recessive retinal pups were genotyped to characterize the modified alleles, and were used disorders that can lead not only to macular dystrophies, but also more dif- as founder animals to obtain heterozygous homozygous mice in subsequent fuse and peripheral atrophy patterns. To date, over 800 pathogenic variants matings. have been associated to this gene, showing an extremely high allelic hetero- Results: As no viability problems were observed, experiments to assess the geneity. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether certain ABCA4 alleles effect of CERKL and NR2 E3
 deletions in retinal phenotype are currently correlate with specific clinical features. being carried out on wildtype, heterozygous and homozygous littermates. Methods: Clinical assessment was performed to characterize and classify Retinal morphology and functionality is being assessed and compared to a cohort of 55 families into five different phenotypes: Stargardt Disease other knock-out and knock-down animal models. These new genetically mo- (STGD), fundus flavimaculatus (FF), bull’s eye maculopathy, cone dystrophy dified strains will provide further insights into the role of these two genes and cone-rod dystrophy (CRD). These families were genetically analyzed by in visual disorders. a combination of highthroughput analyses, Sanger sequencing, genotyping Grants: MJLI is in receipt of a FI-DGR 2015 fellowship (Generalitat de Ca- microarrays, MLPA techniques, and cosegregation studies. When a new va- talunya). This work was supported by SAF2013-49069- C2
-1-R (Ministerio riant was detected, the pathogenic effect was validated using bioinformatic de Economía y Competitividad, Spain), La Marató TV3 (project 201417.30), predictions, human polymorphism databases and molecular assays. SGR2014-0932 (Generalitat de Catalunya), and CIBERER (Instituto Carlos Results: In 62% of the families the two disease-causing alleles were found. III, Spain)  P02
.34 Overall, 61 different ABCA4 variants were identified, including 18 novel Deubiquitinating enzyme genes as candidates for retinal disorders ones. Our results showed a strong correlation between particular ABCA4- M. Esquerdo1,2, V. Abad-Morales1,2, V. Toulis1,2, G. Marfany1,2,3; associated dystrophies and certain genotypes. Thus, the presence of two 1Dept. de Genètica, Fac. Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de missense variants were mainly related with diffuse retinal disturbances Biomedicina (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBER-ER (Instituto such as FF and CRD, whereas STGD patients carried one missense mutation Carlos III), Barcelona, Spain. together with a null or splicing variant. Conclusions: The clinical outcome of ABCA4-associated dystrophies may be determined by the type of the causative mutations. Our findings support Introduction: Post-translational modifications, such as conjugation of ubi- that two missense variants are responsible for much more severe and diffu- quitin, are crucial for the differentiation of specific retinal neurons and se phenotypes, suggesting that protein mislocalization or misfolding would may play a role in photoreceptor cell fate. Ubiquitination is dynamic and cause more deleterious effects. reversible since the ubiquitin moiety is deconjugated from protein targets ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 81 by deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs). Many DUBs are implicated in humanABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index pathological disorders from cancer and neurodegeneration to hereditary vi- tive-stress conditions. Moreover, differential localization of CERKL isoforms sual disorders. Besides, knockout or knockdown animal models of specific in rods and cones has been shown using a panel of in-house antibodies. DUB genes show severe neuronal and eye phenotypes. Conclusions: This differential isoform specifity is highly suggestive of spe- Methods: We aimed to characterize the gene expression pattern of sever- cific functional roles for CERKL in different photoreceptor cell types. Future al DUBs in the mouse retina. To this end, we detected mRNA and protein work will address the impact of CERKL mutations in rods and cones related localization by in situ hybridization and fluorescent immunodetection. As to human visual pathophysiology. a proof of principle, we also performed knockdown of selected DUB genes Grants: This work has been supported by SAF2013-49069- C2
-1-R (Min- by morpholino microinjection in zebrafish embryos to study the resulting isterio de Economía y Competitividad, Spain), La Marató TV3 (project phenotype. 201417.30), SGR2014-0932 (Generalitat de Catalunya) and CIBER-ER (In- Results: Several expression patterns emerge, from ubiquitous expression to stituto Carlos III, Spain). DUBs mostly detected in the photoreceptor layer or axonal processes, poin-  P02
.37 ting to specific functions for different DUBs in the retina. Zebrafish knock- The molecular diagnosis of two large deletions in genes causing down morphants of selected DUBs show moderate to severe eye morpholo- Retinitis Pigmentosa by WES gical defects, with defective formation of retinal structures: no lamination, M. de Castro-Miró1,2,3, R. Tonda4,5, B. Cormand1,2,3, R. Gonzàlez-Duarte1,2,3; no observable plexiform layers nor differentiated photoreceptors. These re- 1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, sults support the relevance of some DUBs in the formation and differentiati- Spain, 2Institut de Biomedicina (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, on of the vertebrate retina, making them good gene candidates for inherited 3CIBERER, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, 4CNAG-CRG, Centre for retinal dystrophies or other visual disorders. Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Grants: V.T. is in receipt of a FPI fellowship (BES-2014-068639, MINECO). Barcelona, Spain, 5Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain. Work is supported by SAF2013-49069- C2
-1-R (Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, Spain), La Marató TV3 (project 201417.30), SGR2014-0932 (Generalitat de Catalunya) Massive exome sequencing (WES) has revolutionized genetic diagnosis of  P02
.35 highly heterogeneous monogenic disorders, as is the case oEf YRSe tinitis pig- CNVs and mosaic are not an uncommon cause of retinal blindness in mentosa (RP), the m. ost frequent retinal disorder. EYS children A heterozygous stop mutation was identified by WES in the gene in an I. Perrault1, S. Hanein2, N. Delphin3, J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1; isolated RP patient A subsequent dosage study of the exons in the fami- 1INSERMU1163, Lab of Genetics in Ophtalmology, IMAGINE Institut, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 2INSERMU1163, NGS molecular diagnosis, IMAGINE Institut, ly was suggestive of a large deletEioYnS encompassing at least 10 exons, which Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 3Lab of Molecular diagnosis, Necker Hospital, was later supported by SNP cosegregation analysis. The identification of Paris, France. the second mutation confirmed as the causative gene with autosomal recessive inheritance in the family. The secoFnGdF 2ca1s e was a large autosomal dominant RP pedigree with no plausible mutationCsR rXevealed by WES in 5 Introduction. Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) and early-onset and severe affected members. Cosegregation of a raCrReX variantwith the disease retinal dystrophies (EOSRD) are a leading cause of incurable blindness in in this family highlighted a closely linked RP gene ( ) as a promising can- children. The visual outcome is variable, ranging from light perception to didate. Coverage and SNP studies of the genomic region in the patieCnRtXs, low but measurable visual acuity in the first two decades. LCA/EOSRD can followed by genomic mapping with specific PCR primers, identified the be the presenting symptom in a range of devastating ciliopathies with skel- boundaries of a heterozygous 10-kb deletion, spanning exons 3 and 4 of . etal, neurologic and/or renal involvement. Both the visual and extraocular The benefits of WES for the molecular diagnosis of highly heterogeneous outcomes strongly correlate with the gene. Here, we assessed targeted NGS mendelian disorders are well established. However, the main drawback is (T-NGS) as a tool to improve the care of infants with severe visual deficiency. the identification of gross structural genomic alterations at heterozygosity Methods. 300 index LCA/EOSRD cases were sequenced using a T-NGS array by using standard variant calling strategies. In such cases, the genetic data comprising 45 genes causing monosymptomatic and/or syndromic EOSRD can be decisive to attain the genetic diagnosis by pointing to the disease and 10 genes of differential diagnoses. Mutations and familial segregation candidates. analysis were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Grants: This work was supported by SAF2013-49069- C2
-1-R (Ministerio de Results. T-NGS allowed identifying disease-causing mutations in 184/300 Economía y Competitividad, Spain), SGR2014-0932 (Generalitat de Cata- (60 %) of the index cases: 10/184 had mutations that could not be detected lunya) and CIBER-ER (Instituto Carlos III, Spain). by Sanger sequencing, including 9 heterozygote rearrangements (8 deleti-  P02
.38 ons, 1 duplication) and one mosaic (54 /395 reads), 6/184 had homozygous Towards rapid genetic diagnosis of developmental eye anomalies: large deletions. design and implementation of a large diagnostic and research gene Conclusion. The molecular diagnosis in LCA/EOSRD neonates is crucial to panel predict the visual outcome, and to decide whether vital functions should be J. L. Bruty1, Y. Wallis1, D. McMullan1, S. Clokie1, M. Griffiths1, R. Holt2, D. Bax2, J. Hoffman3, monitored. Yet, the genetic heterogeneity of these blinding conditions long S. Hadfield3, N. Ragge2,3; challenged routine molecular testing. The identification of the mutation un- 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Oxford derlying the disease in 60% of the cases and the detection of second disease Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham alleles missed by PCR-based Sanger sequencing in 5 % out of them support Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. the relevance of implementing routine T-NGS for LCA/EOSRD.  P02
.36 Developmental eye anomalies, including anophthalmia, microphthalmia Functional role of CERKL, a Retinitis Pigmentosa gene, in mRNA and coloboma, affect ~1 in 3,500 individuals worldwide. At least 150-200 transport in retinal cells genes are implicated in these conditions, with many other genes known to R. Andres1,2,3, E. B. Domènec1,2,3, A. Pons-Pons1, M. J. López-Iniesta1,2,3, F. Sava1, G. be important in eye development pathways, and still more to be identified. Marfany1,2,3, R. Gonzàlez-Duarte1,2,3; 1Barcelona University, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Biomedicina (IBUB), Barcelona Currently 4-5 genes are tested routinely in the UK, meaning only 28% of University, Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBERER, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain. developmental eye anomalies patients receive genetic diagnosis; often follo- wing a lengthy research input. A diagnostic gene panel containing 351 genes known to be involved in eye Introduction: CERKL mutations cause retinitis pigmentosa and cone-rod development and 195 genes of potential interest was developed, using the dystrophy in human. The CERKL gene is a paradigm for high transcriptional Illumina Nextera Rapid Capture Custom Enrichment kit, and sequenced complexity, with many isoforms produced by alternative splicing and the use using the MiSeq platform. Sequence data was processed using an in-house of alternative promoters. The protein displays several protein domains, such bioinformatics pipeline. A validation cohort of 10 patients who have pre- as lipid kinase, nuclear localization and nuclear export signals. Although the viously undergone research testing, along with 16 new patients have been precise physiological function is still unknown, CERKL overexpression pro- tested so far, with a further 16 patients planned. tects cells from apoptosis triggered by oxidative stress. So far mutations have been identified in 15 genes including SOX2, PAX6, Results: In vitro studies on cultured cells showed that CERKL binds mRNA FOX E3
 and BEST1, including all known mutations from the validation co- and contributes to stress granule complexes. These in vitro results have hort and definite causative pathogenic mutations in 2/16 new patients been further confirmed in isolated retinal neurons (retinal ganglion cells (12%). Several other gene alterations are undergoing further analysis. A and photoreceptors), where CERKL co-localizes with RNA and RNA-binding large amount of research data has also been collected, and is linked to an p8ro2teins and is a component of the stress granEuSleHs Gpr o2d0u1ce6d |u nBdAerR oCxEidLaO- Na Ad ,j u Sn Pct Aiv Ie N re |s Wear Wch Wpr .o Eg Sra Hm Gm .e O fo Rr Gfurther analysis. A large panel for sequencing mutations in patients with developmental eyeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.41 Molecular genetic analysis of CO L2
A1 gene in a group of Czech anomalies is a valid and viable approach, and helps reduce the time taken patients with Stickler syndrome for diagnosis. Including research genes linked to a research programme also J. Sabova1,2, V. Sucha1, M. Simandlova2, V. Horinova3, R. Pourova2, A. Krepelova2; gives huge potential benefit for further understanding of developmental eye 1Laboratory for Molecular Diagnostics, Synlab Genetics s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic, anomalies. 2Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Sanatorium Helios,  P02
.39 Brno, Czech Republic. Splicing defects caused by rare OPN1LW/MW haplotypes associated with X-linked cone dysfunction disorders: de novo intrachromosomal gene conversion from MW to LW in the male germline results in Blue Stickler syndrome (STL) is an AD progressive disorder of connective tissue Cone Monochromacy and it is one of the most frequent genetic syndromes associated with deaf- E. Buena Atienza1, K. Ruether2,3, B. Baumann1, R. Bergholz2, N. Weisschuh1, S. Kohl1, B. blindness with incidence 1:7500-1:9000 newborns. STL is characterized by Wissinger1; midfacial underdevelopment and cleft palate (either alone or as part of the 1Institute of Ophthalmic Research, Tubingen, Germany, 2Charité Campus Virchow- Robin sequence); eye abnormalities; hearing loss (both conductive and/or Klinikum, Berlin, Germany, 3Sankt Gertrauden-Krankenhause, Berlin, Germany. sensorineural); and mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and/or precocious arthritis. Eye findings include high myopia, cataract, retinal detachment leading to impaired vision or blindness. The degree of hearing loss varies X-linked cone dysfunction disorders suOchP Nas1 LBWlu/eO CPoNn1eM MWonochromacy and among affected individuals and may become more severe over time. There X-linked Cone Dystrophy are characterized by absent or reduced L- and are several types of STL, which are distinguished by their genetic cause and M- cone function due to defects in the gene cluster. We their characteristic signs and symptoms. The most common type I (ST L1
) studied 24 affected males from 16 families with either a strucOtuPrNal1lyLW intact is responsible for approximately 70% of reported cases and presents with gOePnNe1 cMluWster or at least one intact single (hybrid) gene, but carrying rare aC OwLi2dAe1 variety of symptoms affecting the eye, ear, facial appearance, palate combinations of common SNPOs PinN 1exLoWn/ 3M iWn single or multiple and and musculoskeletal system and occurs due to mutations over the entire gene copies. We applied a semi-quantitative minigene splicing as- gene on cChOroLm2Ao1some location 12q13.11. In our pilot study we inve- say to assess twelve different exon 3 haplotypes. Nine haplo- stigated 29 patients from 15 families with STL from the Czech Republic (CR). types resulted in aberrant splicing of equal or more than 20% of transcripts We analysed the gene using Sanger sequencing as a prescreening including the known pathogenic haplotypes (i.e. ‘LIAVAd’, e‘L nVoAvVoA’) with ab- and here we present the first 3 families in the Czech Republic with 2 de- sent or minute amounts of correctly spliced transcripts, respectively. In one tected known heterozygous frameshift mutations c.2382deClTO La2nAd1 one novel family with strikingly different phenotypes we observed occurrence splice-site mutation c.1123-2A>G. Identification of these mutations confir- of the ‘LIAVA’ haplotype derived from an ancestral less deleterious ‘LIAVS’ haplotype. We could establish an intrachromosomal gene conversion in the mSuepdp othrtee dd ibagy nao psirso ojefc St tfiocrk lceorn scyenpdturaolm dee.v NelGoSp mscernete noifn rge soefa rch orga nneizgaattiiovne male germline as the underlying mechanism driving the phenotype change p00at0i6e4n2ts0 w3 ailnl dfo 6ll4o2w0.4 and GAUK 165815. from macula dystropOhPyN w1MithW deuteranopia into Blue Cone Monochromacy. TOhPeN 1coLWnv/eOrtPeNd1 sMeqWuence was narrowed to a region of ~1300 bp originating from a downstream gene. Although gened ec onnovveorsion shaping the  P02
.42 genes has been postulated and inferred from new ari- TMPRS S3
 mutation as a cause of non-syndromic hearing impairment sing mutations, we are the first to demonstrate a gene conversion among Polish hearing loss patients within the lineage of a pedigree. U. Lechowicz1, A. Pollak1, A. Podgorska1, P. Stawinski1, M. Oldak1, H. Skarzynski2, R. The research leading to these results has received funding from the Euro- Ploski3; pean Union Seventh Framework Programme [F P7
-People-2012-ITN] under 1Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Department of Genetics, Warsaw, grant agreement 317472 (EyeTN). Poland, 2Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 3Medical University of Warsaw, Department of Medical Genetics, Centre of Biostructure, Warsaw,  P02
.40 Poland. Identification and functional assessment of deep-intronic and non- canonical splice defects in ABCA4 associated with Stargardt disease R. Sangermano1,2, S. Albert1,2, M. Bauwens3, N. Bax4, S. Cornelis1, V. Richelle1, L. I. van den Born5, A. Garanto1,2, C. B. Hoyng4, R. W. J. Collin1,2, E. De Baere3, F. P. M. Cremers1,2; Recessive mutations of the TMPRS S3
 gene cause non-syndromic hearing 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, impairment (HI) but little is known about their spectrum among Polish po- Netherlands, 2Radboud Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, pulation. The purpose of the study was to search for pathogenic TMPRS S3
 3Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, variants in Polish HI patients, determine the pathogenicity of those variants Belgium, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, and genotype-phenotype correlations. Netherlands, 5Rotterdam Eye Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Using WES (Illumina HiSeq1500) in one patient two mutations in the TM- PRS S3
 gene were found. Previously, mutations in the GJB2 gene, common deletions in the GJB6 gene and mitochondrial m.3243A>T and m.1555A>T Purpose: Non-canonical ABCA4 splice variants are frequent in Stargardt dis- mutations were excluded in this patient. A large cohort of HI patients ease (STGD1), but their effect is poorly understood. Deep-intronic variants (n=2277) and a control group (n=500) were studied to assess the preva- have also been shown to affect RNA splicing. About 30% of STGD1 patients lence of TMPRS S3
 mutations with real-time PCR. Sanger sequencing was carry one or no ABCA4 variant, and we hypothesize that the missing muta- used to confirm the presence of the detected TMPRS S3
 variants and to tions reside in the non-coding parts. Transcript analysis is not straightfor- search for the second mutation in the TMPRS S3
 gene. ward as ABCA4 is specifically expressed in the retina. The purpose of this We found 43 (1.88%) probands with 14 different TMPRS S3
 variants. The study is to (1) identify intronic variants in unsolved patients by ABCA4 locus most frequent mutation was the already known variant p.H70Tfs*19, the sequencing, and (2) to prove their functional effects as well the effect of non- second one was p.A138E. Truncating TMPRS S3
 mutations cause a more se- canonical splice variants, by in vitro splice assays. vere HI with an earlier onset than missense mutations. The p.A90T variant Methods: Haloplex-based locus sequencing was performed in 70 mono-al- previously linked with HI had a high prevalence in controls (~6%) indica- lelic maculopathy cases. After applying splice site prediction programs, the ting that is non-pathogenic change. effect of intronic variants was tested in vitro by cloning ~1.5-kb fragments Mutations in TMPRS S3
 gene are not a common cause of HI in patients with into minigenes, transfecting them into HEK393T cells and performing re- autosomal recessive hearing loss, but considering the group of patients with verse transcription-PCR. a partial deafness HI and postlingual age of onset, TMPRS S3
 gene mutations Results: Haloplex sequencing revealed > 80 rare deep-intronic vari- may be an important component.<br ants which potentially activate cryptic exons. At least 12 are being ana- This study was supported by NCN grants: NCN 2012/05/N/NZ5/02629 and lyzed by minigene splice assays. The non-canonical c.5461-10T>C and NCN 2011/03/D/NZ5/05592. c.6729+5_6729+19del variants were shown to result in exon 39/40 or 48 skipping, respectively, effectively resulting in null alleles. Conclusions: Two non-canonical splice variants, among which the most fre- quent severe ABCA4 variant, c.5461-10T>C, were shown to completely in- activate ABCA4 function. Minigene splice assays are effective to investigate variants predicted to have an effect on splicing. Some of these variants might be amenable for antisense oligonucleotide-based therapy. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 83ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.43  P03
.02 Pathogenic Role of the USH2A mutation (p.Cys759Phe) among Dysregulation of NR5A1 is a novel and recurrent cause of 46,XX (ovo) Spanish families with Retinitis Pigmentosa or Usher syndrome testicular disorder of sex development R. Perez-Carro1, A. Avila-Fernandez1, F. Blanco-Kelly1, A. Gimenez-Pardo1, I. Martin- D. Baetens1, A. L. Todeschini2, F. Peelman3, H. Stoop4, F. Coppieters1, T. Rosseel1, T. Van Merida1, M. Corton1, N. Reyes1, E. Aller2, J. Millan2, C. Ayuso1; Laethem1, L. H. Looijenga4, R. A. Veitia2, M. Cools5, E. De Baere1; 1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Instituto 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Institut Jacques Monod, de Investigación Sanitaria IIS-La Fe, Valencia, Spain. Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France, 3Department of Medical Protein Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology, Ghent, Belgium, 4Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Mutations in USH2A have been associated with non-Syndromic Retinitis Ghent University Hospital and Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Pigmentosa (RP) and Usher syndrome (USH), being the p.Cys759Phe one of the most frequent mutation. A recent study (Gonzalez-del Pozo et al) has questioned the pathogenicity of this variant detected homozygously in two Background: While many causes of 46,XY disorders of sex development asymptomatic individuals. However, the high prevalence of the p.Cys759Phe (DSD) have been elucidated, the mechanisms leading to 46,XX (ovo)testicu- mutation in our cohort of patients supports its pathogenicity. The aim of this lar DSD are poorly understood. Both conditions may represent a phenotypic study was to establish the implication of p.Cys759Phe mutation as a cause of spectrum resulting from a common underlying genetic defect. syndromic or non-syndromic RP. Methods: Whole exome sequencing was applied to identify the molecular A total of 81 Spanish families affected with RP or USH, carrying the cause in ten unrelated patients with 46,XX (ovo)testicular DSD. Transcrip- p.Cys759Phe mutation, either in homozygosis or heterozygosis, were ana- tional activation of the variant of interest was assessed using luciferase lyzed using classical molecular techniques. Among them, 15 heterozygous assays. RNA-seq was performed on patient-derived lymphocytes. Immu- cases were further studied by different targeted-NGS approaches in order to nohistochemistry was done on gonadal specimens for markers of gonadal identify the second causative allele. development. We could characterize 68 families being 12 of them homozygous for the Results: We identified a novel heterozygous NR5A1 variant c.274C>T p.Cys759Phe variant. Furthermore, fifty-three compound heterozygous p.(Arg92Trp) in three unrelated cases with 46,XX (ovo)testicular DSD. This for USH2A were also found. In three out of 68 characterized patients, cau- variant is absent in genomic databases and is predicted to be deleterious. sative mutations in a different gene were identified being also carriers of The Arg92 residue is conserved up to zebrafish and located in the RGGR the p.Cys759Phe. The remaining 13 uncharacterized families with the motif before the C-terminus helix in the conserved Ftz-F1 box, likely affec- p.Cys759Phe in heterozygosis are being analysed by NGS for detecting di- ting DNA-binding stability and specificity. Immunohistochemistry confir- sease-causing mutation. med SRY-independent SOX9 expression and absence of FOX L2
 in testicular All these data together seem to point to the pathogenic causative role for parts of XX gonads and vice versa in ovarian regions. No consistent changes p.Cys759Phe, although another modifier effect for RP cannot be excluded. in transcriptional activation were seen. RNA-seq showed upregulation of Overall, a comprehensive study of the molecular basis of these diseases MAMLD1, a direct target of NR5A1. allows us to provide an accurate diagnosis, a prognosis of the disease and Conclusions: Previously, loss-of-function mutations in NR5A1 were found proper genetic counseling to the patients. in a spectrum of male undervirilization. Here, a novel NR5A1 mutation was F J D - B i o b a n c o ( R D 0 9 / 0 0 7 6 / 0 0 1 0 1 ) , C I B E R- found in three out of ten cases with 46,XX (ovo)testicular DSD, an ultra-rare ER(06/07/0036),FIS(PI013/00226 and PI013/00638),Fundación Conchita condition. We hypothesize that this variant results in gain-of-function and Rábago,CP/03256 (ISCIII). triggers testicular differentiation in 46,XX individuals. We propose NR5A1 mutation p.(Arg92Trp) as a novel and recurrent cause of 46,XX (ovo)testi-  P03
 Internal organs & endocrinology (lung, cular DSD. kidney, liver, gastrointestinal)  P03
.03 Dissecting the genetic complexity of Addison’s disease by using targeted resequencing data of a large Swedish cohort M. Bianchi1, D. Eriksson2, J. Wahlberg3, O. Ekwall4, P. Dahlqvist5, A. Hulting6, K. Lindblad-  P03
.01 Toh1,7, S. Bensing6, O. Kämpe2, G. Rosengren Pielberg1; Different ethnical distribution of the aberation spilice mutation in 1Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, intron 2, c. 293-13A/C>G, at CY P21
A2 gene in Macedonian patients Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of with classical form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Department of Endocrinology, V. Anastasovska, M. Kocova; and Department of Medical and Health Sciences, and Department of Clinical and Genetic Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology and Genetics,University Children’s Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, 4The Sahlgrenska Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 5Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden, 6Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, and Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 7Broad Introduction: 21-hydroxylase deficiency is an autosomal recessive endocri- Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, ne disorder due to mutations in the CY P21
A2 gene. Severe enzyme defici- United States. ency can present as a classical salt wasting (SW) and simple virilizing form (SV). The In2G (c.293-13A/C>G) mutation provides ~ 2% enzyme activity. It encompasses 25% of the classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency alleles and 51% Addison’s disease (AD) is a rare autoimmune disorder characterized by the of the SW alleles. failure of the adrenal cortex. Besides HLA and a few shared autoimmunity- Materials and Methods: We have performed molecular analysis of the In2G predisposing associated loci, the genetics underlying AD is largely unknown. (c.293-13A/C>G) mutation in 49 Macedonian patients with clinical and la- The Swedish Addison registry consists of 700 AD patients accurately charac- boratory signs of severe form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 26 SW and 23 terized regarding their clinical phenotype and autoimmune serological pa- SV form, evaluated at the Department of Endocrinology and Genetics, Uni- rameters. 83% of the patients have 21-hydroxylase autoantibodies and 62% versity Children’s Clinic, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia, using differential have at least another autoimmune disease. We resequenced 1,900 target PCR/ACRS. Of the patients, 27 had Macedonian, 14 Albanian, and 8 Roma genes involved in immune function and autoimmunity in all AD patients and ethnic origin. in 1,500 healthy controls. Targets included coding sequences, full UTRs and Results: The In2G mutation was detected in 57.1% of the patients, 40.8% conserved intronic and intergenic regions. GATK, LASER and KING software were homozygotes and 16.3% were heterozygotes. It was revealed in 65.4% were used to call variants, pinpoint predicted non-Europeans and identify (34/52) of the SW alleles, and 30.4% (14/46) of the SV alleles. Interestingly, related samples, respectively. Single SNP and aggregate association tests, as In2G was detected in all Roma patients on 93.8% of the alleles (7 homozy- well as pathway analysis will be performed in order to confirm known and gotes and 1 heterozygote), followed by 57.1% of the Albanians on 53.6% unravel novel loci associated with AD and its co-inherited autoimmune di- alleles (7 homozygotes and 1 heterozygote), and 44.4% of the Macedonian seases in the Swedish population. patients on 33.3% of the alleles (6 homozygotes and 6 heterozygote). We expect that our study of a slightly unconstrained Swedish population Conclusions: We found different ethnic distribution of the In2G mutation in isolate will enable to improve global diagnostic and medical AD treatments the Macedonian patients with severe 21-hydroxylase deficiency. High In2G by finding disease variants likely to be causative across different populati- frequency detected in our patients, that is comparable to the most of the ons. other European countries, supports its role in classical phenotype of the The Swedish Research Council Formas, the Swedish Research Council, Tor- 21-hydroxylase deficiency. sten and Ragnar Söderberg Foundations, the European Union Seventh Fra- mework Programme grant 201167 EurAdrenal fp7 consortium, funding for 84 ESHG 2016 | BARCELON cA li, n S icP alA reI sN ea | r cW h (W ALW F). cE oS llaH bG or. aO tivR eG between Stockholm County Council andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Karolinska Institutet, the Swedish Society for Medical Research, the Swedish phenotype and clinical data. The combination of routine and new genetic Society of Medicine, the NovoNordisk Foundation, Tore Nilsons Foundation technologies could be crucial for the molecular diagnosis in such genetically for Medical Research, Karolinska Institutet and the Åke Wiberg Foundation. heterogenous diseases as 46,XY DSD.  P03
.04  P03
.06 Exome sequencing identifies a novel recessive subtype of colorectal Identification by exome sequencing and functional characterization of adenomatous polyposis nonobvious pathogenic variants responsible for Alport syndrome R. Adam1, I. Spier1, B. Zhao2, M. Kloth3, I. Hinrichsen4, N. Friedrichs3, J. Marquez2, S. C. Chiereghin1,2, M. Robusto1,2, P. Castorina3, M. Giani3, S. Duga1,2, R. Asselta1,2, G. Solda‘1,2; Horpaopan5, J. Kirfel6, J. Altmüller7,8, A. Laner9,10, S. Holzapfel1, S. Peters1, K. Kayser1, H. 1Humanitas University, Rozzano (Milan), Italy, 2Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Thiele8, G. Kristiansen6, E. Holinski-Feder10,11, M. M. Noethen1,12, R. Buettner3, A. Brieger4, Rozzano (Milan), Italy, 3Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, R. P. Lifton13, S. Aretz1; Milan, Italy. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genetics, New Haven, CT, United States, 3Institute of Pathology, Cologne, Germany, 4Medical Clinic 1, Biomedical Research Laboratory, Frankfurt, Germany, 5Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medical Introduction: Alport syndrome (AS) is a progressive inherited renal disease Science, Phitsanulok, Thailand, 6Institute of Pathology, Bonn, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 8Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, caused by mutations in three large collagen-IV genes (CO L4
A3, CO L4
A4, CO- 9Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany, 10Medical Genetics Center,  L4
A5), comprising about 50 exons each. Recently, the introduction of next- Munich, Germany, 11Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 12Department of generation sequencing allowed the analysis of all three AS genes in a single Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 13Institute of Genetics, New Haven, CT, step. Despite that, the total mutation detection rate has been estimated bet- United States. ween 55-80%. Materials and Methods: We selected three Italian families with clear clinical evidence of AS but no molecular diagnosis, despite having been subjected to Background: In around 30% of families with colorectal adenomatous po- extensive candidate gene analyses. The probands were screened by whole- lyposis, no germline mutation in the known genes APC, MUTYH, POLE, exome sequencing (WES) using the Nextera Rapid Capture kit on a Next- POLD1, or NTH L1
 can be identified, although a hereditary etiology is likely. Seq500 platform. All exons of AS genes were adequately covered. Methods: To uncover new high-penetrance causative genes, exome sequen- Results: Analysis of variants within AS genes identified pathogenic muta- cing of leukocyte DNA from 104 unrelated patients with unexplained ade- tions in all families. In Family-1, we identified an homozygous 24-bp in- nomatous polyposis was performed. For data analysis and variant filtering, frame deletion in CO L4
A3 (p.Val11_Leu18del), segregating with autosomal an established bioinformatics pipeline including in-house tools was applied. recessive AS. The variant is predicted to disrupt the signal peptide, possibly Results: We identified two unrelated patients with differing compound- altering CO L4
A3 protein secretion. In Family-2 proband, a CO L4
A5 hemi- heterozygous loss-of-function germline mutations in a DNA repair gene. zygous missense mutation (p.Gly491Asp) was found in exon 33, which was The pedigrees, genotypes, and the frequency of mutations of this gene in not covered by previous targeted resequencing. In Family-3, we detected the general population are consistent with an autosomal recessive mode of an heterozygous intronic variant (c.2245-40A>G) altering CO L4
A5 exon-29 inheritance. By transcriptional analysis, by functional analysis of the tumor branch site, as we confirmed by in-vitro studies. Analysis of the pattern of tissue and by use of various in-silico tools we found strong evidence for a X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) on DNA from blood revealed a correlation loss-of-function effect. No germline mutation in any other gene known to between unbalanced XCI and phenotypic manifestations in mutant females. cause polyposis was identified in these patients. Both index patients had an Conclusions: WES was fundamental to provide a molecular diagnosis in 3 affected sibling carrying the same mutations. Besides colorectal and duode- AS families, highlighting non-obvious pathogenic variants that escaped pre- nal adenomas, colorectal cancer, gastric cancer, and early onset astrocytoma vious screenings. were reported in the two patients and their affected siblings. In addition, we We thank: Italian Telethon Foundation (grant#GG P11177
) and Fondazione identified one unrelated patient with a biallelic PM S2
 germline mutation, Cariplo (grant#2013-0825). representing Constitutional Mismatch Repair Deficiency Syndrome (CMMR-  P03
.08 D). Conclusions: The present study is the first to identify biallelic pathogenic The role of DNA analysis in diagnosis of autosomal recessive germline mutations of the given DNA repair gene in patients with a suspec- polycystic kidney disease ted hereditary tumor syndrome. Our data suggest that the reported cases L. Obeidova1, V. Elisakova1, T. Seeman2, J. Reiterova3, J. Stekrova1; represent a novel recessive subtype of colorectal adenomatous polyposis. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine, Charles  P03
.05 University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Paediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Molecular analysis of AR gene in fourteen female patients with 46,XY - Prague and Motol University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department advances of two generations of sequencing of Nephrology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General S. Andonova1, R. Vazharova2,3, L. Grozdanova4, R. Robeva5, I. Bradinova1, E. Stefanova6, L. University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. Balabanski3, S. Ivanov3, D. Toncheva7, P. Kumanov5, M. Sirakov8, A. Savov1; 1National Genetic Laboratory, UHOG ‚Maichin dom‘, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridksi”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3GARH Malinov, Genomic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Introduction: Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is a Bulgaria, 5Clinical Center of Endocrinology and Gerontology, Medical University– Sofia, severe form of chronic kidney disease, frequently diagnosed prenatally. AR- Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes and Genetics Clinic, University PKD is caused by mutations in the PKHD1 gene, nevertheless, the same phe- Pediatric Hospital, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 7Department of Medical notype is part of many other disorders. Thus, the molecular genetic analysis Genetics, Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 8Department of Gynecological can be very useful in differential diagnosis of ARPKD. endocrinology and Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, UHOG “Maichin dom”, Medical Herein, we present the results of molecular genetic analysis in 52 families University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. with clinically suspected ARPKD. Materials and methods: The analysis of PKHD1 was carried out using next-generation sequencing and subsequent MLPA (multiplex ligation-de- Disorders of sex development (DSD) are group of heterogeneous conditions pendent probe amplification). In some of the families, genetic analysis of that usually present with atypical genitalia and/or delayed puberty. One of HNF1β, PKD1/2 was carries out. The cohort of probands was divided into 2 the most common disorders in this group is the Androgen Insensitivity Syn- groups (Group A and B) on the basis of their fulfillment of clinical criteria of drome (AIS) - the affected individuals are phenotypically females with resi- ARPKD. Patients fulfilling all criteria were placed in Group A (n=24). Group stance to androgen action and 46,XY karyotype. More than 600 mutations B consisted of 30 patients. associated with the variable phenotype of the disorder are known in Andro- Results: The detection rate in PKHD1 amounted to 81% in Group A, and gen Receptor (AR) gene (Xq12). Fourteen XY female patients were referred 27% in Group B. Six families within Group B without mutation in PKHD1 to our team due to primary amenorrhea and/or discordance between phe- harbored mutations in other genes (HNF1β, PKD1/2 and NPH P11
 ). notypic and chromosomal sex. Molecular analysis of AR gene was conducted Conclusions: The detection rate of PKHD1 mutations in children fulfilling all using Sanger sequencing (9 patients) and targeted Next-generation sequen- clinically diagnostic criteria of ARPKD is high, reaching 81%. However, mu- cing (5 patients). Mutations in 6 patients were found: p.Q147Ter, p.R616H, tations of PKHD1 were also detected in some of the patients without having p.R780W and p.I842N. The mutation was inherited from the heterozygous met all three clinical criteria, especially in patients who died perinatally. The mother in 4 of the cases. The mother of the one patient was not a carrier important sign of ARPKD in children proved to be congenital hepatic fibro- and the mutation was de novo. DNA sample from relatives of the last patient sis. were not available. Further analyses revealed mutations in SRY, SRD5A2 and Supported by the grant project IGA MZCR NT 13090-4, GAUK 1015 and NR5A1 genes in three of the remaining eight cases. PRVOUK-  P25
/LF1/2 Conclusion: Sanger sequencing of AR is indicated for patients with strong suspicions for AIS while use of targeted next-generation sequencing of known genes associated with DSD couEldS bHeG be 2ne0fi1ci6al |i nB cAasReCs wEiLthO aNtyApi,c aSl PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 85ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P03
.09  P03
.11 Introduction of a routine NGS-based genetic screening into the Targeted NGS improves the identification of genetic determinants in universal screening programme for hypercholesterolemia in Combined Pituitary Hormone Deficiency and Septo-Optic Dysplasia Slovenian 5-years old children J. Rodríguez-Contreras1, C. Polo-Vaquero1, A. Del Pozo1,2, K. Ibáñez-Garikano1, J. Silla1, V. J. Kovač1, G. Klančar1, T. Tesovnik1, U. Grošelj2, T. Battelino2,3, K. Trebušak Podkrajšek1,3; E. F. Montano1, I. González-Casado3, B. Lecumberri-Santamaría4, P. D. Lapunzina1,2, E. 1Unit of Special Laboratory Diagnostics, University Children‘s Hospital, UMC, Ljubljana, Vallespín1,2, K. E. Heath1,2, A. Campos-Barros1,2; Slovenia, 2Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, 1INGEMM, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER (U753), ISCIII, University Children’s Hospital, UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Faculty of Medicine, University Madrid, Spain, 3Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. 4Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Introduction: Introduction: Molecular diagnosis of combined pituitary hormone defici- Untreated familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) increases the risk for develo- ency (CPHD) and septo-optic dysplasia (SOD) by classical gene screening ping atherosclerosis and cardio-vascular disease in early adulthood for up cascade has a poor success rate due to the increasing number of implicated to 100-fold. Slovenia launched the program of universal screening for hyper- genes, the genetic overlap with other clinical entities such as congenital hy- cholesterolemia in 5-year-old children in 1995 with routine measurement pAoimgo: nadotropic hypogonadism (CHH) and the recently postulated oligoge- of fasting serum cholesterol. Additionally, the routine genetic screening nic inheritance. using NGS technology was introduced in 2011 to identify causative genetic SubjeTcots d aensdig Mn,e itmhopdlesment and validate a targeted NGS panel to identify the variants in individuals with positive result of the screening. genetic determinants of CPHD and SOD. Materials and Methods: 272 individuals (149 females) were sent to a tertiary paediatric outpatient A cohort of 82 CPHD or SOD patients were analysed with the HYPOPIT.V1 clinic due to the increased level of serum cholesterol and referred to genetic panel, including a total of 73 genes: 50 found to be mutated in pituitary dis- testing. Genomic DNA was isolated from whole-blood samples according to oRredsuelrtss :a nd 23 genes in associated signalling pathways. Variants were valida- established laboratory protocol. Samples for NGS were prepared using ADH ted by Sanger sequencing, MLPA or aCGH. MASTR assay (Multiplicom, Belgium) for detection of variants in 4 genes as- After having completed the analysis of 26 patients (CPHD n=19; sociated with FH (LDLR, PCSK9, APOE and exon 26 of APOB) and sequenced SOD, n=7), we have identified likely pathogenic variants iFnG 1F1R 1(,4 F2G%F)8;, 7a nodf on a MiSeq platform with MiSeq reagent kit v2 (Illumina, California) follo- wPRhOicKhR p2r, esented potentially relevant variants in more thaCnD OonNe, gGeLnI2e,, sZoIm C2
e, wing the manufacturer’s protocol. oPfT tChHe1m, EinY Ag4enes known to be implicated in CHH, such as Results: CHD7 and in holoprosencephaly associated genes ( 105 (38.6%) of individuals had causative variant identified in LDLR gene Conclusions: ). Interestingly, in 3/11 patients, we also detected variants in followed by 55 individuals (18.4%) with causative variant in APOB and none , a gene implicated in CHARGE syndrome. in PCSK9. Additionally, 51 participants (18.7%) were carriers of APOE  E4
 Targeted NGS identified disease relevant variants in 42% of isoform genotype. The results of genetic analysis were negative for 66 par- analyzed CPHD and SOD cases, supporting the hypothesis of digenic/oligo- ticipants (24.3%). genic inheritance in 27% of the examined patients. These results confirm Conclusions: tShuep puotriltietyd boyf gthrea nttargeted NGS approach for improving the molecular dia- Results clearly demonstrated the efficacy of universal screening programme gnosis of CPHD and SOD. with most participants having genetically confirmed FH. Additionally, data FIS 12/00649 from ISCIII & FEDER. for family history may not suffice for reliable identification of FH patients.  P03
.12 This work was supported by Slovenian National Research Agency grants  P3
- Genetic variants underlying congenital cystic adenomatoid 0343, J3-4116, J3-6800, and J3-6798. malformations  P03
.10 M. Garcia-Barcelo1, J. S. Hsu1, R. Zhang2, F. Yeung1, C. Wong1, M. Yu1, M. So1, M. Li1, P. Sham1, H. Xia2, P. K. Tam1; Differential gene expression in chronic obstructive pulmonary 1The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2Guangzhou Women and disease cases and controls Children’s Medical Center, Guangzhou, China. M. Soler Artigas1,2, A. Esteve2, G. Thun2, C. Newby3, L. V. Wain1, M. D. Tobin1, S. Heath2, I. Gut2, D. Singh4, L. Ziegler-Heitbrock5, C. Brightling3; 1Genetic Epidemiology Group, Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-CRG), Introduction: A congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM) is a Center for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain, congenital hamartomatous pulmonary lesion that results from abnormal 3Department of Infection, Inflammation and Immunity, Institute for Lung Health, overgrowth of tracheal, bronchial, bronchiolar, or alveolar tissue. The clini- University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 4University of Manchester, Medicines cal presentation is variable, ranging from the most serious phenotype which Evaluation Unit Limited, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5The EvA Study Center, may result in hydrops fetalis to mild phenotype with possible resolution. Comprehensive Pneumology Center, Helmholtz-Zentrum München, Gauting, Germany. Affected new-borns present with severe respiratory distress or remain asymptomatic until later in life. Surgical resection is the definitive treat- ment. The disorder is rare (1/8300-1/35,000 live births) and occurs mainly Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbi- sporadically. The condition is due to a defective branching morphogenesis of dity and mortality worldwide. However, the biological mechanisms under- the lung at different developmental stages. What triggers this developmen- lying the development and progression of COPD are not yet well understood. tal defect is unknown, yet alteration of the signalling pathways controlling We analysed sequence-based transcriptomics data in COPD cases and con- lung development are thought to be the cause. trols from the EvA study, as part of the AirPROM project. Cell material was Methods: Whole exome sequencing was conducted on 15 CCAM trios follo- obtained by airway epithelial brushing (305 cases/232 controls) and bron- wing the standard protocol. choalveolar lavage (182 cases/174 controls). Results: Damaging de novo mutations in four genes known to be involved in Case-control differential expression was tested using an exact permutati- airway epithelium response to cigarette smoking and lung cancer (SPG11, on test, and lasso regression was used to assess whether differentially ex- MICA L2
 and LRR C16
A) or soft tissue sarcoma (SCY L1
) found in 4/15 pa- pressed genes were able to predict case-control status. The dataset was tients. Importantly, damaging mutations forming compound heterozygotes divided into training and testing sets of randomly selected individuals, and were detected in SL C15
A1, a gene involved in lung peptide clearance in average predictive values across 50 iterations of ~80% for brushing and bronchial airway epithelial cell lines. Likewise, mutations in interacting ge- ~70% for lavage were obtained. A small number of genes were selected in nes co-existed in several patients and its relevance is being assessed. Copy more than 40 out of the 50 iterations suggesting their potential relevance number analysis is underway. in biological processes relevant to COPD. Additionally, genes were clustered Conclusion: CCAM is genetically heterogeneous with different mutated ge- into modules according to their co-expression across individuals, and the nes in different patients and it is likely to require mutations in more than association of these modules with COPD status and other related traits were one gene to give rise to the developmental anomaly. tested using weighted gene co-expression network analysis. This approach Human Medical Research Fund (HMRF) 01121576 highlighted some of the genes selected by the lasso regression analysis. Genome-wide data has now been generated for this set of individuals and integrative analysis is in progress. Overall, these analyses will highlight genes relevant to biological processes present in COPD patients and have the potential to improve our understan- ding of this complex disease. T8hi6s research received funding from the EuropEeaSnH UGni o2n0 (1gr6an |t Bn°A27R0 C19
E4 L)O. NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P03 .13 
P03 .15 Integration of genomic analysis and transcript expression in focal Evaluation of human epididymis protein 4 as a novel serum form of congenital hyperinsulinism inflammatory biomarker in cystic fibrosis I. Wieland1, I. Dallmann1, S. Vogelgesang2, W. Barthlen3, K. Mohnike4, M. Zenker1; B. Nagy Jr.1, L. Fila2, L. A. Clarke3, Z. Fejes1, P. Antal-Szalmás1, J. Kappelmayer1, M. Amaral3, 1University Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics, Otto-von-Guericke University, M. Macek Jr.2, I. Balogh1; Magdeburg, Germany, 2Institute of Pathology, University Greifswald, Greifswald, 1University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, Germany, 3Clinic for Ped. Surgery, University Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 3University of Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. 4University Hospital, Dept. of Pediatrics, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany. Introduction: A biomarker that can be used for the evaluation of disease progression and the treatment efficacy in cystic fibrosis (CF) would be of a Introduction: In congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) insulin secretion is dys- great importance. Increased expression of the human epididymis protein 4 regulated leading to severe hypoglycaemia in neonates and infants. Focal (H
E4 ) was previously described in CF lung biopsies, but it is unknown whe- forms of CHI have been reported in 20-50% of mutation positive patients. ther serum H
E4  concentrations are elevated in CF. The focal form is caused by a paternally transmitted recessive mutation in Materials ans Methods: 77 young and 57 adult CF patients were enrolled ABC
C8  or KCNJ11 on chromosome 11p15 and a second somatic event in the together with 117 normal controls. Serum H
E4  was measured by an immu- affected islet of Langerhans. In pancreatic lesions we investigated the gene- noassay and its expression was investigated using RT-qPCR in CF versus tic mechanisms underlying focal form of CHI. non-CF respiratory epithelium biopsies. The expression of the potential re- Methods: Patients with proven ABC
C8  or KCNJ11 mutations and receiving gulator miR-140-5p was analyzed using an UPL-based RT-qPCR assay. H
E4  therapeutic surgery were included. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and gene was measured in the supernatants from unpolarized and polarized CF bron- expression were analysed by PCR and Sanger sequencing. Deletions, du- chial epithelial CFBE cells expressing wt- or F508del-CFTR. plications and uniparental isodisomy (UPD) were tested by methylation- Results: Serum H
E4  levels were significantly elevated in affected children specific MLPA. The effect of UPD on gene expression levels was analysed and in adult CF patients (median 99.5 and 115.7 pmol/L, respectively) by massive analysis of cDNA ends (MACE) and real-time quantitative PCR. compared to controls (36.3 pmol/L). In CF patients, H
E4  levels positively Results: LOH was found in 10/11 focal lesions, in contrast to surrounding correlated with disease severity and CRP concentrations, while an inverse pancreatic tissue or blood cells. Monoallellic expression of mutant ABC
C8 / relationship was found between H
E4  and the spirometric FEV1 value. H
E4  KCNJ11 alleles occurred in all lesions, whereas unaffected pancreatic tissue mRNA levels were significantly upregulated with a decreased miR-140-5p showed biallelic expression. Both, ABC
C8  and KCNJ11, are located in pro- expression in the CF airway biopsies. There were 2-fold higher H
E4  concen- ximity to the Beckwith-Wiedemann imprinting control region on chromoso- trations in the supernatant of polarized F508del-CFTR CFBE cells compared me 11p15 that is prone to UPD. Paternal UPD 11p15 was specifically found to wt cells. in samples showing LOH, neither deletion nor duplication was detected. Pa- Conclusions: H
E4  serum levels correlate with the overall severity of CF and ternal UPD in focal lesions resulted in expression changes of 11p15 imprin- the degree of pulmonary dysfunction. H
E4  may thus be utilized as novel in- ted genes and upregulation of endocrine transcription factors. flammatory biomarker and possibly also as measure of treatment efficacy Conclusions: Focal form of CHI is caused by somatic paternal UPD 11p15 in CF lung disease. leading to monoallelic expression of mutant ABC
C8 /KCNJ11 and affects gene expression of lesional endocrine cells. 
P03 .16 Genes underlying inherited cystic kidney disease in Arabian fetuses 
P03 .14 and neonates Molecular analysis of CY
P21 A2 gene in Argentine patients with M. H. Al-Hamed1, W. Kurdi1, M. Tulbah1, N. Alsahan1, Q. Ambosaidi1, J. Sayer2, B. Meyer1; Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Newcastle C. S. Fernandez1, M. Taboas2, C. D. Bruque1,3, N. Buzzalino1, L. Espeche1, M. Delea1, A. University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Nadra4, N. Ceballos4, L. Alba1, L. Dain1,3,4; 1National Center of Medical Genetics, ANLIS, Ministry of Health, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Regenerative Medicine Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedics and Introduction: Inherited cystic kidney disorders are a common cause of end- Traumatology, Juan Fernandez Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Institute of Biology and Experimental Medicine, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4School of Sciences, stage renal disease. These diseases are common in the Saudi population and University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Over 50 ciliopathy genes, which encode proteins that influence the structure and function of the primary cilia, are implicated in cystic kidney disease. Introduction: CoCnYgePn2i1tAal2 adrenal hyperplasia, the most frequent inborn me- Materials and Methods: In order to define the phenotype and genotype of tabolism error, is caused in 90-95% of CtYhPe 2c1aAse2s , by m
C4 u tations in the 21-hy- cystic kidney disease in fetuses and neonates, we correlated antenatal ul- droxylase gene ( ). The deficiency can present as severe, or classical trasound examination and postnatal renal ultrasound examination with form (C), and non-classical CoYnPe 2(1NA
C2 ) . and genes constitute the targeted exon sequencing, using a renal gene panel. A cohort of 50 fami- RCCX moduleC.Y A
P2 b1oAu1t 
P70 % of haplotypes have a bCimYPo2d1uAla2r, arrangement, lies in whom antenatal renal USS findings in affected cases included either with one module carrying and the other the highly homologous bilateral cystic kidney disease, echogenic kidneys or enlarged kidneys was pseudogene . Aregulatory region of the named Z pro- investigated. moter (ZP), is located 5.6 kb upstream. Materials and Methods: 628 pati- Results: In this cohort, causative mutations and inferred causative muta- entCsY (
P12317 A 
C2 , 491 NC) diagnosed as 21-hydroxylase deficient were studied. tions using parental DNA were detected in 35 families (70%). Extra renal In 380/628 we studied the most frequent mutations. In 248/628 the enti- malformations, including encephalocele, polydactyly and heart malforma- re gene was sequenceIdn. vGiternoe dosagei nw sailsi caonalyzed by MLPA. In tions, consistent with ciliopathy phenotypes, were frequently detected. Mu- 80/628 the ZP was sequenced. The RCCX region was studied by Southern- tations were found in 14 different genes with a total of 15 novel pathogenic blot, MLPA and long range PCR. and/or analyses, developed variants. Mutations in C
C2 D2A followed by PKHD1 were the most common in our laboratory, were performed to determine the biological implications cause of an antenatally suspected ciliopathy in our cohort. of novel mutations. Results: 100% of C and 86% of NC patients were fully Conclusion: In families with ciliopathy phenotypes, mutational analysis genotyped. We have identified 10 novel mutations in the coding region and using a targeted gene panel allows a rapid molecular diagnosis and provides one in the ZCPY. P A2l1l An2ovel variants showed pathogenicity. We identified 3 novel important information for patients, parents and their physicians. haplotypes among 16 different conformations of the RCCX module. Conclu- 
P03 .17 sions: The gene is located in one of the most complex regions of the Hypothyroidism during fetal life impaired carbohydrate metabolisms genome. Our results represent one of the larger series of patients in Latin in young and aged offspring rat: Role of glucose transporters in America. We demonstrated the presence of novel mutations and haplotypes insulin-sensitive tissue found for the first time in patients from our population. H. Gholami1, S. Jeddi2, F. Rouhollah1, M. Zarkesh3, A. Zadeh-Vakili3, A. Ghasemi2; 1Department of Biology, Tehran Medical Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Endocrine Physiology Research Center and Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Cellular and Molecular Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. Introduction: Both thyroid hormone deficiency during fetal life and aging ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 87 decreases insulin secretion capacity and lead to glucose intolerance in theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index later life; the underlying mechanisms however are unknown. This study nes have not been identified in more than 50% of 46,XY DSD cases. Among aimed to determine whether fetal hypothyroidism (FH) affects GLUT1 and the detectable causative factors, deletions or nucleotide mutations of the GLUT4 gene expressions in insulin-sensitive tissue of young (3 months) and SRY gene account for about 10-15 %. This implies that the vast majority of aged (19 months) offspring rats. patients with gonadal DSD do not have an underlying molecular etiopatho- Materials and Methods: Pregnant Wistar rats were divided into two groups: genesis as of yet. The FH group received water containing 0.025% 6-propyl-2-thiouracil du- Material and methods: Ten unrelated patients diagnosed as complete 46,XY ring gestation and the controls consumed tap water. Offspring from both GD were selected to be included in the study. All patients with the diagnosis groups (n=6 in each group) were followed until month 3 and month 19. of XY complete GD met the clinical criteria for the inclusion. Sequence ana- GLUT1 and GLUT4 mRNA expression in isolated heart, adipose tissue, and lysis of SRY, WT1 and CBX2 genes were performed in all patients and the soleus muscle were measured using real-time polymerase chain reaction in genomic DNA from 10 unrelated females with complete 46,XY GD were pro- 3 and 19 months offspring. cessed on the Affymetrix Cyto2.7M array consistent with the manufacturer’s Results: Compared with controls, in FH rats, GLUT1 expression was lower in protocol. all tissues in both the young (34%, 41% and 84% for heart, adipose and so- Results: The analysis result suggested that the most significant region maps leus, respectively) and aged rats (51%, 64% and 78% for heart, adipose and to chromosome 8q24.3 which was previously reported by another indepen- soleus, respectively). In addition, FH rats had lower expression of GLUT4 in dent study with a similar patient cohort and this region being probable can- adipose tissue (84% for young and 88% for aged rats) and higher expressi- didate related to complete 46,XY GD. on in heart (104% for young and 388% for aged rats) and soleus (290% for Conclusion: Duplication of 8q24.3 region may be responsible for DSD etio- young and 591% for aged rats) tissues. logy, because of in total three different cases with either partial or complete Conclusion: Hypothyroidism during fetal life affects mRNA expression of gonadal dysgenesis have been identified. glucose transporters during later life in both young and aged rats; these This study was funded by the Gazi University Scientific Research Founda- changes may contribute to impaired carbohydrate metabolism. tion. 
P03 .18 
P03 .20 Novel mutations in the MODY genes HNF4α, GCK, HNF1α in a Castilla y Hemolytic uremic syndrome in children-our experience Leon population M. Gafencu1, A. Lungu2, O. Limoncu2, C. Stoica2, Z. Prohaszka3, A. Jianu4, M. Puiu1, G. M. De Pedro Muñoz1,2, M. Fernández Prieto1,2, E. Ruiz Pérez3, F. Gómez Peralta4, G. Doros1; Díaz Soto5, J. Garrote Adrados6, R. Aguado García7, J. Miralles García8, R. González 1Emergency Children Hospital, Victor Babes University of medicine and Pharmacy, Sarmiento1,2; Timisoara, Romania, 2Fundeni Clinical Institute, Bucuresti, Romania, 3Semmelweis 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular, Departamento de Medicina. Facultad de Medicina. University, 3rd Department of Medicine, Research Laboratory, Budapest, Hungary, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Salamanca, Spain, 2Instituto de investigación biomédica de 4University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Roumania, Timisoara, Romania. Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 3Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición, hospital militar de Burgos, Burgos, Spain, 4Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición, hospital general de Segovia, Segovia, Spain, 5Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición, hospital Aims. Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is characterized by hemolytic ane- clínico universitario de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 6Servicio de Análisis Clínicos, mia with fragmented erythrocytes, thrombocytopenia and acute renal failu- hospital universitario Rio Hortega, Valladolid, Spain, 7Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición, hospital universitario de León, León, Spain, 8Servicio de Endocrinología y re. The aim of the study is to present the renal replacement therapy methods Nutrición, hospital universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. in our groups, genetic changes linked with the type of HUS, complications and mortality rate. Methods. A retrospective analysis was supported on 49 children patients, Introduction: Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a rare mo- aged 2 months to 17 years, with the diagnosis of HUS. We analyze the cases nogenic form of diabetes mellitus. This disease is characterized by auto- using the classic classification and evaluate the cases using data linked to re- somal dominant mode of inheritance and an early onset being frequently nal replacement therapy need and mortality. Genetic testing was performed diagnosed before 25 years of age. The aim of this study was to identify novel by Semmelweis University Budapest for 3 aHUS patients. mutations in the most prevalent MODY genes (HNF4α, GCK and HNF1α) in Results. More than 80% of patients were dialyzed. Mortality was correlated patients from Castilla y Leon. with the severity of extra renal involvement (less than 20%). One patient was Patients and Methods: We have studied 232 patients with clinical diagnosis found to be homozygous for a common deletion of CFHR1 and CFHR3 genes, of MODY from Hospitals from Castilla y Leon. The HNF4α, GCK and HNF1α no other copy number alterations were identified (although in parents). The genes were analyzed by direct sequencing. In silico predictions of the patho- second patient was found to be heterozygous for a substitution in exon 23 genicity were carried out using: PolyPhen, pMut and SIFT. of the CFH gene (c.3592G>C) causing a glutamic acid to glutamine change Results: We have identified a total of 46 patients with mutations in HNF4α, at codon 1198 of the complement factor H protein (p.
E1198 Q) and hetero- GCK or HNF1α genes (20%) and 15 from these were novel mutations zygous for a substitution in exon 7 of the CFHR5 gene (c.1067G>A). Other (32,60%). A missense mutation and a nonsense mutation had not been pre- patient was found to be heterozygous for a mutation causing amino acid viously reported in the HNF4α gene (p.T117I, p.R131X), both in exon 4. The change (Q950H) in scr16 of complement factor H, and heterozygous for the following novel variations were identified in GCK gene: IV
S7 +1G>A, p.M57I, rare allele of the CFH 
E936 D polymorphism. p.T116P, p.K205N, p.Trp257_Leu266delinsPLLLLfsX27, p.F316fsX352, Conclusions. Different mutations were discovered in our cases, some expec- p.
C371 X, p.V374M, p.G385A, p.Y413X. Three more unreported mutations ted to have a pathogenic role in the development of aHUS. were identified in HNF1α gene (p.T137fsX17, c.865 INSC, p.T458I). In silico 
P03 .21 analysis predicted all of the novel mutations to be pathogenic. Genetic testing in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism using next Conclusions: Recurrent mutations have not been detected in our cohort of generation sequencing MODY patients. It implies that there is still a high incidence of novel mu- K. Trebušak Podkrajšek1,2, T. Obreza1, M. Pfeifer3, A. Dankovčíková4, J. Kovač1, T. tations. It is necessary to study all the coding region and adjacent intronic Battelino1,2, M. Avbelj Stefanija1; regions of prevalent MODY genes for improving the diagnosis. 1University medical centre Ljubljana, University Children´s Hospital, Ljubljana, Supported by FIS-FEDER PI13/01741 Slovenia, 2University of Ljubljana, Faculty of medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3University medical centre Ljubljana, Division of internal medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4University 
P03 .19 children’s hospital, Kosice, Slovakia. A new submicroscopic duplication of the 8q24.3 region is a potential candidate for disorders of sex development F. N. Dilek1,2, F. E. Perçin1, H. Kayserili3,4, M. A. Ergün1, N. Saka5; Introduction: Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) is a rare 1Gazi University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, but clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease caused by pathogenic 2Diyarbakır Maternality and Child Hospital, Diyarbakır, Turkey, 3Istanbul Medical mutations in several genes leading to impaired production and secretion of Faculty of Istanbul University, Department of Pediatrics & Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Koc University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, İstanbul, gonadotropin hormones and consequently sex hormones. HH is characte- Turkey, 5İstanbul University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, rized by an absence or delay of puberty and infertility. The association of İstanbul, Turkey. HH with hyposmia or anosmia is defined as Kallmann syndrome. Molecular genetic testing of HH is important, as it can prompt the treatment. Materials and Methods:11 subjects (10 males, one female) aged between Introduction: Some of the disorders of sex development (DSD), including 16 and 67 years with suspicion of congenital HH were included. Seven ma- 46,XX testicular DSD formerly called “XX maleness” and 46,XY DSD with les had Kallmann syndrome, 3 males had normosmic HH. The female had partial or complete gonadal dysgenesis primarily affect the gonads. but can suspicion of Kallmann syndrome. Three subjects had other congenital ano- 88 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG also result in non-syndromic XY-GD. The causative mutations in known ge- malies associated with HH (colour blindness, anomalies of heart, learningABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P03 .24 Fetal kidney anomalies: Next generation sequencing disabilities, long limbs, sensorineural deafness, bimanual synkinesis, hyper- M. Rasmussen1, L. Sunde1,2, M. L. Nielsen1, M. Ramsing3, A. Petersen4, T. D. Hjortshøj5, T. E. telorism). Targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) of 24 genes known Olsen5, A. Tabor6, J. M. Hertz7, I. Johnsen8, L. S. Sperling9, O. B. Petersen10, U. B. Jensen1,2, M. to be associated with HH was used to identify genetic variants that were B. Petersen11, D. L. Lildballe1; subsequently confirmed by Sanger sequencing. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus, Denmark, 3Department of Pathology, Randers Results: Six mutations in five genes (PROK2, GNRHR, PROKR2, FGFR1 and Regional Hospital, Randers, Denmark, 4Department of Pathology, Aalborg University CHD7) were detected in six patients. Among them, three variants namely Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, PROK2 NM_001126128.1: c.171_172delTT (p.Ile57MetfsTer17), FGFR1 Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Department of Obstetrics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, NM_023110.2: c.196T>C (p.Typ66Arg) and CHD7 NM_017780.3: c.5759A>G Denmark, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, (p.Tyr1920Cys) have not yet been described. Denmark, 8Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, Conclusion: NGS enables fast and reliable identification of causal mutations 9Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, in several genes related to HH simultaneously. Presented subject group with Denmark, 10Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 11Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University Hospital, HH was genetically very diverse and the results expand the spectrum of mu- Aalborg, Denmark. tations implicated in HH. 
P03 .22 Clinical utility of a kidney disease gene panel for genetic diagnosis of cystic and glomerular inherited kidney diseases Aim and Introduction: Identification of abnormal kidneys in the fetus may G. Bullich1, I. Vargas1, P. Ruiz1, L. Lorente1, D. Trujillano2, X. Estivill2, J. Ballarín1, R. lead to termination of the pregnancy and raises questions about the under- Torra1, E. Ars1; lying cause and recurrence risk in future pregnancies. 1Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain. In this study, we investigate the effectiveness of targeted next generation sequencing in fetuses with prenatally detected kidney anomalies in order to uncover genetic explanations and assess recurrence risk. Also, we aim Introduction: Molecular diagnosis of cystic and glomerular inherited kidney to study the relation between genetic findings and post mortem kidney hi- diseases (IKD) is complicated by their high genetic heterogeneity and phe- stology. notypic variability. Clinical manifestations of these diseases cover a broad Methods: The study comprises fetuses diagnosed prenatally with bilateral range of phenotypes that can be mimicked by mutations in several genes. kidney anomalies that have undergone postmortem examination. We aimed to develop a more comprehensive approach for genetic diagnosis The approximately 110 genes included in the targeted panel were chosen on of these IKD. the basis of their potential involvement in embryonic kidney development, Materials and methods: Massive parallel sequencing of 124 genes causative cystic kidney disease, or the renin-angiotensin system. or associated with cystic or glomerular IKD was performed in 216 patients, DNA was extracted from fetal tissue samples or cultured chorion villus cells, a validation cohort (114 patients) and a diagnostic cohort (102 patients). aminocytes, or fibroblasts. Data analysis was performed using CLC Geno- Results: We identified 136 of the 140 mutations in the validation cohort in- mics workbench, publicly available databases, and prediction tools. cluding several CNVs, demonstrating similar sensitivity than Sanger sequen- The Regional Ethical Committee approved the study. cing with the advantage of detecting CNVs in a singNleP HapPp3roach. Moreover, Results: Samples from 61 fetuses from 57 families were included in the stu- the kidney panel allows a more comprehensive analysis by identifying 1) dy. mutatioCnUsB iNn low-frequency mutated genes, such as mutations in pa- Two fetuses had mutations in the nephronophthisis associated gene, tients with clinical suspicion of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disea- TMEM67 and six fetuses had mutations in kidney developmental genes. For se and mutations in nepPhKrDot1ic syndroPmKeD; 22) complex inheritance pat- these fetuses kidney histology is presented. terns, such as autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease patients with Conclusion and Perspectives: In eight (14%) fetuses we identified a likely two pathogenic mutations in and/or genes or Alport syndrome genetic cause of the kidney anomalies. patients with mutations in two different collagen IV genes; 3) coinheritance Ten fetuses from eight families, in which no mutations were identified, have of mutations in two genes causative of different IKD. been selected for exome sequencing in order to uncover novel genes asso- Conclusions: Massive parallel sequencing of this kidney-disease gene panel ciated to fetal kidney anomalies. is a comprehensive, efficient and cost-effective tool for genetic diagnosis of 
P03 .25 cystic and glomerular IKD. Development of a comprehensive workflow for analysis of LPL gene, 
P03 .23 identification of LPLD patients eligible to receive AAV1- LPL
S447 X Targeted NGS panel improves mutation detection rate in congenital gene therapy. hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and Kallman syndrome patients I. Valaskova1,2, J. Krizova1,3, R. Gaillyova1,2; and confirms the implication of further genes in these pathologies 1University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, C. Polo-Vaquero1, J. Rodriguez-Contreras1, M. Aza-Carmona1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, K. Ibañez- 3Mendel University, Brno, Czech Republic. Garikano1, J. Silla1, P. Lapunzina1,2, B. Lecumberri-Santamaria1, I. González-Casado3, A. Campos-Barros1, K. E. Heath1,2; 1Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency (LPLD) is characterized by severe hyper- 2CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Dept. Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. triglyceridaemia. The most debilitating clinical manifestation of the disease is recurrent, severe and potentially life-threatenLinPgL acute pancreatitis. LPLD iLsP cLaSu44s7Xed by loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding LPL, regulated Introduction: The large number of implicated genes and their oligogenic the plasma levels of triglyceride. Variant of the gene Ser447stop called inheritance complicates the genetic diagnosis of patients with congenital is the only variant associated with increased LPL enzyme activity hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH) and Kallmann síndrome (KS). leading to reduced triglyceride levels. Aim: We set out to identify the molecular defect in a cohort of CHH, HH and It was developed a LPL gene therapy product, Alipogene tiparvovec (Glybera, KS patients using a targeted NGS panel. Subsequently we evaluated the AMT-01, AAV1- LPL
S447 X), an adeno-associated virus serotype 1-based number of cases with monogenic or oligogenic inheritance. gene therapy that results in the expression of gain-of-function 
S447 X vari- Methods. Cohort of 58 probands: 39 CHH, 16 KS, 2 CHARGE with HH and ant of the human LPL gene. 1 CAH with HH. All were screened for mutations using the NGS panel, HY- The aim of this work was to establish a molecular genetic screening pro- POPIT.V1, which includes a total of 73 genes: 50 found to be mutated in pi- gram of patients with LPLD caused by loss-of-function mutations in LPL tuitary disorders and 23 genes in associated signalling pathways. Variants gene, suitable for AAV1- LPL
S447 X gene therapy. were validated by Sanger sequencing, MLPA or arrayCGH. Method: The examined group has consisted of patients with severe or multi- Results: Pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutations were identified in 19/58 ple pancreatitis attacks. Genomic DNA has been extracted from whole blood. probands (33%). The phenotype could be explained by the identified muta- Screening algorithm in LPLD patients has been: 1. HRM-based LightSNiP as- tions in 8 of these (42%). In the remaining 11 probands, only one mutation say to detect the most common LPL mutation Asn291Ser (cooperation with was identified; 9 in genes with reported oligogenicity, and two are individu- TIBMolBiol), 2. MLPA (
P218  MRC Holand) confirmed using QF PCR, 3. se- als with heterozygous variants in GNRHR and GNRH1 suggesting the possi- quencing LPL promoter and 10 exons. bility of oligogenic inheritance for these genes. Interestingly, a heterozygous Results: In LPLD patients, synonymous and nonsynonymous LPL sequence mutation in POU1F1 was observed in an adult patient with KS. variants have been detected. In silico analysis have been performed to de- Conclusions: Targeted NGS has increased our mutation detection rate and termine the pathological status of sequence variants with uncertain signifi- has also demonstrated the implication of further genes in the etiology of cance. these pathologies. Conclusion: It is currently possible to identified patients with LPLD caused SPAb INy l o s Ws-o Wf-f Wun .c Eti Son m Gu .Otat Rio Gns inS 4
L4 P7
XL gene, eligible for the introductio 8n of ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, | H 9 treatment of the therapeutic LPL gene.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P03
.26 Crohn‘s disease associated with a higher rate of mevalonate kinase somatic mosaicism in circulating monocytes. In the last 4 years, we tested 29 patients for a suspected HNF1B-related dis- Y. Shinar1, R. Cohen1, V. Marcu-Malina1, I. Goldstein1, A. Menza-Vilaro2, A. Menza-Vilaro2, order. Through sequencing and MLPA analysis, we identified a mutation in E. Gonzalez-Roca2, J. I. Arostegui2, A. Livneh1,3, V. Oron-Karni4; 14 patients from 11 unrelated families. Six patients carried large deletions 1Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, 2Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Te Aviv involving the whole gene (de novo in three patients with available parental University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Rhenium LTD, Modi‘in, Israel. DNA). One carried an intragenic deletion (exon 1 to 4). One had a splicing mutation. One had a promoter variant of uncertain significance. Five pati- ents from 2 unrelated families carried missense mutations. Introduction The role of somatic mutations in the development of complex No typical clinical presentation can be described. Patients with loss of func- autoinflammatory diseases has barely been studied. We performed genetic tion mutations (gene deletions and splicing) tend to have an earlier onset of testing for familiar monogenic autoinflammatory diseases in the case of an symptoms, with hyperechogenic kidneys detected in the antenatal period adult with late onset recurrent fever and severe upper abdominal pain. The and congenital urinary and/or genital malformation. Progression of kidney patient was eventually clinically diagnosed with Crohn‘s disease based on disease appears to be slow. All adult patients had diabetes mellitus or glu- capsule endoscopy and was treated successfully with an anti-TNF blocker. cose intolerance. Two had cholestasis and two developed unexplained liver Aim Study the rate and distribution of a novel and somatic mevalonate ki- cirrhosis at a relatively young age (39 and 44 years). A 21-year-old woman nase (MVK) gene mutation detected by Sanger sequencing, in a patient with also had mild developmental delay: after MLPA analysis that identified an Crohn‘s disease. HFN1B deletion, array-CGH was performed and a large (1.3 Mb) deletion Methods Massive parallel sequencing (MPS) of all MVK exons (2000 reads was found. of target) was performed on DNA isolated from peripheral blood cells, and In conclusion, we confirm the wide phenotypic heterogeneity of HNF1B- followed by exon 3 fusion-PCR MPS (10,000 reads per target) in DNA from related disorders, but we point out that liver disease can be a major com- neutrophils, and from FACS sorted T (CD3+), B (CD19+) and monocyte plication in patients. (CD14+) cells.  P03
.29 Results The somatic mutation was detected in 22% of the MVK exon 3 reads Whole-exome sequencing (WES) identifies rare mutations in two and was confirmed to be the only mutation in the entire MVK coding region. pedigrees with recurrent familial Nephrolithiasis The mosaicism rate was twice higher in DNA of CD14+ monocytes (50%) M. Jabalameli, V. Walker, S. Ennis; than in neutrophils (23%), B (17.6%) or T cells (21.7%). University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. Conclusion This may be the first report of a somatic MVK mutation in the context of Crohn‘s disease. The mutation source was traced as far as a multi- potential hematopoietic stem cell. However the mutation appeared to ex- Introduction: Nephrolithiasis is a prevalent condition with high morbidity. pand in circulating CD14+ monocytes despite effective anti-TNF treatment. Heritability accounts for 56% of the disease incidence. Patients often pre- The pathogenic and auto-inflammatory significance of this monocyte sub- sent with acute flank pain and dysuria that necessitates surgical interven- population remains to be studied. tion. High concordance rate among monozygotic twins suggest a strong  P03
.27 genetic component. Recent studies on monogenic cause of nephrolithiasis Rapid screening for mutations in MODY genes by next generation identified that dominant mutations are more frequent in adult onset kidney sequencing stones. We sought to identify pathogenic mutations underlying late-onset M. Losekoot1, L. Vijfuizen1, W. S. Frankhuizen1, C. M. J. Spruijt1, A. H. B. Bollen1, I. F. H. C. nephrolithiasis in two pedigrees with recurrent stone formers. Fokkema2, N. van der Stoep1; Materials and Methods: 6 adults from two pedigrees with multiple stone 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, formers were recruited. Biochemical markers of renal function were com- Leiden, Netherlands. prehensively analysed and genetic diagnosis carried out by whole exome sequencing. Results: Based on segregation pattern, deleteriousness (Phylop aAndD CGYe1r0p++ Introduction: Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic scores) and sScLaCrc2i5tyA 2o5f variant (MAF≤0.02) both in the reference popula- form of diabetes with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. It is tion and in the in-house database, two missense mutations in (p. characterized by early onset (<25 years of age), non-obese and non-auto-  P1200
L) andA DCY10 (p.Q349H) were identified to underlie the condition immune mediated associated diabetes and accounts for 1-5% of all diabetic in pedigree 1 and 2 respectively. patients. Differentiation of the various subtypes allows an optimal treat- Conclusion: encodes a unique class of adenylyl cyclisesesA. DVCaYri1a0- ment and delay of diabetes related complications. Mutations in at least 13 tion at this gene has been already proposed to underlie absorptive hyper- genes are responsible for MODY and therefore mutation analysis of all genes calciuria. We identified a rare missense mutation in exon 26 of in one next generation sequencing experiment seems an optimal diagnostic (ScL.C C2355
A9295T) that co-segregate with nephrolithiasis in pedigree-1. FSuLr-- strategy. tCh2e5rAm2o5re, WES analysis revealed that a missense mutation in exon 8 of Materials en Methods: All coding exons and at least 20 bp of flanking in- (c.G1047C) co-segregate with nephrolithiasis in pedigree-2. tronic sequences were enriched using the Agilent SureSelectXT Inherited encodes a calcium-binding carrier that regulates uptake or efflux of Disease Panel, followed by sequencing on Illumina HiSeq2000. Data analysis adenine nucleotides into or from2 +mitoc-3h ondria. Our in-silico analysis sugge- was performed using a home-made pipeline for MODY related genes. sted that variants involved in Ca /PO4 metabolism and purine metabolism Results: High-quality sequence data was obtained. Variant analysis using a contribute to hereditary nephrolithiasis and their functional impact merit low stringency analysis pipeline revealed a pathogenic mutation in 10 out of further investigation. 69 patients in GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A or HNF1B. In addition, 4 possibly patho- genic mutations were found in ABC C8
 and KLF11, genes that are not routi-  P03
.30 nely tested in MODY patients. Whole exome sequencing identifies a novel mutation in ACTN4 gene Conclusions: This approach gives a mutation detection ratio comparable to in a Brazilian patient with steroid resistant nephrotic syndrome Sanger Sequencing. The procedure is fast and efficient and reveals mutati- M. S. Guaragna, A. Lutaif, A. Maciel-Guerra, V. Belangero, L. Prates, G. Guerra-Júnior, M. ons in genes that otherwise might not have been tested in a gene-by gene de Mello; UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil. approach.  P03
.28 Variable clinical expressivity in patients with HNF1B mutations Introduction: Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is defined by heavy proteinuria, A. Tranchina1, C. Graziano1, R. Minardi2,3, C. P. Cristalli2,3, S. Bin3, A. Mattiaccio3, M. hypoalbuminemia, edema and hyperlipidemia. Approximately 20% of the Pariali3, G. Lanzoni1, M. Romagnoli1, G. Severi1, G. La Manna2, M. Seri1, V. Mantovani1,3; patients do not respond to treatment with steroids and are classified as 1Medical Genetics Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, steroid-resistant (SRNS). A significant number of SRNS cases are caused by 2Nephrology Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 3Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), S.Orsola-Malpighi inherited mutations in proteins that form the glomerular filtration barrier. University Hospital, Bologna, Italy. The aim of this study was to search for mutations in a SRNS familial case, using whole exome sequencing (WES), as this method has become a tool of choice for genetic screening in diseases with high genetic heterogeneity and HNF1B heterozygous mutations are the cause of “Renal Cysts and Diabetes pNhPeHnSo1tyNpPicH vSa2riabiliWtyT s1uch as SRNS. Syndrome”, a clinically heterogeneous disorder characterized by maturity Material and Methods: WES was performed in one familial SRNS case. onset diabetes of the young, renal disease (cysts, small kidney, hyperurice- , and mutations had been already excluded after Sanger mic nephropathy), liver test anomalies (cholestasis) and abnormalities of sequencing. We used strict genetic criteria for reduction of variants. Sanger th9 e0 genital tract. ESHG 2016 | BARCELON sA eq, uS eP nA cinIN g w | aW s pW erW for. mE eS dH inG o. rO deR rG to confirm the mutation identified.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ACTN4 Results:We identified the novel heterozygous p.Phe153Leu mutation in the the PKD1 is the most efficient approach to determine the molecular cause of gene in the patient and in hDisa fnaitoh eRre, rwioho is also affected with the di- the disease in ADPKD patients. An accurate genetic diagnosis is essential to sease. The residue Phe153 localizes in the N-terminal region of α-actinin-4 provide reproductive options to ADPKD patients and their families in addi- protein and is conserved down to . Mutations in the N-terminal tion to appropriate genetic counselling. region are de scribed as increasing the affinity AtoC TaNct4i.n filaments and affec-  P03
.33 ting their intracellular localization. Molecular characterization of genetic variants in patients with Conclusions:We identified a novel mutation AinC TN4 The patient here pre- primary ciliary dyskinesia from Serbia sented and his family will benefit of the unequivocal etiology of the disease M. Z. Andjelkovic1, V. Spasovski1, M. Vreca1, P. Minic2,3, A. Sovtić2, M. Rodic2, S. Pavlovic1; and of genetic counseling, as mutations in are associated with late 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Mother onset autosomal-dominant familial FSGS. and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia „Dr Vukan Cupic“, Belgrade, Serbia, 3School of FAPESP and CNPq supported this work. Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.  P03
.31 Extensive molecular analysis suggested the strong genetic Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder heterogeneity of idiopathic chronic pancreatitis V. Sofia1, L. Da Sacco2, C. Surace1, A. Tomaiuolo1, S. Genovese1, S. Grotta3, M. Gnazzo1, S. with extensive genetic heterogeneity and is estimated to affect 1 in 15,000 Petrocchi1, L. Ciocca1, F. Alghisi4, E. Montemitro4, L. Martemucci5, A. Elce6, V. Lucidi4, G. to 30,000 individuals. It usually comes to medical attention because of re- Castaldo7, A. Novelli1, A. Angioni1; current pneumonia, otitis media and upper respiratory tract infections early 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, “Bambino Gesù” Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, in the life, or, in the adult male, infertility. Respiratory infections are caused 2Multifactorial Diseases and Complex Phenotypes Research Area, “Bambino Gesù” by defective mucociliary clearance due to immotile or dysmotile respiratory Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, “Bambino Gesù” cilia with or without ultrastructural defects. Children’s Hospital/S. Pietro Fatebenefratelli Hospital, UOSD Medical Genetics, Rome, In this study, we analyzed 6 patients from Serbia with diagnosis of PCD ac- Italy, 4Cystic Fibrosis Unit, “Bambino Gesù” Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 5Pediatria Sistematica, A.O. Santobono-Pausilipon, Naples, Italy, 6Ceinge-Biotecnologie avanzate, cording to clinical presentation. We used a NGS panel with 4813 genes to Naples, Italy, 7Ceinge-Biotecnologie avanzate/Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare and detect disease-causing mutations in this patients. We have detecteDd NvAaLri1- Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy. ants in 6 different genes. In each patienLt RoRnCly6 one gene was affected. Va- DriNanAtHs 1w1ere detected in the genes DprNeAvHio5usly associated with PCD: (c.347A>T, CcC.3D5 C04
T0>G and c.485G>A), (c.27T>G and 1397T>C), Introduction: Genetic features of Chronic Pancreatitis (CP) have been ex- (c.7798C>T, c.8555C>G), (c.1137C>T, c.7624T>C, ScC.4N3N516A- tensively investigated mainly testing genes associated to the trypsinogen 2A>G) and (c. [248delC]; [248delSCC]N),N fr1oAm first to the fifth patient, activation pathway. However, different molecular pathways involving other respectively. In the last patient we detected homozygous variant in genes may be implicated in the pathogenesis of CP. gene (c. [1654T>C]; [1654T>C]). So far, gene was not associated Materials and Methods: 81 patients with Idiopathic CP have been investi- with PCD, but it was associated with Cystic Fibrosis-Like Disease. gated using Next Generation Sequencing approach with a panel of 70 genes This study provided the first data about molecular genetics of patients from related to six different pancreatic pathways: premature activation of tryp- Serbia presenting with PCD clinical symptoms, thus paving a path to molecu- sinogen; modifier genes of Cystic Fibrosis phenotype; pancreatic secretion lar genetic diagnostics and genetic counseling of this disease in the country. and ion homeostasis; Calcium signalling and zymogen granules exocytosis; Acknowledgements autophagy; autoimmune pancreatitis related genes. This work was funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technologi- Results: We found mutations in 34 out of 70 genCesF TexRamined. 65/81 patients cal Development, Republic of Serbia (grant no. III 41004) and by European (80.2%) were positive for mutations in one or more genes, 16/81 patients Commission, EU-F P7
-REGPOT-316088 (19.8%) had no mutations. Mutations in the (Cystic fibrosis trans-  P03
.34 membrane conductance regulator) gene were detected in 33/81 patients The prevalence of GNAS deficiency-related diseases in a large cohort (40.7%) and 23 of them exhibited at least one mutation in genes of other of patients characterized by the EuroPHP network pancreatic pathways. Of the remaining 48 patients, 13/81 (16%) had mu- F. M. Elli1, A. Linglart2,3, I. Garin4, L. de Sanctis5, P. Bordogna1, V. Grybek2,3, A. Pereda4, F. tations in genes involved in premature activation of trypsinogen and 19/81 Giachero5, E. Verrua1, P. Hanna3,2, G. Mantovani1, G. Perez de Nanclares4; (23.5%) had mutations only in genes of the other pathways: 40/65 patients 1Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Department of Clinical positives for mutations showed variants in two or more genes (61.5%). Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Endocrinology and Diabetology Conclusions: Our data suggest a high rate of genetic heterogeneity in chronic Unit, Milan, Italy, 2APHP, Reference center for rare disorders of the mineral metabolism and Plateforme d’expertise Paris Sud Maladies Rares, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, pancreatitis and that trans-heterozygosity may predispose to the Idiopathic 3INSERM U1169, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, et Université Paris-Saclay, CP phenotype. Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 4Hospital Universitario Araba, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain,  P03
.32 5Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of Turin, Regina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Health and Science City, Turin, Italy. Genetic diagnosis by specific sequencing of PKD1 gene in a (spanish) cohort of 100 ADPKD families M. Molero, C. Ruiz, A. Gomez, A. Arteche, L. Rausell, M. Lazaro, M. Bermejo, J. Garcia- Planells, M. Garcia-Hoyos; Context: The term pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) was coined to descri- Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna, Spain. be the clinical condition resulting from end-organ resistance to parathor- mone (rPTH), caused by (epi)genetic alterations within or upstream GNAS. Though knowledge is growing, there are few data on the prevalence of un- Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD;# 173900 and derlying (epi)genetic defects. #613095) is the most common inherited kidney disease and is characte- Objective: To ascertain the relative prevalence of PHP-associated molecular rized by the development and progressive enlargement of cysts in kidneys defects. and other organs, eventually leading to end-stage renal disease and usually Design: With a special questionnaire, we collected data from patients a late-onset multisystem disorder characterized by bilateral renal cysts. AD- (n=407) clinically and molecularly characterized by the EuroPHP network. PKD is caused by mutations in the PKD1 gene (*601313) in approximately Results: Isolated rPTH (31%) was caused only by epigenetic defects, 70% 85% of the cases and in the PKD2 gene (*173910) in the remaining 15%. of patients showing loss of imprinting affecting all four GNAS differentially The genetic diagnosis of this disease is very difficult due to the existence of methylated regions (DMRs) and 30% loss of methylation restricted to the 5 pseudogenes with high resemblance (98%) to the PKD1 gene. GNAS A/B:TSS-DMR. Multihormone resistance without Albright’s heredita- We have developed, validated, and carried out a methodology based on a ry osteodystrophy (AHO) (15%) was essentially due to epigenetic defects, long PCR followed by several internal PCRs that allows specific and accura- although 10% had point mutations. te analysis of the entire PKD1 gene while avoiding the amplification of the In patients with rPTH and AHO (10%), the rate of point mutations was hig- pseudogenes. her (28%) and methylation defects lower (70%). Patients with multihormo- We used this long PCR approach for the analysis of the PKD1 gene in more ne resistance and AHO (38%), presented all types of molecular defects with than 100 ADPKD families. This procedure allowed the identification of the different frequencies. Finally, isolated AHO (4%) and progressive osseous disease-causing mutation in 75,3% of our patients. The vast majority of the heteroplasia (2%) were exclusively caused by point mutations. mutations detected are null variants (nonsense, frameshift, and canonical Conclusion: We have established the prevalence of various genetic and epi- splice sites). genetic lesions in PHP-affected patients. Using these findings, we will deve- According to the results produced in this study, a high percentage of ADPKD lop criteria to guide cost-effective strategies for genetic testing and explore cases is associated with mutations in tEhSe HPKGD 12 g0e1ne6. S| pBecAifRicC seEqLuOenNciAng, oSf PAtIhNe i|m WplWicaWtio.nEsS foHr Gm.aOnaRgeGment and prognosis. 91ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P03
.37 Role of Klotho genetic polymorphisms in salt-sensitivity: a link This work was supported by ESPE Research Unit and the French National between salt and aging? Research Agency [AL]; the Italian Ministry of Health (GR-2009-1608394) L. Citterio1, C. Lanzani1, S. Delli Carpini1, S. Lupoli2, E. Brioni1, M. Simonini1, G. Gatti1, S. [GM]; Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI13/00467) and the Basque Depart- Tentori1, L. Zagato1, E. Messaggio1, C. Barlassina2, D. Cusi2, P. Manunta1; ment of Health (GV2014111017) [GPdN]. 1University “Vita-Salute”, Milano, Italy, 2Department of Health Science, University of Milan, Milano, Italy.  P03
.35 Acute pancreatitis recurrence transcriptome profiling in chylomicronemia Rational: Previous data in transgenic mice showed that one-half Klotho K. Tremblay, D. Brisson, D. Gaudet; deficiency resulted in extensive premature aging, increased salt sensitivity Université de Montréal and ECOGENE-21 Research Center, Chicoutimi, QC, Canada. and caused salt-sensitive hypertension. Moreover, a recent gene expression study confirmed the expression of Klotho in renal distal tubular cells. Aim of the study: To evaluate the role of Klotho polymorphisms in human essential Introduction: Recurrent acute pancreatitis (RAP) is defined as more than hypertension and salt sensitivity. two crisis of acute pancreatitis not meeting the criteria of chronic pancrea- Design and Methods: 32 SNPs in Klotho gene identified with a previous GWA titis. Extreme hypertriglyceridemia (fasting triglycerides >10 mmol/L) is were used in the genetic analysis. Selected SNPs were studied in three dif- associated with chylomicronemia (CM) and increased risk of RAP. The re- ferent clinical settings: 1. Pressure-natriuresis relationship (PNat) in 580 currence of pancreatitis episodes varies significantly between CM patients. naive essential hypertensive patients, never treated before, (NHP) by Acu- We have investigated the gene expression profiles of adult patients with CM te salt load (NaLoad: 310 mMol in 2 h iv), 2. Low salt diet (137 pts, Low in a spectrum of RAP. SD: <100 mEq/die for 15 days), and 3. Follow-up cohort (FUP, median 150 Materials and Methods: A total of 62 subjects participated in this study: 15 months) of 230 hypertensive patients. healthy controls and 47 CM subjects divided into three groups: 0 (n=21), 1-3 Results: 15 SNPs (with tagging r²=0.80) out of 32 were selected in the iden- (n=10) or ≥4 (n=16) acute pancreatitis episodes. Whole blood RNA samples tified gene region. Six of these resulted significantly associated to BP varia- were hybridized on Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0 ST Array. After RMA norma- tion after Naload and/or LowSD and/or FUP. Particularly, the genotypes lization, differential expression moderated T-tests (Bioconductor package in a missense mutation in exon 2 were associated to salt sensitivity (SBP Limma) and Ingenuity Pathway Analyses were performed. variation and PNat after Na load) and decrease in kidney function in FUP Results: At a p-value <0.01, a FDR of 5% (Benjamini-Hochberg method) and confirming the similar effect in the two different clinical settings. a >2-fold change expression significance levels, a set of 41 probes have been Conclusion: Selected Klotho gene SNPs for first time resulted involved in found differentially expressed in CM subjects with no pancreatitis, 103 in salt homeostasis, hypertension development and long term kidney damage. the CM group with 1 to 3 pancreatitis, and 94 in the group with ≥4 pancrea- Our findings support the proposed Klotho as key gene in salt sensitivity and titis compared to controls. Of the identified annotated probes, 14 are shared aging in humans. by all CM groups; 3 are specific to CM with no pancreatitis; 11 are specific to  P03
.38 CM with 1 to 3 pancreatitis, and 17 are specific to CM with ≥4 pancreatitis. Computational strategy to predict pathogenic variants in SERPINA1 Most of the annotated probes are involved in inflammatory, immune, lipo- gene led to the identification of new functional mutations protein kinetics or signalling biological pathways. E. Giacopuzzi, M. Laffranchi, R. Berardelli, G. Borsani, A. Fra; Conclusions: These results reveal gene expression signatures of RAP in pa- Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. tients with CM.  P03
.36 Two novel RFX6 variants in siblings with Mitchell-Riley syndrome Introduction: The SERPINA1 gene encodes for Alpha-1-Antitrypsin (AAT), with childhood onset diabetes an acute phase glycoprotein that inhibits Neutrophil Elastase (NHE). Muta- M. Skopkova1, M. Ciljakova2, Z. Havlicekova2, J. Vojtkova2, L. Valentinova1, D. Danis1, D. tions in this gene cause reduced levels of AAT in the plasma, Alpha-1 Anti- Murgas3, R. Szepeova2, J. Stanik1,4,5, P. Banovcin2, I. Klimes1, D. Gasperikova1; trypsin Deficiency (AATD), and reduced inhibition of NHE leads to emphy- 1Institute of Experimental Endocrinology BMC SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of sema. Moreover, mutated forms of AAT can aggregate in the endoplasmic Children and Adolescents, University Hospital in Martin, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Martin, Slovakia, 33Department of Pediatric Surgery, University reticulum of hepatocytes causing hepatotoxicity and liver disease. AATD is Hospital in Martin, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Martin, Slovakia, characterized by high allelic heterogeneity, asking for a way to discriminate 4First Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty of Comenius University and Children functionally impaired alleles as new missense variants are observed in the Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Center for Pediatric Research, Hospital for gene. Children & Adolescents, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. Methods: By combining CADD score, amino acid conservation, protein struc- ture modeling and alignment with other SERPIN polypeptides, we have de- veloped a computational strategy to identify missense variations that could Introduction: Two sisters from a Caucasian family were diagnosed with mul- result in impaired protein function. We tested our strategy against the group tiple gastrointestinal tract (GI) malformations (duodenal atresia, Meckel di- of already characterized pathogenic missense mutations to assess specifi- verticulum, gallbladder hypoplasia, and multiple gastric heterotopy loci in city and sensibility of the method. This approach has then been applied to ileum) and childhood onset diabetes (in 2y 10m and 2y 7m). The aim of our missense variants reported in human population from the ExAc 0.3 databa- study was to search for the genetic etiology. se (~63.000 exomes) to identify candidate missense mutations for functio- Materials and Methods: The whole exome (SureSelect V4+UTR, Agilent) nal studies. sequencing was performed (HiSeq2000, Illumina) in the two patients and Results: Our strategy performed well to correctly classify already known their parents. Variant filtering included MAF<0.01, autosomal recessive pathogenic mutations. When applied to ExAc 0.3 data, it identified 8 yet un- mode of inheritance conditions and pedigree analysis. Candidate variants characterized missense variants with high probability to affect the SERPI- were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and their pathogenicity was tested NA1 protein function. These variants could represent new rare pathogenic by in silico analyses. alleles diffused in the human population. Functional consequences of these Results: In both affected sisters, two novel heterozygous RFX6 variants were mutations are being evaluated by in vitro studies. identified: c.1316_1319delTCTA (p.I439Tfs*13) and c.1154G>A (p.R385Q). Conclusions: We have developed a computational strategy useful to prioriti- Each was inherited from another unaffected parent. Both variants were ze new pathogenic variants in the SERPINA1 gene and identify new poten- found to be pathogenic by in silico analyses. Mutations in the gene RFX6 tial pathogenic alleles. are associated with neonatal diabetes, pancreatic and biliary hypoplasia and  P03
.39 duodenal/jejunal atresia - classified as the Mitchell-Riley syndrome (MRS) Disease exome, a powerful diagnostic tool: post-mortem diagnosis of with autosomal recessive type of inheritance. dyskeratosis congenita J. Pinto-Basto1, L. S. Almeida1, F. Melo1, A. Garrido2, C. Barbosa2, S. M. Pereira1, R. Conclusions: From 11 previousely reported patients with MRS, all but two Cerqueira1, P. Tavares1; of them developed diabetes in first days of life. We report here two sisters 1CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital Center Tondela – Viseu, E.P.E., Viseu, Portugal. with two new compound heterozygous RFX6 variants with phenotypes con- sistent with MRS, but with diabetes onset in the third year of life. This sup- ports the need of extending the diabetes definition in MRS to „neonatal or Exome sequencing has become a powerful diagnostic tool to identify the childhood“ onset and suggests that glycaemia should regularly be checked molecular etiology of genetic diseases. We report on a deceased 60yo male in patients with GI tract malformations typical for Mitchell-Riley syndrome. with an undiagnosed systemic disease that presented with liver cirrhosis, Supported by APVV 0187-12. pulmonary fibrosis, sick sinus syndrome and thrombocytopenia. DNA from 92 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONpAo,s tS-mPAorItNem | tWissWue Wwa.sE oSbHtaGin.eOd RanGd disease exome performed.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Disease exome was performed by capture of target regions using TruSightO- Results. Wilson disease was genetically confirmed in 42 patients. In total ne (Illumina) and subsequent NGS of a panel composed by 4813 clinically- 82.4% of WD patients’ alleles were identified: H1069Q (72.22%); M769H- relevant genes. Alignment and variant calling was performed using the BWA fs*26 (1.85%); Val73GlufsX4C (O1M.8M5%D1) and D1267G, D765N, M645R (0.93% and GATK, respectively. Variants were filtered and processed with bioinfor- for each); 27.78% of the alleles remained unidentified. Three nucleotide matic analysis tools to assess its pathogenicity and potential to explain the changes were identified in , of which two represented reported clinical phenotype. Relevant variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. synonymous changes: rs55677935 and rs9096. The third one – two nu- Analysis revealed a novel missense heterozygous variant c.1492G>A cleotide deletion in gene’s regulatory region (rs569267407) was found only (p.Gly498Arg) in TERT gene, affecting a highly conserved residue. Bioinfor- in two patients – siblings, showing different clinical symptoms – one dying matic analysis suggests that the variant is very likely pathogenic and is not from fulminant hepatitis at age of 17, the second – being asymptomatic at present in dbSNP, ExAC, 1KGenomes and ESP. Mutations in TERT gene, most- age of 19, when first being diagnoseCdO wMiMthD W1D due to family screening. ly missense, cause autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita (DKC; type2; Conclusions. MIM 613989) and autosomal recessive DKC (MIM 613989). In the context of 1) There were no vaCrOiaMnMtsD in1 gene found that could be related to the clinical phenotype of this patient, this result supports the diagnosis of different phenotype of WD patients; DKC type2. Segregation studies were not possible as parents and sibs were 2) Change found in regulatory part could be a cause for different not available for testing. protein activity, but the clinical significance remains unclear. We report a post-mortem diagnosis of DKC type2 with a novel variant in the TERT gene, expanding the mutational spectrum of TERT related DKC. Addi-  P04
 Skeletal, connective tissue, ectodermal tionally, this result highlights the importance of molecular diagnosis, even and skin disorders post-mortem, as establishing the molecular etiology allows proper genetic counselling to at-risk relatives.  P03
.40 Sequence analysis of EPCAM gene in Consanguineous Qatari Families,  P04
.001 suffering from tufting enteropathy, identified a founder mutation OBS L1
 Mutations Represent The Major Gene Defect In A Group Of 3M Z. Nawaz1, M. A. Khan2, S. Khan2, S. Ali1, H. Abdelrahman3, E. abdalbari hamid3, F. Al- Syndrome Patients: A Study From Turkey madhaki3, W. Almasri3, K. Abu Hasima3, K. Hassan3; P. O. Simsek-Kiper1, E. Z. Taskiran2, U. Arslan3, C. Kosukcu2, O. Akgun-Dogan1, G. E. 1Genomic Diagnostic Division, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Utine1, A. Alikasifoglu4, N. Kandemir4, V. Cormier-Daire5, Y. Alanay6, M. Alikasifoglu2, K. Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 2Genomic Core Facility, Translational Boduroglu1; Research Institute, Academic Health System, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 1Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 3Department of Pediatric, Hamad General Hospital, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Qatar. Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Institute of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Background: Tufting enteropathy, also termed as intestinal epithelial dys- Ankara, Turkey, 5INSERM U781, Universite Paris Descartes-Sarbonne Paris Cite, Institut plasia, is a rare genetic condition with early onset of sever diarrhea. Histolo- Imagine, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades Genetics, Paris, France, 6Acıbadem University, gically, it is characterized by villous atrophy, disorganization of the surface Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey. epithelium and basement membrane aberrations. The epidemiological data indicates its prevalence as 1 out of 50,000 to 100,000 live births in western population, while it is estimated to be greater in Arab ethnic families due Introduction: 3M syndrome is characterized by severe prenatal and post- to high rate of consanguinity. Genetic studies have found the association of nCUatLa7l growth retardation, facial features and normal intelligence. Mutations EPCAM and SPINT2 genes mutation in disease etiology. in CU L7
, OBS L1
 or CCD C8
 genes have been identified in the etiology so far, Materials and Methods: Sanger DNA sequencing was carried out for the ge- mutations beinCgU tLh7e OmBoSsLt1 commCCoDnC.M8a terials and Methods: Clinical netic screening of EPCAM gene in affected and corresponding normal family and molecular features of 18 patients from 14 families were evaluatCeUdL. D7 NA members. The study was approved by ethical committee and sample was sOeBqSuLe1nce analysis of , and was performed and genotype- obtained after informed written consent. Results: Two consanguineous Qatari families were enrolled in the present phenotype correlations were investigatOeBdS.RLe1sults: Eight distinctC U L7
 or homozygous mutations were idCeUnLt7ified in 11 patients. Of muOtaBtSioLn1 study and sanger sequencing of all coding exons in EPCAM gene was per- positive patients (n=11), 6 (55%) had and 5 (45%) had mu- formed. The sequence analysis revealed c.498_499insC mutation in exon 5, tations. Of all detected mutations 1 (c.361_362insT) and 3 which presumably truncates the protein synthesis (p.Gln167Profs*21). This (CcU.1 L1725
_1126insT, c.1277_O12B8S L21
+delTCAAAGGTCAG, c.1187G>A) mutati- truncation predictably removes the C-terminal domain of EPCAM protein, oCnUsL 7w ere novel. Growth hormone deficiency was detected in 1 pOatBiSeLn1t with which is suggestively involved in the attachment of EPCAM protein to intra- and 2 patients with mutation. Birth weight of patients with cellular membrane. mutation was significantly lower than the patients with mu- Conclusion: The identified mutation, c.498_499insC, seems to have founder tation (p=0.016). A group of patients with no mutations shared siCmUiLla7r cli- effect in Arab population because it has previously been reported in a Qa- nical and radiological features with mutation positive patients.ConcluOsBioSnLs1: tari, Kuwaiti and Saudi families. The present molecular study has evidenced 3M syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous condition. Although was this mutation as a genetic hotspot and suggests to formulate a molecular reported to be the major gene responsible for 3M syndrome so far, diagnostic test in Qatari families, affected with tufting enteropathy, for ge- mutations were more common in the present study which might be an indi- netic counseling. cator of a founder effect in Turkish population. Mutations identified so far  P03
.41 do not account for all 3M syndrome patients suggesting the involvement of Is COMMD1 gene a modifier locus of Wilson disease? other genes. Further molecular studies will shed light on the identification A. Zarina1,2, L. Piekuse1, M. Kreile1,2, I. Tolmane3,4, V. Sondore3, G. Cernevska5, I. Pukite5, Z. of these new genes in the common growth pathway. Krumina5; 1Riga Stradins University Scientific Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga  P04
.002 Stradins University, Department of Biology and Microbiology, Riga, Latvia, 3Riga East Altered ABC C9
 gene: expanding the clinical phenotype of Cantu Clinical University Hospital, stationary “Infectology Center of Latvia”, Riga, Latvia, Syndrome 4University of Latvia, Faculty of Medicine, Riga, Latvia, 5Children Clinical university H. Fryssira1, E. Tsoutsou1, S. Psoni1, S. Amenta2, H. Lüdecke3, J. Czeschik3; Hospital, Riga, Latvia. 1Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2“Mitera“ Maternity Hospital, AT P7
B Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Introduction. Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of Germany. copper metabolism, caused by mutations in gene . Although AWTPD7 Bis established as monogenic disorder, heterogeneity in phenotype is observed evCenO MamMoDn1g ( pfoartmieenrt sM pUoRsRse1s)s.ing the same type of mutations in gene . Introduction: Cantu Syndrome (OMIM#239850) is a very rare (about fifty One of the candidate genes which might play the role of a modifier locus cases have been reported so far) autosomal dominant disorder characteri- is zed by generalized congenital hypertrichosis, neonatal macrosomia, distinc- Materials and methods. 54 patients, clinically diagnosed with WD (Leipzig’s tive coarse faces, cardiomegaly and skeletal abnormalities. The syndrome SCcOoMreM, D20101) were tested for mutations in AT P7
B gene: by PCR Bi-PASA and has been attributed to mutated ABC C9
 and KCNJ8 genes which encode the direct sequencing (for other mutations); and for possible changes in gene SUR2 and Kir6.1 subunits of the ATP-dependent potassium channel (KATP- by direct sequencing of its thErSeeH eGxo n2s0.16 | BARCELONA, SPAcIhNa n| nWel)W reWsp.eEctSivHelGy..ORG 93ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Case Report: We present a four-year-old female patient with developmental transporter. Effect on splicing of c.192 G>C mutation of exon 1 of SL C39
A4 delay, dysmorphic features such as narrow forehead with low anterior fron- has been confirmed. We propose a strategy to quantify zinc transport to in- tal hairline, micrognathia, low-set dysplastic ears and generalized hypertri- vestigate consequences of mutations wSLitCh3o9uAt 4effect on SL C39
A4 localizati- chosis since birth. The investigation revealed absent ovaries. FSH and PRL on. were markedly elevated whilst LH, estradiol, testosterone, DHEA-S and 17- Conclusion: Functional assessment of mutational spectrum provi- OH progesterone were all normal. Chromosome G-banding technique was des key information for interpreting the significance of pathogenicity in the also normal. DNA sequencing analysis of the ABC C9
 gene was performed daily practice of a molecular biology laboratory. and a heterozygous point mutation c.3460C>T which resulted in the abnor-  P04
.005 mal protein NM-OO5691.3 (ABC C9
_1001):p.Arg1154Trp was revealed. This Broadening the phenotypic spectrum of heterozygous aggrecan missense, gain-of-function mutation was located in exon 27 of the ABC C9
 mutations in short stature children gene. O. Nilsson1, K. E. Heath2,3,4, M. Andrew5, L. Sentchordi6,7,8, S. Hallgrimsdottir5, A. Conclusions: The p.Arg1154Trp point mutation has been reported before in Brannstrom5, M. Crocker9, J. Douglas9, N. Dunbar10, D. Flynn11, V. Hwa12, A. Jorge13, S. Cantu syndrome patients and is associated to the full phenotype. However, LaFranchi14, S. Lalani15, E. Los14, D. Newbern16, C. B. Nowak9, M. Olson16, J. Popovic17, J. the absence of the ovaries has not been described before. Therefore, this Quintos18, E. Stattin19, J. Baron20, A. Dauber21, International Aggrecan Consortium; could represent either an expansion of the phenotype or an interaction of 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Institute of Medical & Molecular ABC C9
 with other genes related to ovarian formation and function. Genetics (INGEMM), IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, UAM, Madrid, Spain, 3Multidisciplinary Unit of Skeletal dysplasias (UMDE), Hospital Universitario La Paz, Since the activating mutations in the ABC C9
 gene are the underlying cause Madrid, Spain, 4CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 5Cincinnati Children´s Hospital Medical of the Cantu syndrome, a drug that leads to K+ channel closure indepen- Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 6Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics, IdiPAZ, dently to ATP, could serve as a possible treatment. Hospital Universitario La Paz, UAM, Madrid, Spain, 7Hospital Universitario Infanta Leonor, Madrid, Spain, 8Multidisciplinary Unit of Skeletal dysplasias (UMDE), Hospital  P04
.003 Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Austria, 9Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United Acrodermatitis enteropathica-like forms of atopic dermatitis revealed States, 10Connecticut Children’s Hospital, Connecticut, CT, United States, 11St. Luke by whole-exome sequencing Regional Medical Center, Boise, ID, United States, 12Cincinnati Children’s Hospital S. Küry1, T. Besnard1, X. Latypova1, S. Schmitt1, S. P. Paul2, D. Candy3, E. Blouin4, S. Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 13University Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, Bézieau1; 14Oregon Health and Science University, Oregon, OR, United States, 15Texas Children’s 1CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 2St Richard’s Hospital, Chichester, United Kingdom, Hospital, Texas, TX, United States, 16Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, United 3Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Laboratoire Labcatal, Montrouge, States, 17Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 18Hasbro France. Children’s Hospital, Rhode Island, RI, United States, 19Umeå Universitet, Umeå, Sweden, 20PDEGEN, NICHD, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 21Cincinnati Center for Growth Disorders, Division of Endocrinology, Cincinnati Children‘s Hospital Background: Acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE; MIM #201100) is a rare and Medical Center, Cincinnati, ID, United States. severe autosomal recessive zinc deficiency disorder molecularly diagnosed by the identification of a biallelic anomaly of zinc transporter gene SL C39
A4. Its pathognomonic symptom is an acral and periorificial dermatitis occur- Introduction: Heterozygous aggrecan (ACAN) mutations have been report- ring in early life that responds in a spectacular fashion to zinc therapy. Yet, ed to cause short stature with bone age (BA) acceleration and premature our experience in the molecular diagnosis of AE showed that more than a growth cessation. half of the cases of suspected AE were not due to a primary zinc dyshomeo- In order to characterize the phenotypic spectrum and the response to stasis that would be associated by alterations of SL C39
A4. growth-promoting therapies, a detailed clinical evaluation of 66 individuals Purpose: Our goal was to determine the genetic cause of genodermatoses from 12 families with ACAN mutations, 7 novel truncations, 5 missense, was very suggestive of an AE, albeit with no SL C39
A4 mutation. performed. Method: We sequenced the whole-exome of a series of simplex and multi- Results: Adults have mildly disproportionate short stature (SDS median:-3.3, plex families with a AE-like dermatitis. range:-0.9 to -4.5) with normal/slightly elevated sitting height indices (SDS Results: Beside the identification of a few exceedingly rare syndromes mi- median:2.1, range:0.4-3.8) and early growth cessation and/or lack of pu- micking AE, the most striking result was the presence of dominant muta- bertal growth spurt. Growth of upper extremities appears less affected with tions in filaggrin and in laminins, some of them were already known to be arm-spans typically greater than height (arm-span-height: median:+5.5cm; associated with an increased susceptibility to atopic dermatitis (AD). range:-4 to +13). Some cases had osteochondritis dissecans and early-onset Conclusions: Our work highlighted atopic dermatitis as the main clinical osteoarthritis requiring knee joint and other large joints replacement sur- diagnosis of AE. This suggests that a sub-group of the common disease re- geries in the 2nd-3rd decade. Two families had degenerative disc disease in presented by AD could be diagnosed by genetic testing. Further studies are the 4th decade. needed to determine whether these severe cases of AD are exceptional or Prepubertal height is less affected (median SDS:-1.8, range:-1.0 to -4.2). In if the efficiency of zinc therapy can be extended to the treatment of all AD contrast to most children with short stature, many with ACAN mutations patients with similar anomalies. show an advanced BA (BA-CA, median:+1.3yr; range:+0 to +3.5) reflecting a reduction in the remaining growth potential. Nine patients have been treat-  P04
.004 ed with rhGH and/or GnRH analogs or aromatase inhibitors. Functional modelling of SL C39
A4 zinc transporter mutations effects Conclusions: Heterozygous ACAN mutations result in a wide phenotypic in Acrodermatitis enteropathica spectrum ranging from mild and proportionate short stature to a distinct X. Latypova1, T. Besnard1, E. Blouin2, P. Hulin3, S. Nedellec3, S. Bézieau1, S. Küry1; skeletal dysplasia with disproportionate short stature and brachydactyly. 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 2Laboratoire LABCATAL, Montrouge, France, 3Plateau d’imagerie cellulaire MicroPICell, Nantes, France. Some also cause articular/intervertebral disc caArCtiAlaNg e dysfunction lead- ing to early-onset osteoarthritis and degenerative disc disease requiring intervention. Careful monitoring of patients with mutations may help Acroderma- to identify important genotype-phenotype correlations and to understand tBiaticsk egnrtoeurnodp:a tZhinicca is a key factor of various biological processes. Intestinal their pathogenicity. absSoLrCp3t9ioAn4 is the critical step of zinc homeostasis regulation. is a rare cause of Ahcerroeddeirtmarayt iztiisn ce ndteefriocpieantchyic. aMutations  P04
.006 in , coding a transmembrane zinc transporter, mainly expressed in Analysis of PMN function in patients with aggressive periodontitis eSLnCte3r9oAc4y tes, have been described in patienStLs-. R. Werner1, A. Schossig1, J. Dudás2, J. Zschocke1, I. Kapferer-Seebacher3; SCi3n9cAe4 its identification by our group in 2002, clinical molecular testing for 1Division of Human Genetics, Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of mutations is available. However, functional consequences of Otorhinolaryngology, Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Department of Restorative mutations are poorly characterized. In these conditions, assessment and Operative Dentistry, Dental School, Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. of pathogenicity of newly identified variants oSf LuCn3k9nAo4wn significancHe erLea- mains challenging. SL C39
A4 Methods : We evaluated the effects of missense mutations in Introduction: Aggressive periodontitis (AgP) is an inflammation disorder cells transfected with wild type or mutated, hemagglutinin tagged, with a prevalence of approximately 0.1% in central European population. It transcript. To model decrease of transport activity by SL C39
A4, we perfor- is characterized by early age of onset, rapid rate of progression and loss of med time-lapse measurements of zinc cytoplasmic levels. Finally, the effects teeth until age of 35, if untreated. Several studies indicate functional chan- of putative splice-site mutations were tested by minigene assay. ges in polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMNs) resulting in altered immune Results: Disruption of SL C39
A4 membrane trafficking has been showed in response and destruction of periodontal tissues. 89 m4issense mutations, located in N-terminal EeSxtHraGce l2lu0la1r 6d o| mBaAinR oCf EthLeO NMAa, tSerPiaAl IaNnd | mWetWhoWds:. EWSeH hGav.eO inRvGestigated phagocytosis and chemotaxis of PMNs extracted from peripheral blood in a 4-generation family with ge-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index neralized autosomal dominant inherited AgP (6 affected, 5 non-affected, 5 1801018) and Bax (rs4645878) genes were determined with real-time PCR. unrelated controls) as well as in a cohort of unrelated patients with spora- Expressions of these genes were analyzed immunohistochemically follo- dic form of generalized AgP (n = 46) and periodontal healthy 1:2 age- and wing Histological Degeneration Scoring. gender-matched controls. Results: Whereas no relationship was found among polymorphisms of Fas Results: Phagocytic activity of PMNs in response to non-opsonized E.coli and Bax genes and their expressions, we have determined a relationship was significantly reduced in familial AgP patients compared to healthy sib- among GG genotype of Bcl-2 and their expressions. Additionally, we have lings and non-related controls (p = 0.032). A similar reduction of phagocy- found that ratio of Bax-positive cells is related with IVDD grades. In addition tic activity could not be observed in sporadic AgP in the cohort compared to this, we have found that radiological degeneration grades were compatib- to matched controls. In the family both directed and random migration of le with histological degeneration scores. PMNs was significantly reduced in AgP patients compared to healthy con- Conclusions: GG genotype of Bcl-2 gene may influence the level of its expres- trols (p = 0.042 and p = 0.028, respectively). This significant reduction in sion and may be effective in development of IVDD. Additionally, expression chemotactic activity was not observed in cohort patients compared to mat- of Bax gene may be related with different grades of IVDD. ched controls.  P04
.009 Conclusions: The differences in PMN function between familial AgP and the GLUT10 deficiency leads to oxidative stress and non-canonical αvβ3 sporadic form suggest distinct pathophysiological pathways, although lea- integrin-mediated TGFβ signalling associated with extracellular ding to a similar clinical presentation. To elucidate a possible genetic pre- matrix disarray in arterial tortuosity syndrome skin fibroblasts disposition testing of known variants related to PMN dysfunction is ongoing. N. Chiarelli, M. Ritelli, G. Carini, V. Cinquina, M. Colombi, N. Zoppi;  P04
.007 University of Brescia, Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Brescia, Italy. Role of miRNAs in the etiology of alopecia areata: A genome-wide miRNA association analysis A. Tafazzoli1, A. Fostner1, A. Hofmann1, S. Redler2, L. Petukhova3, F. Basmanav1, K. Giehl4, S. Eigelshoven5, R. Kruse6, B. Blaumeiser7, M. Böhm8, N. Garcia Bartels9, G. Lutz10, H. Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS, OMIM #208050) is a rare autosomal Wolff4, U. Blume-Peytavi9, A. Christiano3, M. Nöthen1, R. Betz1; recessive connective tissue disorder characterized by tortuosity and elon- 1Institute of Human Genetics and Department of Genomics, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute gation of the large and medium-sized arteries and a propensity towards an- of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 3Dermatology and Epidemiology, New York, NY, eurysm formation and vascular dissection. ATS is caused by mutations in SL- United States, 4Dermatology, Munich, Germany, 5Dermatology, Dusseldorf, Germany,  C2
A10 encoding the facilitative glucose transporter 10 (GLUT10). GLUT10 6Dermatological Practice, Baderborn, Germany, 7Medical Genetics, Antwerb, Belgium, 8Dermatology, Munster, Germany, 9Clinical Research Center for Hair and Skin Science, deficiency leads to the disarray of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and to the Department for Dermatology and Allergy, Berlin, Germany, 10Hair & Nail,Dermatological activation of the TGFβ pathway, but the pathomechanisms of ATS is still an Practice, Wesseling, Germany. enigma. To discern the pathomechanisms underlying the ATS aetiology, we perfor- med gene expression profiling and biochemical studies on skin fibroblasts. Background: Alopecia areata (AA) is a common hair loss disorder charac- Transcriptome analyses revealed the dysregulation of several genes invol- terized by a sudden onset of patchy areas of hair loss, which can occur on ved in TGFβ signalling and ECM homeostasis as well as the perturbation the scalp or elsewhere on the body. Immunological and genetic association of specific pathways that control both the cell energy balance and the oxi- studies support the hypothesis that AA is autoimmune in nature. Recent evi- dative stress response. Biochemical and functional studies showed a mar- dence points to a significant role of miRNAs in autoimmune diseases;but the ked increase in ROS-induced lipid peroxidation sustained by altered PPARγ role of miRNAs in AA has not been investigated so far. function, which contributes to the redox imbalance and the compensatory Methods: We performed a systematic analysis to investigate whether com- antioxidant activity of ALDH1A1. ATS fibroblasts also showed activation of mon variantsamong all known autosomal microRNAs loci contribute to a non-canonical TGFβ signalling due to TGFBRI disorganization, the upregu- AA development. Gene-based analyses were performed by VEGAS for all lation of TGFBRII and connective tissue growth factor, and the activation of miRNAs listed in miRBase and their flanking sequences using the largest the αvβ3 integrin transduction pathway, which involves p125FAK, p60Src, GWAS data set of 3,253 patients and 7,543 controls. and p38 MAPK. Stable GLUT10 expression in patients’ fibroblasts normali- Result: As a result, 78 of the 617 investigated microRNAs showed nominally zed redox homeostasis and PPARγ activity, rescued canonical TGFβ signal- significant p-values. After correction for multiple testing, three microRNAs ling, and induced partial ECM re-organization. These data add insights into (miR-1237, miR-30b/d, miR-548h-2) showed significant association with the dysregulated biological pathways and definition of the pathomechanis- AA. The most promising one was miR-30B.Target gene analyses for 3 di- ms involved in ATS. This work was supported by the Telethon Foundation sease associated microRNAs revealed 2,072 nominally significant predicted (grant number GG P13167
). target genes. Gene based p-values were calculated for the predicted target  P04
.010 genes revealing 42 of them to be significantly associated with AA after cor- Asphyxiating Thoracic Dysplasia (ATD) and Short Rib-Polydactyly rection for multiple testing,including I L2
RA, ERBB3 as genome-wide signi- syndrome type III (SRPIII): clinical and molecular review of 71 ficant loci from former AA GWA-studies. By luciferase assays, we validated families the site-specific regulation of I L2
RA, STX17 and TNXBof miR-30B. G. Baujat1, C. Michot1, Q. Siour1, M. Parisot2, C. Bole-Feysot2, C. Fourrage3, P. Nitschke3, Conclusion: Our study is the first to suggest the importance of microRNAs H. Kayirangwa1, K. Le Quan Sang1, A. Dieux-Coeslier4, G. Mortier5, P. Simsek-Kiper6, K. in the pathogenesis of AA which could be of interest for development of the- Chandler7, A. David8, C. Do Ngoc Thanh9, C. Francannet10, D. Gaillard11, A. Goldenberg12, rapies in the future. A. Megarbané13, S. Sigaudy14, C. Thauvin15, T. Attié-Bittach16, S. Saunier17, Skeletal Ciliopathies Consortium, C. Huber1, V. Cormier-Daire1;  P04
.008 1Service de Génétique, INSERM UMR 1163, Université Paris Descartes- Sorbonne The effects of polymorphisms of death pathway genes and Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, mitochondrial pathway genes in intervertebral disc degeneration France, 2Plateforme de Génomique, Institut IMAGINE, Paris, France, 3Plateforme de B. Eser1, O. Eser1, E. Aslan2, H. Dolgun3; Bioinformatique, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4Service de Génétique 1Balikesir University, Balikesir, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, Afyonkarahisar, Clinique, CHRU, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 5Department of Medical Turkey, 3Ministry of Health Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit Education and Research Hospital, Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital and University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, Ankara, Turkey. 6Hacettepe University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Genetics Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 7Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Saint Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 8Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 9Médecine Introduction: It has been proposed that apoptosis is effective on interverte- Physique et Réadaptation de l‘Enfant, Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Garches, France, bral disc degeneration. Especially death receptor pathway and mitochondri- 10Service de Génétique Médical – CHU Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 11Service al pathway are reported to have a significant role in apoptosis mechanism. de Génétique et Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Maison Blanche, Reims, This study is the first study in which both polymorphisms and expressions France, 12Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 13Unité de of apoptotic genes in patients with intervertebral disc degeneration (IVDD) Génétique Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint Joseph, Beyrouth, Lebanon, are evaluated together. The aim of our study is to determine whether poly- 14Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d‘Enfant de la Timone, Marseille, France, 15Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, EA4271, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, morphisms and expressions of apoptotic genes involved in both pathways France, 16Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut Imagine INSERM U-1163, are related with grades of IVDD or not. Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 17INSERM UMR 1163, Laboratory of Materials and Methods: Blood and tissue samples of 100 patients diagnosed Inherited Kidney Diseases, Université Paris Descartes- Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut with lumbar disc degeneration were collected. Patients were divided into 2 Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France. groups according to their radiological degeneration grades as grade 2 (mild) and grade 3 and 4 (severe). PolymorpEhSisHmGs i n2 0Fa1s6 (r |s B22A3R47 C6
E7 L),O BcNl-A2 ,( rSs PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 95ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Asphyxiating Thoracic Dysplasia (ATD) and Short Rib-Polydactyly syndro- gion between the core protein and its GAGs are known as linkeropathies. me type III (SRPIII) belong to the SRP group and are characterized by a RESULTS: We describe the clinical features of an infant fBr3oGmA cTo3n sangu ineous narrow thorax, short long bones, trident acetabular roof and extraskeletal parents from India, iBn 3wGhAoTm3 we identified the previously reported homozy- malformations. SRPIII is uniformly lethal due to pulmonary hypoplasia and gous p.(Gly223Ser) (c.667G>A) missense mutation in usingwhole- other organ system abnormalities. To date, mutations in 11 genes, coding exome sequencing. encodes glucuronyltransferase 1, which adds for ciliary proteins, have been reported in ATD/SRPIII. Here, we report the the fourth saccharide to the linker region. The boy, who expired at age 2.5 molecular screening of 71 individuals (53 ATD, 18 SRPIII) by targeted NGS months, displayed generalized cutis laxa, osteopenia and multiple perinatal of a customized ciliopathy gene panel, called ciliome. fractures, adducted thumbs, bilateral club feet and large joint contractures, The ciliome allowed us to identify the molecular basis of 70% (50/71) of severe dysmorphic features, blue sclerae and corneal clouding. Structural ATD/SRPIII cases. Mutations in DYN
C2 H1 were identified in 34/50 (68 %) modeling of the substitution shows that the mutation substitutes a nonpo- and were not associated with kidney disease but with liver and retina in- lar Gly residue by a polar Ser residue in the catalytic pocket of the enzyme. volvement. Mutations in other genes, namely IFT140 (6%), WDR60 (6%), Functional studies to further investigate the pathogenic conseBq3uGeAnTce3s of the IFT144 (6%), WDR34 (4%), IFT80 (2%), WDR35 (2%) and TT
C21 B (2%), defect are ongoing on a cellular overexpression model of the mutant alleles. were associated with multiple organ damage including kidney insuffici- CONCLUSIONS: This is only the fifth reported child with a B 3mGuAtTa3- ency or liver cirrhosis illustrating the overlap with Saldino-Mainzer and tion. Two other missense mutations (p.(Arg277Gln) and p.(Pro140Leu)) Sensenbrenner syndromes. We also identified one heterozygous mutation have been reported. We highlight the extended phenXoYtLyTp1ic, XraYnLTge2 ,o Bf 4GALT7, in DYN
C2 H1 and IFT140 for a living ATD case, supporting a digenism. We mB3uGtAatLiTo6n s an dB 3aG pArTo3vide comparative overview of the phenotypic features finally identified homozygous mutations in a new ciliary gene, KIF24, in two of the linkeropathies associated with mutations in ATD sibling fetuses with renal, hepatic and pulmonary involvement. In the and . 21 families with no identified molecular bases, radiological features were 
P04 .013 typical and multi organ involvement variable. We conclude that DYN
C2 H1 is Whole exome sequencing reveals a new mutation in NOD2 gene in a the major gene responsible for ATD/SRP III. The exclusion of the 11 known Mexican family with Blau syndrome genes in 21 families supports the involvement of other causal genes. J. Toral-Lopez1, L. M. Gonzalez-Huerta2, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias3; 
P04 .011 1Centro Médico Ecatepec, ISSEMYM, Ecatepec, Mexico, 2Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Genetica, Facultad de Medicina, Hospital General de A novel AT
P6 V0A2 frameshift mutation causing autosomal recessive Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico. cutis laxa with bleeding diathesis and defective wound healing I. Karacan1, R. Diz Kucukkaya2, A. Tolun3, V. S. Hançer4, E. Tahir Turanlı1,5; 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, Blau syndrome (BS; MIM 186580) and early onset sarcoidosis (EOS; MIM Istanbul Bilim University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Molecular Biology and 609464) are familial and sporadic systemic granulomatosis diseases respec- Genetics, Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of Molecular Biology and tively; they are caused by heterozygous mutations in the NOD2/CARD15 Genetics, Faculty of Science, Istanbul Bilim University, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Dr. Orhan gene located on 16q12. The NOD2 gene plays a role in nuclear NF-kappa-B Ocalgiray Molecular Biology-Biotechnology and Genetics Research Center, Istanbul activation, is associated with innate immune system and in the consequent Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey. formation of non-gaseous granulomas. BS is a genetic disorder with domi- nant autosomal pattern, whereas, EOS is sporadic and appears in young people. Both are clinically characterized by granulomatous arthritis, uvei- Introduction: Autosomal recessive cutis laxa type-II (ARC
L2 ) syndrome is a tis/iritis and skin rash. Twenty seven mutations on NOD2/CARD15 gene rare congenital disorder associated with growth and developmental delay have been associated with BS/EOS. In the present study, we analysed the as well as skeletal anomalies. Its prevalence is 1 in 12 million live births. Bi- NOD2 gene from genomic in a Mexican family with BS and 100 normal con- allelic mutations in the responsible gene AT
P6 V0A2 lead to increased pH in trols through WES, PCR and genome DNA direct sequencing. We detected Golgi, resulting in impaired glycosyltransferase activity and organelle traf- a novel mutation in the NOD2 gene in the affected members of the family ficking. Here we present a consanguineous family with four unaffected and that was absent in the non-affected healthy subjects of the family and in 100 two affected sibs (a male and a female) with microcephaly, dysmorphic fea- normal controls. This allowed discard a polymorphism. This is a first novel tures, cleft lip/palate, vision/hearing impairment, wrinkled skin, tendency mutation observed in Mexican patients that enriches the genomic spectrum to infections, bleeding diathesis and defective wound healing. observed in BS. Materials and Methods: SNP genotype data were used to detect regions with homozygosity shared only by the patients. Exome sequence data for the in- 
P04 .014 dex patient were used to search for a rare, homozygous deleterious muta- Search for variants in the FLJ42280 genomic region and assessment tion in the possibly linking regions. of their roles in osteoporosis Results: Linkage analysis pointed to a large region at 12q24.21-24.32 with N. Roca-Ayats1, M. Gerousi1, N. Martínez-Gil1, E. Czwan2, R. Urreizti1, N. Garcia-Giralt3, L. a multipoint LOD score of 2.58 and including 198 genes. Causative muta- Mellibovsky3, X. Nogués3, A. Díez-Pérez3, S. Balcells1, D. Grinberg1; 1Universitat de Barcelona, IBUB, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 2Roche Diagnostics tion search in linkage regions identified homozygous frameshift mutation Deutschland GmbH, Mannheim, Germany, 3URFOA, RETICEF, IMIM, Parc de Salut Mar, p.
S695 RfsX12 (c.2083_2086del) in AT
P6 V0A2. The truncated protein has Barcelona, Spain. 705 amino acids instead of the native 856. Conclusions: We identified a novel disease-causing AT
P6 V0A2 mutation responsible for the ARC
L2  in the presented family. We did not find a del- Signals emerging from genome-wide association studies (GWAs) are fre- eterious mutation in another gene that could possibly explain the bleeding quently located in non-coding, poorly studied regions, and are likely to be in diathesis. Furthermore, the male afflicted with ARC
L2  and another brother linkage disequilibrium with un-genotyped causalF vLaJ4ri2a2n8t0s. GWAs have iden- have mental retardation for which we are searching for a causative muta- tified variants associated with bone mineral density (BMD) and osteoporo- tion. tic fracture, some located in intronic regions of , a poorly stulodciuesd The study was supported by TÜBİTAK (Grant No 114Z829). gene of unknown function. FLJ42280 
P04 .012 We aimed at exploring the genetic variability and functionality of this . A homozygous B3GAT3 mutation causes a multisystemic cutis laxa- Firstly, we resequenced the genomic region in two extreme BMD like syndrome, expanding the phenotype of linkeropathies groups from the BARCOS cohort of postmenopausal women; we statistically B. Guillemyn1, T. Van Damme1, W. Steyaert1, D. Syx1, P. Coucke1, A. De Paepe1, S. Symoens1, compared the number caisnd frequency of variants between the two groups, S. Nampoothiri2, F. Malfait1; and we analyzed their overlap with functional elements from ENCODE. Se- 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent - Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, condly, we performed -eQTLs analyses to determine whether the GWAs 2Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & Research SNPs, and others in strong linkage disequilibrium with them, correlated Center, Elamakkara, Cochin 682041, Kerala, India. with gene expression levels. We identified 110 variants, 18 of which were novel and 59 were low fre- quency variants (LFV). The number of LFV was balanced between the two INTRODUCTION: Proteoglycans (PGs) are major components of the extra- extreme groups and frequency differences of all variants were below the cellular matrix (ECM), and fulfill an essential role as both structural and statistical power of the design, although 9 showed trend and are currently regulatory biomacromolecules. They are compXoYsLeTd1 /o2f , aB c4oGrAeL Tp7ro, tBe3inG AoLnTto6 being genotyped in the complete BARCOS cohort. One exonic variant was whic Bh3 oGnAeT 3or more glycosaminoglycan (GAG) side chains are covalently at- found and 28 variants were located in putative regulatory regions, including tached. Specific deficiencies in the enzymes ( an9d6 ) involved in the biosynthesis of tE heS tH etG ra s2 a0 cc1 h6 ar i| d B e A linR kC erE rL eO - NaAn, iSntPeAreIsNtin |g W SNWP Win .aEnS aHctGive.O osRteGoblast enhancer. Functional studies ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index SL
C37 A2 SCARF2 FAM20C cis SL- the enhancer are currently underway. None of the SNPs showed influence cCa3n7iAn2e , and genes, respectively. CMO is a clinical on expression levels of -genes. equivalent to an infantile cortical hyperostosis (Caffey disease) for which Funding: 2014SGR 932 (Catalan Government), SAF2014-56562-R (Spanish is a new candSiCdAaRteF 2gene. SFLACM3270A
C2  is a poorly characterized member Government), Spanish Society for Bone and Mineral Research (SEIOMM), of a glucose-phosphate transporter family without previous disease associa- and FPU13/02066 fellowship to NRA. tions. Mutations in and have been associated with human van den Ende-Gupta and Raine syndromes and our results demonstrate that 
P04 .015 the canine disorders show remarkable similarity to human syndromes. Expanding the genetic spectrum of Caffey disease Conclusions: Given the growing interest in the molecular characterization S. Symoens1, G. Mortier2, D. Wieczorek3,4, S. Unger5, A. Zankl6, T. Hospach7, P. J. Coucke1, F. Malfait1; and treatment of human rare diseases, our study presents three novel phy- 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, siologically relevant models for further research and therapy approaches. 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University In addition, identification of mutations in the human orthologues provides of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Institut für molecular identity for the canine conditions. Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 4Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 5Medical Genetics Service, CHUV, 
P04 .017 University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Academic Department of Medical Identification and validation of novel genetic variants associating Genetics, Discipline of Genetic Medicine, The University of Sydney, Sydney Children‘s with canine hip dysplasia related traits Hospital Network, Sydney, Australia, 7Pediatric Rheumatology, Klinikum Stuttgart, L. Mikkola1, S. Holopainen2, A. Lappalainen2, M. Hytönen1,3, O. Hakosalo1, H. Lohi1,4,5, A. Olgahospital, Stuttgart, Germany. Iivanainen1; 1Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Equine and Small Animal Medicine, Faculty Infantile cortical hyperostosis or Caffey disease is an autosomal dominant of Veterinary Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 4Haartman Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 5Research rare bone disorder, characterized by inflammation associated with cortical Programs Unit, Helsinki, Finland. and periosteal thickening of affected bones and swelling of the surrounding soft tissues. The disease is diagnosed in young infants and is characterized by spontaneous resolution of the cortical thickening, with episodes of re- Introduction: Canine hip dysplasia (CHD) is a common, complex, and mo- currence and reduced penetrance. The underlying genetic cause is an unique derately heritable disorder. The genetic background of CHD remains am- recurrent arginine-to-cysteine substitution (p.(Arg1014Cys), c.3040C>T) in biguous despite rigorous studies. It is non-congenital, inflicts pain via se- the helical domain of the α1-chain of type I collagen (CO
L1 A1). condary osteoarthritis and may lead to euthanasia on humane grounds. We We describe six unrelated probands with Caffey disease. Molecular analysis aimed to identify risk loci and gene variant(s) of canine hip dysplasia and to of CO
L1 A1 confirmed heterozygosity for the c.3040C>T (p.(Arg1014Cys)) validate our findings with replication studies. mutation in three probands. Biochemical collagen studies on one of these Materials and methods: Our data consisted of German shepherd dogs. Popu- probands’ dermal fibroblasts showed intracellular α1(I)2-dimers, which are lation stratification was considered in our study. Ethylenediaminetetraace- at least partly secreted into the extracellular matrix. In the remaining three tic acid (EDTA) preserved blood samples were genotyped with a high densi- probands a novel c.2752C>T nucleotide change (p.(Arg918Cys)) was identi- ty 173K canine single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array. We executed a fied. This mutation also causes the formation of α1(I)2-dimers, which were genome-wide association study (GWAS) in two steps: 1) with a case-control not secreted into the extracellular matrix. data, and 2) with a larger cohort of dogs with expanded phenotypes. Vali- Although both arginine-to-cysteine substitutions are in relative close pro- dation studies were conducted with an independent cohort of dogs, using ximity, they affect different protein regions. While the p.(Arg1014Cys) maps competitive allele specific PCR (KASP™) based SNP genotyping. to the gap region between two Major Ligand Binding Regions (MLBR2-3), Results: The first GWAS revealed seven suggestive SNPs in one chromoso- the p.(Arg918Cys) is located within the cell-interacting domain MLBR2, as- me; the haplotype frequencies demonstrated a significant correlation with sociated with (severe-to-)lethal Osteogenesis imperfecta. the severity of the phenotype in our validation study. The second GWAS de- So far the mechanism driving the temporary hyperostosis and inflammato- tected one genome-wide significant and 29 suggestive SNPs in several addi- ry reaction in Caffey disease is unknown. Unraveling the genetic spectrum tional chromosomes. is the first step towards our understanding of its pathophysiology. Future Conclusions: We revealed one genome-wide significant and multiple sug- studies will evaluate the effect of intracellular retention of mutant collagens gestive SNPs, all previously unprecedented, associating with CHD traits. chains and interference with other proteins in the extracellular matrix. Seven of these SNPs were validated indicating significant correlation with 
P04 .016 the severity of the phenotype. Additional validation studies are underway Molecular characterization of three canine models of human rare for these as well as for the remaining 30 SNPs revealed in the second GWAS. bone diseases: Caffey, van den Ende-Gupta, and Raine syndromes Canine health foundation and the Academy of Finland funded this study. M. K. Hytönen1,2,3, M. Arumilli1, A. K. Lappalainen4, M. Owczarek-Lipska5, V. Jagannathan5, S. Hundi1, E. Salmela1, P. Venta6, E. Sarkiala4, T. Jokinen4, D. Gorgas7, J. 
P04 .018 Kere1,2,8, P. Nieminen9, C. Drögemüller5, H. Lohi1,2,3; Cartilage hair hypoplasia: a case with compound heterozygous two 1Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, novel mutations 2The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Veterinary B. Akgun1, S. Candan2, E. Isik1, T. Atik1, A. Aykut3, A. Durmaz3, F. Ozkinay1; Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Equine and 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Pediatric Small Animal Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Institute of Genetics, Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Balikesir Ataturk State Hospital, Medical Genetics Department, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 6Department of Microbiology Balikesir, Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, Michigan, MI, United States, 7Division Izmir, Turkey. of Clinical Radiology, Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, Bern, Switzerland, 8Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden, 9Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Diseases, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Introduction: Cartilage hair hypoplasia (CHH) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterised by short-limb dwarfism, sparse and light- colored hair, Hirschsprung’s disease and immune deficiency. It is caused by Introduction: One to two percent of all children are born with a develop- mutations in the RMRP gene, which encodes the RNA component of the mi- mental disorder and for many of them the molecular pathogenesis remains tochondrial RNA-processing ribonuclease (RNase MRP). Several mutations poorly characterized. Parallel developmental disorders in other species have been identified in its promoter region or transcribed sequence. could provide complementary models for human rare diseases by unco- Case report: A 6 month-old-girl was born to nonconsangious parents at vering new candidate genes, improving the understanding of the molecu- 39th week of gestation by ceaserian section. Bilateral rhisomelia on the lar mechanisms and opening possibilities for therapeutic trials. Our study upper and lower extremities were detected at the prenatal period. She investigated the clinico-pathological features and genetic causes of three had postnatal growth retardation and chronic constipation. On physical developmental syndromes in dogs; craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO), examination, sparse and light colored hair and eyebrows, frontal bossing, previously undescribed skeletal syndrome, and severe tooth wear due to anteverted ears, rhisomelic dwarfism and joint laxity were observed. Neu- hypomineralization. romotor development was normal. Immunological parameters were nor- Materials and Methods: We established study cohorts for each disease and mal. Short extremities and metaphyseal dysplasia were detected on the characterized their clinical features. Either a genome-wide association stu- bone survey. We detected compound heterozygous two novel mutations dy combined with targeted resequencing or whole genome sequencing was [g.4976_4989dupTACTACTCTTGTAA and +22T>C] on the RMRP gene by utilized to identify the causal variants. Sanger sequencing analysis. Results: For the studied disorders, weE iSdeHnGtif i2ed0 p1a6th |o gBeAniRc vCaEriLanOtsN inA t,h Se PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 97 Conclusion: In conclusion, in a case who has normal immune phenotype andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index prominent skeletal findings compound heterozygous mutations in RMRP weighted clinical scoring system on 20 points. Statistics were performed gene were reported. Clinical findings of the syndrome depend on the muta- using SPSS 22.0. tion harboring in the gene. Forty-seven probands harbored an FBN2 mutation (mutation uptake rate 
P04 .019 39%). All but 2 mutations were located in the neonatal region (exons 22- Cartilage-hair hypoplasia by a new mutation 151G>C in the RMPR 36) with half of them altering or producing cysteines. Three patients had gene large intragenic deletions or frameshift mutations. Five FBN2+ patients de- M. Ortiz, A. Lafuente, G. Pi, A. Zuñiga; Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. veloped cardiovascular complications. Logistic regression analysis reveals a significantly higher score in FBN2+ versus FBN2- patients (p<0,001). Cut point analysis using a ROC curve revealed that a clinical score of 11+ yields a sensitivity of 84% and a specificity of 60% for the FBN2 result. In addition, Cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH; MIM#250250) is a form of short-limbed in patients presenting with a clinical score of 11+ and at least crumpled ears dwarfism due to skeletal displasia. CHH is an autosomal recessive disorder and arachnodactyly, the probability of finding an FBN2 mutation is 60%. characterized by skeletal involvement, short stature, variable features like BOF15/MET-V/011; FWO:1881515N blond fine sparse hair, and defective cellular immunity affecting T-cell-me- 
P04 .021 diated responses. Patients may have a severe combined immunodeficiency Rare variant in the CECR1 gene and susceptibility to autoimmune requiring bone marrow transplantation or they may be asymptomatic. CHH diseases? is caused by mutations in the RMRP gene (RNA component of mitochondri- T. Roberta1, R. Santacroce1, A. Leccese1, A. Corrado2, M. Margaglione1; al RNA-processing endoribonuclease), an untranslated gene with only 267 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, Foggia, Italy, 2Clinica Reumatologica- Azienda nucleotides that encode an RNA subunit of an RNase-MRP complex. This is Ospedaliero Universitaria di Foggia, Foggia, Italy. the first nuclear-encoded RNA in which mutations have been found to lead to human diseases. RMRP is characterized by a very high density of SNPs and several pathogenic variants. Subsequently, molecular diagnosis remains CECR1 (cat eye syndrome chromosome region, candidate 1) encodes adeno- problematic sine deaminase 2. Adenosine deaminase (ADA) catalyzes the deamination Proband was a 8 mo male and he is the first child of healthy, non-consan- of adenosine and deoxyadenosine to inosine and deoxyinosine, respectively. guineous parents. No family history of congenital anomalies was referred. ADA, an enzyme essential for the differentiation and proliferation of lym- The child was born after 38 weeks of an uneventful pregnancy. Low birth phocytes and the monocyte-macrophage system, has been used for moni- weight, short stature and forearm and hand hypoplasia, with contractures of toring several diseases in which immunity has been altered. both wrist and fingers, were the main symptoms after the birth. Karyotype In previous studies it was observed that compound heterozygous mutati- was normal male and CGH array did not detect any CNV. Direct sequencing ons in CECR1 cause a syndrome which includes systemic vasculopathy and of RMPR gene detected a known pathological mutation, 195C>T (maternal inflammation, showing overlap with polyarteritis nodosa and signs of com- origin) and a non-previously described mutation 151G>C (paternal origin) promised endothelial integrity and endothelial cellular activation. Since this in RMPR gene. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that may have a pathological syndrome shared similarities with systemic sclerosis disease (presence of character affecting the secondary structure of the RNase-MRP RNA. There- antibodies and connective tissue damage), we performed a mutational ana- fore, the patient should carry two pathological mutations that confirm the lysis of the CECR1 gene on this autoimmune disease to test the hypothesis diagnosis of cartilage-hair hypoplasia. that gene may be also involved in it. 
P04 .020 We identified one CECR1 missense mutation (p.Arg45Trp) in one patient Congenital contractural arachnodactyly: delineation of clinical affected by diffuse form of the disease, and it was not observed in the 200 criteria Italian controls analysed in this study. This substitution affects a nucleoti- S. De Coninck1, I. Meersschaut1, S. Garcia Miñaur2, J. C. Oosterwijk3, R. Igbokwe4, M. Suri5, de in the dimerization domain, and in silico analysis performed with three A. Bayat6, G. Jones7, C. I. Dali6, S. Lynch8, E. Blair9, A. Collins10, V. Laitinen11, E. Thomas12, A. Male13, I. Stolte-Dijkstra3, K. Keymolen14, L. Cheryl15, D. Yadav16, F. Mckenzie17, S. prediction algorithms predicts for it a nonneutral role. The other 3 detected Berland18, P. Willems19, A. Topa20, F. Petit21, A. Destree22, J. De Backer1, P. J. Coucke1, A. De variations were synonymous and have already been described in public da- Paepe1, S. Symoens1, B. L. Callewaert1; tabases and were identified also in control samples. 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, The presence of only one mutation in heterozigosity cannot be responsible Belgium, Ghent, Belgium, 2Clinical Genetics dpt, University Hospital la Paz, Madrid, for the phenotype of the patient and therefore, we did not observe any signi- Spain, 3Dpt of genetics, University medical center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, ficant evidence for the implication of this gene in SSc development. 4West Midlands Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5Nottingham Clinical Genetics Service Nottingham 
P04 .022 University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 6Clinical Genetic Clinic, The candidate implant materials being Mg-Y-RE’s alloys suppressed Kennedy Center, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 7Clinical chondrogenesis Genetics Department, University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Leicester, United B. Gogebakan, M. Izmirli, K. Gunduz, L. Atac, N. Bilgic, S. Ozarslan, O. Sahin; Kingdom, 8Department of clinical genetics, Our Lady’s Children & Temple street Mustafa Kemal University, Hatay, Turkey. Hospitals, Dublin, Ireland, 9Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10Wessex Clinical Genetics Service University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom, 11Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland, 12Genetics clinic, Borough Wing Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common form of joint disease and it may Guy‘s Hospital Great Maze Pond, London, United Kingdom, 13Clinical Genetics dpt, commonly develop knees, hips, hands, facet joints and feet. The gold stan- Great Ormond street hospital, London, United Kingdom, 14Center for Medical Genetics, dard for the diagnosis of OA is the histology of synovial cell. The synovial Brussels University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium, 15Clinical genetics dpt, NHS Greater cell consists of from one to four layers of cells including fibroblast cell and Glasgow & Clyde, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 16Dpt of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Institute of several biomarkers for OA and chondrogenesis. For OA, the chondrocyte im- Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Pondicherry, India, 17Genetic Services of Western Australia, Subiaco, Australia, 18Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular plantation and osteochondral autograft procedures are used as treatment of Medicine Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 19Gendia, Antwerp, Belgium, methods which are expensive and have side effects. Another method is im- 20Dpt of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden, 21Dpt for plants being made of several materials can be used as knee implant. CHI3
L1 , clinical Genetics, CHU de Lille, Lille, France, 22Center for Human Genetics, Institute for COMP, MM
P1 , ADAMT
S4 , ADAMT
S5 , HIF1A, NFKB, EPA
S1  genes are asso- Pathology and Genetics, Gosselies, Belgium. ciated with chondrogenesis and they are well known biomarkers for OA and chondrogenesis. Therefore, we aimed to determine the invitro cytotoxicity and the level of mentioned genes expressions of synthesized Mg-Y-R
E12 , Mg- Congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA) is an autosomal dominant Y-R
E13  and Mg-Y-R
E24  alloys by Micro/Nano-Mechanical Characterization connective tissue disorder manifesting joint contractures, arachnodacty- Laboratory of Physic department as implant materials. HE
L299  which is the ly, crumpled ears, and scoliosis as main features. Its rarity and substantial fibroblast cell line as model of synovial fibroblast is used. For this purpose, overlap with other conditions including Bethlem myopathy, Marfan syn- HE
L299  was exposed to various concentrations of Mg-Y-R
E12 , Mg-Y-R
E13  drome and distal arthrogryposes, make the diagnosis challenging, though and Mg-Y-R
E24  at 24, 48 and 72 hours. Cell viability was evaluated by MTT. important for clinical management. CCA is caused by mutations in FBN2. The expression levels of genes were evaluated with qRT-PCR. To compa- We performed a comprehensive clinical and molecular assessment in a lar- re control and exposed HE
L299  cell line, Mg-Y-R
E12  suppressed COMP, ge cohort of CCA patients to delineate clinical diagnostic criteria and guide ADAMT
S5 , HIF1A, NFKB and EPA
S1  genes, Mg-Y-R
E13  suppressed CHI3
L1 , molecular analyses for FBN2. ADAMT
S5 , HIF1A, NFKB, EPA
S1  genes and Mg-Y-R
E24  suppressed CHI3
L1 , FBN2 analysis using either Sanger Sequencing or PCR-based next-genera- ADAMT
S4 , ADAMT
S5 , MM
P1 , HIF1A, NFKB, EPA
S1  genes. In a conclusion, tion sequencing was performed in 122 clinically well-characterized pro- Mg-Y-R
E12 , Mg-Y-R
E13  and Mg-Y-R
E24  cannot suitable for knee implant ma- bands. For 10 clinical characteristics, the positive and negative predictive terials. va9l8ue to find an FBN2 mutation was determEinSedH Gin 2or0d1er6 t o| BesAtaRbClisEhL aO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .023 CO
L1 A1 CO
L1 A2 Cleidocranial Dysplasia - Clinical, radiological and molecular CO
L1 A1 CO
L1 A2 diagnosis of 5 cases the type I collagen genes and . A. R. Soares1, M. E. Oliveira1, C. Melo2, G. Soares1, R. Santos1, A. M. Fortuna1; The objective of this study was to identify mutatiCoOnLs 1inA 1 C OaLn1dA 2 1Centro Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto Magalhães - CHPorto, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço in patients with clinical suspicion of OI. Pediatria - Centro Hospitalar Médio Ave, Vila Nova Famalicão, Portugal. Material and Methods: The coding regions of and were screened in 47 families with OI by next-generation sequencing (NGS). Most families were Spanish, but patients from other countries were included. We Introduction: Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD, MIM#119600) is an autosomal confirmed the mutations by conventional Sanger sequencing. Familial ana- dominant skeletal dysplasia characterized by hypoplasia/aplasia of the cla- lysis were performed when samples were available. vicles, delayed closure of the cranial sutures and multiple dental abnorma- Results: We identified 28 different pathogenic mutations in 31 families lities. Other features that may be present are macrocephaly, brachycephaly (68%). Most commonCO m
L1 uAta1tionsC OwLe1rAe 2missense variants affecting glycine and bossing, short stature and other skeletal abnormalities. The prevalence residues but dspe lnicoivnog. and frameshift mutations were also found. There were of CCD is one in 1 million. Mutations in the RUNX2 gene are responsible for 12 novel mutations ( =6; =6) and eight mutations were con- 60-70% of the cases (~40% are de novo). The diagnosis is based on clinical firmosetdeo tgoe bnee sis imperfecta. and radiological findings and may be confirmed by RUNX2 gene mutation Conclusions: NGS is a suitable method to accomplish molecular diagnosis analysis. of Large deletions/duplications and deep intronic Materials and Methods: We report 5 CCD patients (4 families), in which mutations which were not analysed in this study could explain the low rate RUNX2 sequence analysis was performed. of mutation detection. Results: All the patients presented with typical clinical features and spe- The large majority of pathogenic variants identified were missense muta- cific radiological findings. The RUNX2 gene molecular study revealed 2 tions affecting glycine residues and thus expected to cause collagen I triple missense mutations (in 2 families) affecting highly conserved amino acids helix disturbance. - p.Arg190Trp and p.Lys218Asn. The later represents a novel base substitu- 
P04 .026 tion (c.654A>C), located in the DNA-binding Runt domain. Further studies Mutation in filamin B co-segregating with congenital talipes will be performed in the other 2 families. quinovarus in a chinese family Conclusions: These cases illustrate the importance of clinical clues for the H. Yang, Z. Zheng, H. Cai, Z. Wang, Q. Fu; diagnosis, as well as the intra and interfamilial variability of this disease. Shanghai Children‘s Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University school of Medicine, The molecular confirmation allowed a more accurate genetic counselling for Shanghai, China. patients and families, namely by the opportunity to offer prenatal diagnosis. Although CCD has an overall good prognosis, its earlier diagnosis may lead to a better management from a multidisciplinary team thereby providing an Introduction: Congenital talipes equinovarus, also known as clubfoot, is one improved quality of life for patients. of the most common musculoskeletal disorders, and its etiopathogenesis is 
P04 .024 not clearly known. Genetic factors are known as contributors to its patho- Novel RUNX2 mutation in the runt domain in a Japanese patient with genesis. Up to date, a large number of genes were involved in this process, cleidocranial dysplasia such as PITX1, TBX4 and RBM10. Our aim was to determine the candidate J. Machida1, H. Goto2, A. Shibata2, T. Tatematsu2, T. Nagao3, K. Shimozato2, Y. Tokita4; disease-causing mutations in Chinese patients with isolated clubfoot. 1Toyota Memorial Hospital, Toyota, Aichi, Japan, 2Aichi-Gakuin University, Nagoya, Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood Aichi, Japan, 3Okazaki City Hospital, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan, 4Institute for Developmental samples of isolated clubfoot pedigree and 53 sporadic patients. Whole exo- Research, Aichi-Human Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan. me sequencing (WES) and Sanger sequencing were performed for identifing disease-causing mutations and validation, respectively. Results: A putative pathogenic mutation c.4717G>T (p.D1573Y) in filamin B Introduction: Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD; MIM 119600) is a rare autoso- (FLNB) gene was successfully identified by WES and was shown to co-segre- mal-dominant inherited disorder that causes an abnormal skeletal genesis gate with the family anomaly in a three-generation family with six isolated characterized by short stature, absent or delayed closure of cranial sutures, clubfoot affected individuals. In addition, two novel missense mutations in hypoplastic or absent clavicles, and dental anomalies, such as delayed tooth FLNB [c.1897A>G(p.M633V) and c.2195A>G(p.Y732C)] were further iden- eruption of permanent teeth, hypodontia, and supernumerary teeth. It has tified from 53 sporadic patients with isolated clubfoot. been demonstrated that hypomorphic or haploinsufficiency of the runt re- Conclusions: Our results indicated that FLNB mutations were associated lated transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) gene is causative for CCD. RUNX2 en- with isolated clubfoot,and provide a concrete evidence for involvement of codes an osteoblast-specific transcription factor, which recognizes specific FLNB in pathogenesis of isolated clubfoot and expand the clinical spectrum DNA sequences via the runt domain, and has an important role in the diffe- of FLNB mutations. rentiation of osteoblasts and the maturation of chondrocytes. 
P04 .027 Materials and Methods: In vitro characterization of the skeletal stem cell niche from calvarial Mutational analysis was performed with fragments covering the entire sutures of nonsyndromic craniosynostosis coding region of the RUNX2 gene. In addition, biochemical analyses were L. Di Pietro, M. Barba, L. Massimi, P. Frassanito, M. Caldarelli, G. Tamburrini, W. carried out to investigate the role of detected mutant RUNX2 in the CCD pa- Lattanzi; thologies. Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, ROMA, Italy. Results and Conclusions: In this study we described the case of a 9 year old Japanese boy with CCD who carries a novel mutation in the RUNX2 gene (c.473c>a) that resulted in Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (NSC) is a congenital defect due to the pre- an amino acid substitution (p.A158E) in the runt domain of the gene pro- mature fusion of skull sutures. These are mesenchymal gaps that bridge the duct. Although A158E RUNX2 showed stable exogenous expression in trans- gaps among flat bones of the skull, and serve as key growth centers coordi- fected CO
S7  cells and a normal nuclear localization pattern, it did not show nating skull-brain concerted development. The suture mesenchyme houses transcriptional activity in a reporter assay. This indicates that the A158E a craniofacial-specific skeletal stem cell niche, recently characterized. Re- mutation in RUNX2 is causal for the CCD in our current case. cent evidence suggests that NSC is due to a stem cell abnormality at this site. 
P04 .025 Our aim is to characterize the stem cell population isolated from open and Mutations in CO
L1 A1 and CO
L1 A2 in patients with osteogenesis fused sutures of NSC patients, focusing on the expression of lineage-specific imperfecta markers. J. Díaz-Garzón1, C. Prior1, C. Gómez1, L. Pascual1, R. Núñez1, R. de Sancho1, N. Chacón1, Cavarial stem cells (CMSC) were isolated from NSC biospecimens and clonal- E. Vallespín1, V. Martínez-González1, P. Gutiérrez2, J. Molano1, A. Bueno2, G. Otafy3, S. ly diluted. The expression of bone marrow stem cell markers (THY1, a skel- Temtamy3, M. Aglan3, P. Lapunzina1, V. L. Ruíz-Pérez4; etal stemness-marker; TI
E2 , tyrosine kinase recognized as haemopoietic/ 1Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Madrid, Spain, angiogenic marker; ENPEP, glutamyl aminopeptidase involved in osteogenic 3Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, Centre of Excellence of Human differentiation of bone marrow stem cells; and ITGAV, an integrin playing a Genetics, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 4Instituto Investigaciones Biomédicas, Madrid, Spain. key role in bone marrow niche environment) was analyzed both in suture tissues and matched cell clones, with and without osteogenic induction. Osteogenesis imperfecta CMSCs clones homogeneously displayed a THY1+/TI
E2 -/ENPEP- immuno- Introduction: (OI) is a connective tissue disorder phenotype, indicating that explant cultures allow a significant selection of characterized by skeletal fragility leading to recurrent fractures. It is mainly cell populations for both sutures and synostoses. Cells expressed increased an autosomal dominant disorder withE 8S 5H -9G 0% 2 o0 f 1 ca6 se | s B haA vR inC g mEL uO tatN ioA ns, iS n PAlIeNve |ls W ofW THWY1.E aSndH IGTG.OAVR, wGhile decreased levels of ENPEP and TI
E2 , c9o9m-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .030 Mutations in the E subunit of the vacuolar ATPase complex cause a pared with matched tissue samples. The expression of THY1, ENPEP and novel type of autosomal recessive cutis laxa TI
E2  decreased after the osteogenic induction. T. Van Damme1, A. Kariminejad2, M. Mohamed3, B. Guillemyn1, T. Gardeitchik3, W. THY1+ represent reasonably the stem cell population inside the calvarial Steyaert1, S. Ghaderi-Sohi2, E. Morava4, D. Syx1, D. Lefeber3, P. Coucke1, S. van Kraaij3, D. niche, hence a potential target of therapies aimed at reducing the increased Dalloyaux3, R. De Rycke5, A. De Paepe1, S. Symoens1, R. Wevers3, F. Malfait1, B. Callewaert1; osteogenic rate at the site of premature suture fusion. 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 
P04 .028 3Departments of Laboratory medicine, Pediatrics and Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Bardet Biedl Syndrome-gene 9 (BB
S9 ) and primary cilium signaling Netherlands, 4Hayward Genetics Center, New Orleans, LA, United States, 5Department of in the aberrant osteogenic process underlying non-syndromic Biomedical Molecular Biology, Inflammation Research Center, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. craniosynostosis M. Barba, L. Di Pietro, L. Massimi, M. Geloso, F. Michetti, C. Di Rocco, G. Tamburrini, C. Berardini, W. Lattanzi; Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, ROMA, Italy. Introduction: Acidification of vesicular compartments is crucial for the function of intracellular trafficking pathways. Defects in this pr+ocess due to mutations in genes encoding subunits of the vacuolar-type H-ATPase (V- Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (NSC) is a congenital malformation due to ATPase) pump cause very different Mendelian disorders. We now identified the premature ossification of calvarial sutures, with an unclear multifactori- a homozygous mutation in another subunit of the V-ATPase in a consan- al etiopathogenesis. The Bardet Biedl Syndrome-associated gene 9 (BB
S9 ), guineous Iranian pedigree with a severe cutis laxa pAThePn6oVt1yEp1e. encoding a structural component of the primary cilium, has been associated Results: Using whole-exome sequencing, we detected a homozygous to the NSC phenotype in a GWAS. The role of BB
S9  in the osteogenic commit- p.(Leu128Pro) (c.383T>C) missense mutation in , encoding the ment and differentiation of somatic stem cells inside skull bone and sutures E subunit of cytoplasmic V1 part of the V-ATPase complex, in a patient with is unknown. severe and generalized cutis laxa, arthrogryposis, congenital hip dysplasia, The aim of this study was to investigate how BB
S9  modulation affect cilio- and severe aortic root dilatation and biventricular hypertrophy. Located in genesis and osteogenesis, in cells isolated from fused (p-CMSC) and unfused the head of this subunit, Leu128 engages a hydrophobic reaction with the (n-CMSC) sutures of NSC patients. opposing B subunit that is predicted to be abolished by the Pro substitution. Cells were cultured either in standard growth or in osteoinductive conditi- Proband fibroblasts displayed abnormal swelling and fragmentation of the ons; BB
S9  was silenced using siRNA, and its expression analyzed through Golgi apparatus on transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and severely qPCR. The number of primary cilium-expressing cells, and the activity of the delayed retrograde translocation of Golgi membranes to the endoplasmic cilium-related Hedgehog pathway were analyzed comparatively in all cells. reticulum after Brefeldin A treatment, suggesting disturbed vesicular intra- BB
S9  expression was higher in p-CMSC compared with n-CMSC, and under- cellular trafficking. TEM analysis of the proband’s dermis showed severe went a further increase upon osteogenic induction. The number of ciliated changes in the amount, structure and organization of elastic and collagen cells was lower in p-CMSC compared with n-CMSC. Following BB
S9  silen- fibers, linking this disorder to other types of cutis laxa. Biochemical studies cing, the percentage of ciliated cells raised significantly in p-CMSC, equali- investigating the effect on elastin and collagen are currently ongoing. zing to the percentage observed in n-CMSC. Furthermore, the expression of Conclusions: This study describes a novel type of cutis laxa caused by mu- Hedgehog pathway-related genes (SMO, GLI1, GLI3, IGF1) in p-CMSC was tations in the E subunit of the V-ATPase complex that affects intracellular significantly dysregulated, compared with n-CMSC, and reverted to normal trafficking and secretion of major extracellular matrix constituents. upon BB
S9  silencing. 
P04 .031 Taken together, our data point towards a functional role of BB
S9  in the A New Face oF Inherited Recessive Cutis Laxa: AT
P6 V0A2 gene osteogenic commitment of suture-derived cells, highlighting a key role of mutations associated with metabolic defects the primary cilium in the abnormal osteogenic process underlying NSC pa- G. Ogur1, F. Malfait2, U. Abur3, A. Yılmaz4, H. Mutlu Albayrak4, E. Altundag4, C. Aygün5; t Ph 0o 4g .e 0n 2e 9sis. 1Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Genetics, Samsun, Turkey, 2Ghent University, Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 3Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty,Genetics, Samsun, Differential expression of candidate genes for skull globularization Turkey, 4Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Genetics, Samsun, Turkey, 5Ondokuz in nonsyndromic craniosinostosis patients: a common molecular Mayis University Medical Faculty, Neonatalogy, Samsun, Turkey. network in skull shape evolution, craniofacial dysmorphology and cognitive disabilities? W. Lattanzi1, L. Di Pietro1, M. Barba1, C. Boeckx2, L. Massimi1, D. Chieffo1, G. Tamburrini1, Introduction. Cutis laxa (CL) is a rare disorder of elastic fibers and is cha- A. Benitez-Burraco3; 1Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 2ICREA/Universitat de Barcelona, racterized by lax skin, skeletal and developmental anomalies. Several forms Barcelona, Spain, 3Universidad de Huelva, Huelva, Spain. have been described. ARC
L2 A (OMIM 219200) presents lax skin with per- sistent wide fontanels, intrauterine growth retardation, hip dislocation, scoliosis, and inguinal hernia. A subgroup of patients with AT
P6 V0A2 gene Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (NCS) is a congenital malformation, with mutations have also metabolic problems mostly N- and O-glycan biosynthe- unclear etiopathogenesis, due to premature suture fusion, which alters sis defect. skull-brain landmarks. Cognitive impairment, typically involving the langua- Here we present two cases of ARC
L2 A both with homozygous AT
P6 V0A2 ge domain, has been reproducibly found in NCS patients. gene mutations, in one of whom, ethylmalonic aciduria was also observed. In a paleoneurobiology perspective, the skull of anatomically-modern hu- Case I. A 6 year-old male patient from consanguineous parents was referred mans (AMHs) has evolved to a more globular shape, compared to Neandert- because of lax skin and a previous sib affected with CL. He showed a large hals, while improving cognition and linguistic abilities. Recent studies from fontanel and lax skin. Mutation analysis revealed homozygous AT
P6 V0A2 our group pointed out that critical genes have been selected in AMHs and gene mutations, (c.187C>T, p.R63X). No mutations were identified in the should be crucial for skull globularization, while playing a putative role in FBLN5 gene. neurogenesis, neo-cortex and subcortical patterning, neuronal interconnec- Case 2 was a 17 day-old baby with facial dysmorphism, congenital hip tion, and synaptic plasticity. dysplasia, a wide anterior fontanel, lax skin and pectus excavatum. Muta- Hence we aimed to investigate the role of candidate genes for skull globula- tion analysis revealed homozygous nonsense AT
P6 V0A2 gene mutation, rity in the premature ossification of calvarial sutures occurring in NCS, cho- (c.187C>T, p.R63X). During follow up, urine organic acid screening tested sen as a model disease. because of developmental delay, revealed high levels of ethylmalonic acidu- To this aim, these selected genes were comparatively analyzed through ria. A repeated analysis supported the same result. qPCR in sutures of NCS patients versus control samples from unaffected in- DISCUSSION: To best of our knowledge no previous association of cutis laxa dividuals. Differential expression of DLX5, ROBO1, SLIT2, NCAM1, TGFB2, syndrome with ethylmalonic aciduria has been reported. Increased ethyl- DCN, RUNX2, and SFR
P2  was found. The expression levels of these genes malonic acid in urine is observed in a number of inborn errors of metabo- was also significantly modulated in cells induced towards osteogenic diffe- lism, as well as in people with the SCAD coding region polymorphism. It is of rentiation in vitro. interest that SCAD and ARC
L2 A are on the same DNA loci, 12q24.31. Taken together our data seem to suggest that the molecular signaling ac- ting at the site of premature suture fusion in NCS partially overlaps with the gene regulatory network that shaped the skull and the brain during human evolution and that improved our cognitive abilities. We claim that this over- lapping may be informative of the common molecular machinery regulating t1h0e s0kull-brain concerted development and evoEluStHionG. 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .032 Multiple trichoepitheliomas and vulvar cysts: Extending the cutaneous phenotypic spectrum in CYLD mutation carriers associated to cardiac involvement; - the PPK-HSA-skin fragility-normal A. Dubois1, V. Wilson1, V. Bajaj2, Á. Alonso Sánchez1, A. Husain3, N. Rajan1; cardiac function subtype (19.9%) frequently associated Plakophillin1 ano- 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department malies; - the PPK-HSA-skin fragility-cardiac involvement subtype (3.1%) of Dermatology, University Hospital of North Durham, Durham, United Kingdom, always due to DSP mutations. Three mutation hotspots in DSP and JUP ac- 3Department of Pathology, RVI, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. count for 90.8% of the patients with cardiac involvement. Conclusion. The combination of PPK and HSA justify long-term cardiac mo- nitoring. 
P04 .035 Patients with germline mutations in CYLD are recognised to develop a range Dyschromatosis universalis hereditaria caused by a recessive of patterns of presentation, including familial cylindromatosis (FC), Brooke- mutation in ENP
P1  gene Spiegler Syndrome (BSS) and multiple familial trichoepitheliomas (MFT). M. Chourabi1,2, J. N. Foo3, D. H’mida-Ben Brahim2, L. Boussofara4, C. Bonnard1, J. E. Here we present a case of a 29-year-old female patient with multiple facial Common5, B. Sriha6, N. Ghariani4, A. Aounallah4, O. Mamaï1, R. Nouira4, B. Lane5, J. Liu3,7, and genital papules, a pattern not previously associated with CYLD muta- A. Saad2, M. Denguezli4, B. Reversade1; tion. 1Laboratory of Human Genetics and Embryology, Institute of Medical Biology, A*STAR, The patient began to develop multiple, asymptomatic, skin coloured papu- Singapore, Singapore, 2Laboratory of Human Cytogenetic, Molecular Genetics and les around the nose and upper lip from the age of 16. There was no family Reproductive Biology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Human history of skin tumours. White, firm papules began to develop within the Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore, 4Department labia majora from the age of 25, and numbered more than 20. A biopsy of the of Dermatology and Venereology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 5Laboratory of Epithelial Biology, Institute of Medical Biology, A*STAR, Singapore, facial lesions showed trichoepithelioma. The labial lesions demonstrated hi- Singapore, 6Department of Pathological Anatomy and Cytology, Farhat Hached stological features consistent with epidermoid cysts. Sanger sequencing of University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 7Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National the coding exons of CYLD revealed a novel heterozygous base duplication in University Health Systems, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. exon 8, c.966dupG, resulting in a frameshift mutation. Pubic tumours are a feature recognised in CYLD mutation carriers, and one that challenges the paradigm of ultraviolet radiation induced tumour in- Dyschromatosis Universalis Hereditaria (DUH) is a rare genodermatosis duction. We undertook local review of records from four further patients characterized by asymptomatic hyper- and hypo-pigmented macules over carrying a CYLD mutation (c.2460delC) who had undergone excision of ge- the body. These irregular lesions appear in infancy or early childhood. DUH nital lesions, and none were found to have epidermoid cysts. A search of the is subtyped into different forms. The genetic etiology of autosomal recessi- literature did not reveal this pattern of presentation in other patients with ve DUH remains unknown. CYLD mutations. In this study we investigated 8 patients belonging to 3 related Tunisian fa- MFT may be genetically heterogeneous, with only 44% of patients demon- milies with autosomal recessive DUH presents with punctuate palmoplan- strating germline mutations in CYLD. Our finding of MFT and labial cysts tar keratosis (PPK). To find the causative gene, we performed homozygosity may represent an infrequent, novel pattern of presentation associated with mapping followedE bNyP tPr1io whole-exome sequencing. C PY 0L 4D .0 m 33utation. In the mapped candidate locus on chromosome 6q, a unique single nucleoti- Complete and partial XYLT1 deletion in a patient with neonatal short de variant in thEeN P
P1  gene was identified. Sanger sequencing confirmed limb skeletal dysplasia the segregation of this variant (c.358T>C; p.Cys120Arg) with the disease in S. van Koningsbruggen, H. Knoester, R. Bakx, O. Mook, L. knegt, J. Cobben; the 3 families. encodes the ectonucleotide pyrophoEsNphPaPt1ase/phos- Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands. phodiesterase 1, a cell surface enzyme that catalyses the hydrolysis of ATP to AMP and generates extracellular inorganic pyrophosphate. has been shown to play a role in skin pigmentation as the underlying cause for domi- A boy was born with a neonatal short limb skeletal dysplasia and respirato- nant Cole disease. Whereas Cole Disease mutations are heterozygous and ry problems. Array CGH identified a large deletion on chromosome 16p13, affect conserved cysteine residues In the SMB2 domain of ENP
P1 , this novel which was also present in his healthy mother. However, detailed analysis of Cys120 missense mutation is located in the SMB1 domain and must be in the the deleted region pointed at candidate gene XYLT1, a gene reported to be homozygous state to cause DUH. associated with skeletal development. Sequence analysis was performed on We suggest that these two genodermatoses represent a clinical spectrum the remaining allele and identified a small intragenic deletion, originating of dyschromatosis, where this newly identified DUH stands for a recessive, from his father. Subsequent RNA studies using NGS technology revealed se- more severe and extended form of Cole Disease. 
P04 .036 veral out-of-frame transcripts. Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa in two sisters XYLT1 mutations have recently been reported as causative in recessive Des- S. Garcia1, A. M. Poyatos2, A. Rubio1, M. Martinez3, S. Padrinaci3, T. De Haro1; buquois skeletal dysplasia (DBSD), but the skeletal features in our patient 1Hospital San Cecilio, Granada, Spain, 2AGS Sur- Hospital de Santa Ana, Motril, Spain, do not fit this diagnosis. It is possible that the phenotype of XYLT1 mutati- 3Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain. ons extends to more aspecific types of short limb skeletal dysplasias and not to DBSD alone. 
P04 .034 Severe generalized recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB-sev Combination of palmoplantar keratoderma and hair shaft anomalies: gen) is the most severe subtype of dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. Is a a warning signal of severe cardiac disorder? A systematic review on severe skin disorder beginning at birth characterized by extremely fragile desmosomal diseases L. Polivka, S. Hadj-Rabia, C. Bodemer; skin: blisters and skin erosions occur with minimal trauma and this result in Hôpital Necker, Paris, France. mutilating scarring and contractures of the hands, feet, and joints. Affected individuals have an increased risk of developing aggressive squamous cell carcinoma. Introduction. Inherited desmosomal diseases are characterized by skin The reported prevalence varies between populations, from 1/1,250,000 and/or cardiac features. The dermatological features might be a clue in the inhabitants in Scotland to 1/2,381,000 inhabitants in the Unites States. In determination of the underlying life-threatening cardiac disease. We propo- Spain the estimated prevalence is 0.8/100000. se a clinical algorithm in order to identify the patients at high risk of cardiac The disease is caused by null mutations within the type VII collagen gene involvement and to orientate gene sequencing. (CO
L7 A1) that usually lead to a lack of functional collagen VII, the main Methods. Systematic review of published articles. The inclusion/exclusion constituent of anchoring fibrils that anchor the basement membrane to the criteria were: 1) at least one identified mutation in the following desmoso- dermis. mal genes: JUP; PK
P1 , PK
P2 , DSP, DSG1 to 4, DS
C1 -3 and CDSN; 2) Descripti- We present the case of two sisters of 28 and 32 years, they have clinical on of the dermatological phenotype. diagnosis of the disease and family history of parental consanguinity.The Results. 78 articles fulfilling the criteria were published. They correspond to older sister has a healthy baby born by caesarean section. Gene sequencing 458 patients. Palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK), hair shaft anomalies (HSA), of CO
L7 A1 gene shows the homozygous mutation c.469insA (c.497dupA). and skin fragility were the major features. Isolated PPK or isolated HSA are The RDEB-sev gen comprises two types based on inheritance pattern: Do- associated to a desmosomal disease limited to skin. The combination of PPK minant DEB and Recessive DEB (more several). Molecular characterization and HSA was recorded in 161 patients, and this association is at high risk of of pathogenic variants is the only accurate method to determine mode of in- cardiac disease (129/161 patients, 80.1%). Skin features appeared as the heritance and recurrence risk; phenotype severity and EM/IF findings alone initial clinical manifestations in the majority of cases. However, they had led are not sufficient. The offspring of an individual with RDEB are obligate he- to cardiac monitoring in only 2.3% of those patients. We delineated three terozygotes (carriers) for a pathogenic variant in CO
L7 A1. major phenotypes: - the PPK-HSA-noE n S frH agG ile 2 s0 ki1 n6 s u| b B tyA peR C (7E 7%LO ), N alA wa, yS s PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 101ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .037 Zebrafish modeling of the β4GalT7-deficient type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Clinical findings: The patient was the second child of consanguineous S. Delbaere, T. Van Damme, A. Willaert, S. Symoens, P. Coucke, F. Malfait; parents of Turkish descent. In infancy he presented with hypertelorism, lar- Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. ge anterior fontanel, flattened occiput, low hair line and wide neck, bilateral adducted thumbs and arachnodactyly. He had umbilical hernia, diastasis recti, constipation, bilateral hydronephrosis, as well as cryptorchidism. He Introduction: Proteoglycans are found on the surface of animal cells and had delayed psychomotor development. MRI of cerebrum showed a corti- in Bth4eG AeLxTtr7acellular matrix. They consist of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) side cal heterotopia of 5-12 mm, interpreted as neuronal migration defect. He chains attached to a core protein through a linker region. Biallelic mutations had myopia, strabismus and mild unilateral perceptive hearing loss. He was in , the gene encoding galactosyltransferase I (β4GalT7) which is an diagnosed with scoliosis, joint hypermobility, repeated shoulder luxations, essential enzyme for the biosynthesis of thei nt evtirvaos accharide linker region, and had surgery for pes cavus. The skin wCaHs ShTy1p4erextensible with delayed are the cause of the rare progeroid variant of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome wDSoEund healing, easy bruising and development of large hematomas. (EDS). This disorder, which lacks a relevant animal model, is mainly Results: No mutations were found in the gene. Sequencing of the characterized by short stature, hypotonia, a progeroid facial appearance and gene revealed homozygosity for a stop mutation c.960T>A (p.Tyr320*). skeletal abnormalities. Conclusion: This is the first time cryptorchidism, hydronephrosis, joint dis- Methodsb:4 Wgael td7eveloped and characterized a knockdown (KD) zebrafish mo- locations, myopia and hearing impairment are described as part of mEDS del for the progeroid type of EDS by using morpholino injections targeted type II. The phenotype of mEDS type I and type II seem very similar, alt- against . hough the impression is that the phenotype in mEDS type II is moderately Results: Morphant embryos showed morphological abnormalities such as a milder. small, round head, withdrawn jaw, more front-facing eyes and mild develop- 
P04 .040 mental delay compared to wild-type and negative control embyos. The total A girl with FKB
P14 -related Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and secondary amount of sulfated GAGs was severely reduced in morphant embb4rgyaolts7 and mitochondrial dysfunction in muscle biopsy - a case report whole-mount immunohistochemistry showed that heparan and chondroitin J. Pilch1, C. Fauth2, M. Kajor3, E. Karczmarewicz4, M. Witsch-Baumgartner2, D. sulfate proteoglycans were severely diminished in the heads of KD Piekutowska-Abramczuk5, E. Jamroz1; embryos. In addition, alcian blue staining demonstrated that cartilage struc- 1Department of Paediatrics and Developmental Age Neurology, Medical University of ture in the head of morphant embryos are absent or strongly misshapen Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 2Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, and immunohibs4togcahlte7m ical staining revealed a disturbed filamentous actine Innsbruck, Austria, 3Department of Histopathology, Medical University of Silesia, pattern in their head and tail. Katowice, Poland, 4Department of Biochemistry, Radioimmunology, and Experimental Medicine, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warszaw, Poland, 5Department of Conclusion: A KD zebrafisbh4 gmaoltd7e l has been developed which seems Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute,, Warszaw, Poland. to be specific as it mimics partly the human phenotype of patients suffering from progeroid EDS. Currently, a knockout zebrafish model is being created using the CRISPR/Cas technology. FKB
P14 -related Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a recently identified in- herited connective tissue disorder characterized by severe muscular hypo- 
P04 .038 tonia at birth, progressive kyphoscoliosis, joint hypermobility, hyperelastic Homozygous missense CO
L5 A2 mutation associated with Ehlers- skin, myopathy, hearing loss and vascular complications. Due to severe mu- Danlos Syndrome scle involvement patients frequently undergo muscle biopsy which someti- B. B. Geckinli1, K. Delil1, M. A. Soylemez1, A. Turkyilmaz1, H. Simsek1, Z. Gormez2, H. mes may yield unusual findings. Demirci2, B. Yuceturk2, A. I. Guney1, A. Arman1; 1Medical Genetics Department, Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, We present an 8-year-old girl with FKB
P14 -related EDS and COX negative Turkey, 2Advanced Genomics and Bioinformatics Research Center, The Scientific and fibers in muscle biopsy. She was born prematurely with microcephaly, hip Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK), Kocaeli, Turkey. dysplasia, valgus deformity of feet, severe muscular hypotonia and muscle atrophy. During the first months of life excessive sweating and hyperlactaci- demia was noted. Motor milestones were delayed. Acyl carnitine profile in Classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant connective serum and transferrin electrophoresis were normal. EMG showed a myo- tissue disorder, characterized by skin hyperextensibility, articular hypermo- pathic pattern which prompted us to muscle biopsy. Histopathology and bility, and tissue fragility. It is caused by collagen alpha-1(V) gene (CO
L5 A1) EM showed no structural abnormalities. However, COX staining was nega- or the collagen alpha-2(V) gene (CO
L5 A2) mutations, causing deficiency of tive and activity of respiratory chain complexes II+III was reduced. Thus, type V collagen. a mitochondrial disorder was suspected and selected mitochondrial genes We report a 16 year-old girl who was born with uncomplicated pregnancy at (SURF1, SCO2 and MTAT
P6 ) were screened but no mutation was found. Du- term to unrelated parents. She was referred to our clinic because of dysmor- ring infancy motor function improved, but joint hypermobility was noted phic features, hand deformities, operated congenital hip dislocation, throm- and she developed hearing impairment, easy bruising, chest deformity and bocytopenia, splenomegaly, and previously followed-up ventricular septal scoliosis starting at the age of 7 years. Based on these findings FKB
P14 - defect. On physical examination, her weight was 70 kg (90-97P), height 161 deficient EDS was suspected and confirmed by sequence analysis which cm (25-50P) and occipitofrontal circumference 52 cm (<3P). She had mild revealed the recurrent homozygous c.362dupC mutation in FKB
P14  gene. intellectual impairement. Her clinical features were short and webbed neck, In conclusion, muscle biopsies in FKB
P14 -related EDS may sometimes yield a low posterior hairline, myopia, high palate, small and deformed hands, ab- unusual findings such as mitochondrial dysfunction which probably is a normal palmar creases, pes planus, hallux valgus and striae rubra on lum- secondary finding. However, the exact pathophysiology of FKB
P14 -related bar skin. X-ray showed, loss of cervical lordosis and mild scoliosis. Homo- EDS and its impact on muscle function still remain to be elucidated. zygosity mapping with whole exome sequencing identified a homozygous 
P04 .041 missense mutation c.3794A>G (p.Asp1265Gly) in CO
L5 A2 exon 51, affecting Significance and correlation of ultrastructural and molecular genetic C-terminal propeptide domain. Her parents were heterozygous carriers for approaches in the diagnostics for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) the same substitution. Previously, this homozygous mutation has not been patients with the classic and vascular type including the potential of reported in Ehlers- Danlos syndrome. next-generation sequencing (NGS) K. Mayer1, I. Hausser2, R. Brumm1, S. Doelken1, H. Klein1; 
P04 .039 1Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics (AHC), Martinsried, Germany, Adding to the knowledge of the phenotype of musculocontractural 2Institute of Pathology Heidelberg (IPH), Heidelberg, Germany. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome caused by mutations in the DSE gene S. Markholt1, U. B. Jensen1, C. K. Lautrup2; 1Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, 2Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. EDS represents a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of rare con- nective tissue disorders (CTDs) with challenges in establishing a precise te- sting strategy to define an accurate diagnosis. Six main EDS subtypes can be assigned clinically and substantiated by investigations like ultrastructural Introduction: The diagnosis musculocontractuCrHalS T
E1 h4lers-Danlos syndrome analysis of a skin biopsy and genetic analysis of collagen or collagen mo- (mEDS) has recently been discovered. Most of the patients have bDeSeEn dia- difying genes. gnosed with mEDS type I and mutations in the gene. Only 3 patients Matching of pseudonymized data sets consisting of morphological investi- have been published with mEDS type II caused by mutations in the gene gations from 1511 patients achieved between 1984 and 2015 and genetic and the phenotype is less well-described. We present detailed phenotype of analyses of 1187 patient samples performed between 2002 and 2015 re- a1n0 128 years old male patient with mEDS type IIE.SHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG sulted in an intersection of 157 cases. 45 specimen were morphologicallyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index compatible with the classic type, 45 with the vascular type, 16 with the hy- physical examination and basic laboratory studies the results of the histolo- permobile type, 26 with a CTD without specification, 25 showed no patho- gical, endocrinological, radiological and immunological work up. logical morphology. Conclusion: We confirm that chronic leg ulcer can be an important sign With respect to the morphological classification, in 10/45 cases with the leading to the diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VIII as it was pro- classic and 19/45 cases with the vascular assignment the diagnosis was posed in a previous publication by Ronceray et al. (Case Reports in Derma- confirmed by a mutation identified with Sanger sequencing in CO
L5 A1/2 tological Medicine, 2013). or CO
L3 A1, respectively. To uncover the genetic basis in mutation negative 
P04 .044 patients with a clear morphological assignment to the classic (35) or vascu- Molecular analysis of 26 Ellis van Creveld syndrome (EVC) families lar (26) group, we performed NGS applying a panel of 41 genes known to using targeted NGS, MLPA and array CGH technologies reveals high be mutated in different EDS subtypes or related CTDs like cutis laxa, Loeys frequency of a recurrent maternal deletion of EVC. Dietz syndrome, Marfan syndrome and TAAD. In addition, whole-exome se- C. Huber1, G. Baujat1, M. Zarhrate2, C. Bole-Feysot2, C. Masson3, P. Nitschké3, S. Nusbaum4, quencing was undertaken to identify mutations not previously associated C. Francannet5, A. Megarbané6, D. Martin-Coignard7, Y. Alembik8, M. Alex-Cordier9, with EDS. In preliminary results of 19 reanalyzed patient samples gene pa- K. Devriendt10, A. Dieux11, L. Faivre12, M. Gonzales13, N. Laurent12, S. Manouvrier11, M. nel analysis determined a molecular diagnosis in one case with classic mor- Mathieu14, A. Paris15, F. Pelluard16, L. Spacini17, S. Saunier18, V. Malan4, V. Cormier-Daire19; phology and in three cases with vascular morphology. 1Service de Génétique, INSERM UMR 1163, Université Paris Descartes- Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (AP-HP),, PARIS, 
P04 .042 France, 2Plateforme de Génomique, Institut IMAGINE, PARIS, France, 3Plateforme de Contribution of NGS in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes diagnosis and Bioinformatique, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4Service de Cytogénétique, characterization Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Service de Génétique Médical – CHU A. Legrand1,2,3, V. Boccio1, A. Talbi1, X. Jeunemaitre1,2,3, J. M. Albuisson1,4,3; Estaing, Clermont – Ferrand, France, 6Medical Genetics Unit, Saint Joseph University, 1APHP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 2INSERM U970 Paris Beirut, Lebanon, 7Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier du Mans, Le Mans, France, Cardiovascular Research Centre, Paris, Austria, 3Centre de Référence des Maladies 8Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 9Service VAsculaires Rares, Paris, Austria, 4INSERM U970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Centre, de Génétique, Hôpital femme Mère Enfant GHE, Bron, France, 10Kliniekhoofd Centrum Paris, France. Menselijke Erfelijkheid, UZ Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 11Service de Génétique Clinique, CHRU, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 12Génétique et Anomalies du Développement, EA4271, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 13Service de génétique et d’Embryologie Médicales, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, Introduction: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a phenotypically and mole- France, 14Service de Génétique Clinique CHRU d’Amiens- Hôpital Nord, Amiens, France, cularly heterogeneous group of inherited connective tissue disorders that 15Service de Gynécologie Obstétrique, Maison de Santé Protestante Bordeaux-Bagatelle, share joint hypermobility, skin extensibility, abnormal scarring and tissue Talence, France, 16Pôle de Biologie, Service de Pathologie, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, fragility. Vascular EDS (vEDS), the most severe EDS characterized by arterial France, 17Unita Operativa Complessa di Ostetricia e Ginecologia, Istituti Clinici di fragility, is caused by CO
L3 A1 mutations. Analysis of CO
L3 A1, the gene for Perfezionamento, Milano, Italy, 18INSERM, UMR 1163, Laboratory of Inherited Kidney vEDS is performed in the Genetics Department, Georges Pompidou Euro- Diseases, Université Paris Descartes- Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France, 19Service de Génétique, INSERM UMR pean Hospital, Paris. Other EDS types can be responsible for arterial fragility 1163, Université Paris Descartes- Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker with minor clinical criteria, but with a better vascular prognosis and a diffe- Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France. rent clinical follow-up. Materials and Methods: we developed a NGS gene panel for types 1 to 7, but also rarest recessive types of EDS, corresponding to 16 genes (CO
L1 A1, CO- Ellis-van Creveld (EVC) syndrome is characterized by short ribs, shortened 
L1 A2, CO
L3 A1, CO
L5 A1, CO
L5 A2, CO
L6 A1, TNXB, PLOD1, FKB
P14 , FBLN5, tubular bones, trident aspect of the acetabular roof, post-axial polydactyly, ELN, ADAMT
S2 , CHST14, DSE, B4GALT7, and B3GALT6). Regions of interest congenital cardiac defects, dysplastic nails and teeth and labio-gingival ad- were targeted with a custom Haloplex enrichment kit, followed by sequen- hesions. EVC is caused by mutations in EVC or EV
C2 . More recently, mutati- cing on Miseq. The data analysis was carried out using 3 different bioinfor- ons in DYN
C2 LI1 or WDR35 have been reported in a few cases. matics pipelines. To date 42 patients with positive Villefranche criteria were Here, we report the molecular screening of 26 EVC family (31 cases, 17 fe- analysed. tuses and 14 postnatal cases) by targeted NGS (called ciliome), associated Results: Causal mutations were identified in 9 patients (21%) in TNXB, CO- with MLPA and array CGH technology. 
L5 A1, CO
L1 A1 and CO
L3 A1. Numerous variants of unknown significance By Ciliome analysis, we identified variants in 20/26 families (10 nonsense, remain to be explored and large rearrangements to be confirmed. The iden- 5 splice site, 1 missense, 5 deletions) in EVC (10), EV
C2  (9), EVC/EV
C2  (2) tification of one patient with a CO
L3 A1 mutation and hypermobility pheno- and DYN
C2 LI1 (1). In 18 cases, the absence of any variant (6/18) and the type highlights the phenotypic overlap in EDS types. identification of i) an heterozygous variant only (5/18), ii) an “homozygous” Conclusion: This panel provides a powerful tool for the molecular diagno- variant confirmed only at the heterozygous state in the father (3/18), iii) sis in EDS and will help for the characterization and best knowledge of the deletions identified by ciliome (4/18) prompted us to perform MLPA and different EDS types, but also the genetic counseling and the management of CGH at EVC/EV
C2  loci. We identified in 6 families the same deletion of 48Kb patients. encompassing exon 3 to 11 of EVC always inherited from the mother. Finally, 
P04 .043 in 4/26 families only one heterozygous variant was detected and in 6/26 fa- Chronic leg ulcer associated with premature dental loss in two milies, neither variant nor deletion were detected in EVC/EV
C2 , supporting brothers in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VIII the involvement of another disease gene. Exome sequencing is in progress. J. Kárteszi1, A. L. Kovács2, R. Gyulai2, A. Lőcsei-Fekete1, K. Hadzsiev1, B. Melegh1; By combining ciliome analysis, MLPA and array CGH, we conclude that EVC 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of and EV
C2  account for 73 % of EVC families. Our study emphasizes the high Dermatology, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. frequency of an EVC deletion of maternal origin. 
P04 .045 Epidemiology approach in skeletal dysplasia in France: 8-year Introduction: We report two young male patients with the clinical diagnosis experience by the centres of reference for rare skeletal dysplasia of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VIII (MIM130080), which entity is a very C. Messiaen1, G. Baujat2, A. Ruel1, M. Cohen Solal3, V. Forin4, C. Roux5, R. Chapurlat6, C. rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by periodontal disease at Michot2, R. Choquet1, V. Cormier-Daire2; young age and necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum like skin alterations. Ad- 1Banque Nationale de données Maladies Rares, Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants ditional features like marfanoid habitus, joint hypermobility, osteoarthritis Malades, APHP, PARIS, France, 2Centre de Référence Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles and vascular manifestations were described in literature. The striking sym- (Reference Centre for Genetic Bone Diseases), Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants ptom of chronic leg ulcer was also noted in one or two cases. Neither the Malades et Institut Imagine (AP-HP), PARIS, France, 3Centre de Référence Maladies pathomechanism nor the underlying gene has been determined so far. Osseuses Constitutionnelles (Reference Centre for Genetic Bone Diseases), Hôpital Case Report: We performed detailed clinical phenotype analysis of our pati- Lariboisière (AP-HP), PARIS, France, 4Centre de Référence Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles (Reference Centre for Genetic Bone Diseases), Hôpital Trousseau ents, who are brothers, taking into account that less than hundred patients (AP-HP), PARIS, France, 5Centre de Référence Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles were published until now and plenty of questions are unanswered yet. Both (Reference Centre for Genetic Bone Diseases), Hôpital Cochin (AP-HP), PARIS, France, of our patients were attending at dermatological examination because of 6Centre de Référence Dysplasies Fibreuses des Os (Reference Centre for Osteofibrous chronic leg ulcer to be formed on the basis of brownish plaques over the ti- dysplasia), Hôpital Edourd Herriot (HCL), LYON, France. bia. Obvious causes in the background like diabetes, arterial and venous cir- culation problems were excluded. Karyotype was normal. Anamnesis unra- veled almost complete loss of teeth caused by periodontitis in both of them. OBJECTIVES: Skeletal dysplasias (SD) are responsible for variable types of Discussion: Our poster contains besideE tShHe pGre 2se0n1ta6ti o|n B oAf aRnCamEnLeOstNic Ada,t aS, PAsIhNo r|t W staWtuWres.,E dSeHforGm.aOtiRonGs and pain, leading to severe disabilities. 1Si0nc3eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 2007, all patients seen for expertise in the french Centre of Reference (CR) (SMA-PME). The prevalence of both diseases is currently unknown and awa- for skeletal dysplasia, are systematically recorded in CEMARA, database de- reness of them is limited due to their rarity; both are likely underdiagnosed. dicated to rare diseases. We have begun collecting data including genotypes, clinical, biochemical The study objective is to characterize the epidemiological data about SD in and immunologic phenotypes, on a growing cohort of over 30 living Farber France, to better assess care services needs. patients from around the world. Our findings so far reinforce the validity METHODS: The CEMARA system records for each patient a common data of the characteristic symptoms of Farber disease (arthritis, nodules, dys- set, sharing its ontology accorded to the Nosology and Classification of Con- phonia). However, it also reveals that there are patients who present with stitutional Skeletal Dysplasias. only one or two of these symptoms, and that the spectrum of disease inclu- CEMARA cases were reviewed for the period 2007-20015. A « case » was des remarkably attenuated forms with relatively little associated disability. defined according to the status of the diagnosis assertion: confirmed, likely, These insights provide an indication for screening of certain pediatric and unlikely. The regional prevalences were standardized. young adult polyarticular arthritis patients for acid ceramidase deficiency, RESULTS: On the 31/12/2015, 7.874 patients with SD were identified in and such programs are being initiated. Acid ceramidase enzyme therapy is CEMARA. The mean of annual new cases was 887. Two third were of ped- currently under development, and Plexcera Therapeutics is working with iatric age. The three main diagnoses were Osteogenesis Imperfecta (1120), physicians and patients to develop a natural history study framework to achondroplasia (272) and fibrous dysplasia (242). 42% of the diagnosis better understand disease progression and factors influencing the different were confirmed. The age at onset was 14% in antenatal, 28% at birth, and phenotypes, as well as what benefits can be derived from currently available 43% at a later stage. The median transport time to the CR was 33 minutes anti-inflammatory treatments. (30 km). The prevalence of patients with SD at the 31/12/2015 was 18.20 
P04 .048 per million (IC 95% [11.59 - 27.46]) in Paris region. Prevalence of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) in France CONCLUSION: This is the first global study about SD at an almost national R. Choquet1, C. Messiaen1, S. Bouee2, V. Cormier-Daire1, V. Jeanbat2, K. Le Quan Sang3, A. level. This descriptive study allows approaching the epidemiology on speci- Ruel1, C. Michot3, D. Lapidus4, P. Landais5, G. Baujat3; fic rare diseases in France. 1Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Cemka-Eval, Bourg la Reine, France, 3Centre de Référence Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles, Paris, 
P04 .046 France, 4LapidusData Inc, Oklahoma City, OK, United States, 5Université de Montpellier, Application of gene panel targeted massively parallel sequencing in Montpellier, France. genetic diagnosis of patients with Epidermolysis bullosa M. Hýblová1,2, J. Radvánszky3,2, P. Silló4, L. Striešková1, T. Szemes1,2; 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Institute of Clinical and Translational Research, Biomedical Introduction: FOP is rare, severely disabling genetic disorder characterised Research Centre, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Faculty of Medicine, by heterotopic ossification of muscle and soft tissues. The objective of this Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. study was to estimate the prevalence of FOP in France using data from two national health data collection systems: registry data from CEMARA and me- dical/administrative data from PMSI. Introduction: Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica is severe often life and Materials and Methods: Records in CEMARA and PMSI (for the p eriod 2006- health threatening disease affecting sublamina densa of epiderma-derma 2012) were reviewed for evidence of FOP. Patients who either died before or junction of the skin. This disorder is caused exclusively by mutations in CO- were born after 01/01/2012 (prevalence date) were excluded. 
L7 A1 gene resulting in recessive or dominant condition. While nonsense, Results: CEMARA 85 patients with FOP were identified in CEMARA. At the frameshift and splicing mutation are characteristic for recessive condition, prevalence date, 63 had an FOP diagnosis, 10 had experienced symptoms missense mutations particularly glycine substitution can contribute to eit- but had not yet received an FOP diagnosis, and the remaining 12 did not her dominant or recessive condition. Currently, more than 300 disease cau- have an available diagnosis date. The prevalence was therefore 1.3 cases sing variants in CO
L7 A1 are known. per million. The mean age was 29, and the age distribution was as follows: Materials and methods: Mutational analysis was carried out in 11 Hungari- 44%<20, 48% 20-60, and 8%>60. an patients with phenotype either autosomal recessive and dominant epi- PMSI dermolysis bullosa dystrofica (DEB) using targeted next generation sequen- 242 patients with the ICD-10 code for FOP were identified in PMSI. The cing followed by variant analysis. We analysed all exons and their flanking mean age was 42, and the age distribution was as follows: 18%<20, 60% regions of CO
L7 A1 gene. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood 20-60, and 22%>60. The prevalence of patients with the FOP code was 3.7 leukocytes. DNA library was prepared using transposon based protocol and cases per million; however, it is unknown whether these patients have a cor- analysed by massively parallel sequencing on Illumina MiSeq platform. Re- responding clinical diagnosis. sulting reads were mapped to human genome hg19 and data were further Conclusion: This study shows a minimum prevalence of 1.3 cases per milli- evaluated using GeneTalk and HGMD database. on, higher than previous studies demonstrating 0.36/M (Spain) and 0.61/M Results: MPS analysis of 552 genes in patients with assumed recessive (UK). A forthcoming study linking the two data sets will help to refine the type of EB revealed pathogenic homozygotic mutation (c.425A>G, K142R) accuracy of this estimate. in 2 patients, which is prevalent in central Europe. In addition, previously 
P04 .049 unknown compound heterozygote frameshift, nonsense and missense mu- Identification by whole exome sequencing of two novel heterozygous tations were found. In dominant EB patients we identified 4 novel missense mutations in SH3PXD2B gene in a first case of Moroccan patient with glycine substitutions and 1 glycine missense mutation previously annotated frank-ter haar syndrome. as pathogenic. A. Zrhidri1, I. C. Jaouad1,2, J. Lyahyai1, L. Raymond3, G. Egéa3, M. Taoudi3, S. El Conclusion: Using gene panel approach and massively parallel sequencing Mouatassim4, A. Sefiani1,2; we were able to effectively identify novel mutations in epidermolysis bull- 1Centre de Génomique Humaine, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, Mohammed osa patients. V University in Rabat, Rabat, Morocco, 2Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d’Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, 3Département de Génétique Moléculaire, 
P04 .047 Laboratoire Biomnis, Lyon, France, 4Département de Génétique Moléculaire, Laboratoire Farber disease: a growing clinical cohort indicates that acid Biomnis, Rabat, Morocco. ceramidase deficiency has a broader clinical spectrum and higher incidence than previously anticipated A. Solyom1, C. Simonaro2, X. He2, E. Schuchman2; Introduction: Frank-Ter Haar syndrome (FTHS), also known as Melnicke 1Plexcera Therapeutics LLC, New York, NY, United States, 2Icahn School of Medicine at Needles like syndrome, is an autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by Mt. Sinai, New York, NY, United States. skeletal, cardio-vascular, and eye abnormalities, such as increased intraocu- lar pressure, prominent eyes, and hypertelorism. The most common under- lying genetic defect in Frank-Ter Haar syndrome appears to be a mutation in Farber disease (Farber lipogranulomatosis) represents a broad clinical the SH3PXD2B gene on chromosome 5q35.1. Until now, only six mutations spectrum presenting from infancy through late childhood, with joint disease in SH3PXD2B gene has been identified. A genetic heterogeneity of FTHS was (arthritis and/or contractures), subcutaneous nodules and hoarseness as- suggested in previous studies. sociated with the pro-inflammatory and pro-apoptotic characteristics of the Material and Methods: FTHS was suspected clinically in a girl of 2 years old, lipid ceramide. Farber is caused by mutations in the ASAH1 gene, which lead born from non-consanguineous Moroccan healthy parents. The patient had to acid ceramidase deficiency, accumulation of ceramide, and a distinct va- been referred to a medical genetics outpatient clinic for dysmorphic facial riety of disease phenotypes, culminating in two recognized diseases: Farber features. Whole exome sequencing was performed in the patient and their d1is0e4ase and Spinal Muscular Atrophy with ProEgSreHssGiv e2 M0y1o6cl o| nBicA ERpiCleEpLsyO N pA a, eS nP tsA iI nN | dW itiW onW to. E SaS nH geG . sO eqR uG r , a d r encing that was carried out to confirmABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index the results obtained by whole exome sequencing. not detected. However, we observed a higher prevalence of patients harbo- Results: We report the first description of a Moroccan FTHS patient with ring >1 M
C1 R variant (19%) compare to control population (9.8%). Moreo- two novel compound mutations c.806G>A; p.Trp269Ter (maternal alle- ver, 18.7% (3/16) GCMN patients carry rare ATM variants: p.
L1420 F (EB-E le) and c.892delC; p.Asp299ThrfsTer44 (paternal allele) in the SH3PXD2B freq= 0.019; benign/tolerated), p.V410A (EB-E freq= 0.003; benign/delete- gene. Sanger sequencing confirmed this mutation in the affected girl and rious) and p.
S333 F (EB-E freq= 0.001; possibly damaging/deleterious). In demonstrated that their parents carry this mutation in heterozygous state. contrast, p.
E318 K-MITF variant was not detected in the set of patients. Conclusion: Our results confirm the clinical diagnosis of FTHS in this repor- Conclusions: The study suggests that GCMN patients have a higher incidence ted family and contribute to expand the mutational spectrum of this rare of M
C1 R variants and rare ATM variants. Study of a large number of patients disease. Our study shows also, that exome sequencing is a powerful and a is necessary to confirm such findings. cost-effective tool for the diagnosis of a supposed genetically heterogeneous Fundings was provided by FEDASEM, FEDER, Isabel Gemio Research Foun- disorder such FTHS. dation and Leo Messi Foundation. 
P04 .050 
P04 .052 A PheWAS approach in studying genital prolapse Cellular and molecular defects in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome with M. B. Khadzhieva1,2, D. S. Kolobkov1, S. V. Kamoeva3, L. E. Salnikova1,2; a novel mutation in HP
S5  1N.I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, J. Stephen1, Y. Tadafumi1, N. Tolman2, K. J. O‘Brien1, B. P. Brooks3, L. Huryn3, D. Adams2,4, Russian Federation, 2Federal Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and D. Chen5, W. A. Gahl1,2,4, M. V. Malicdan2,4, B. R. Gochuico1; Immunology named after Dmitry Rogachev, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Pirogov 1Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Ophthalmic Genetics & Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, National Genital prolapse (GP) is the dropping of the pelvic organs caused by wea- Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Office of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United kness or damage to the normal support of the pelvic floor. We used the Phe- States, 5Division of Hematopathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. WAS (Phenome-wide association studies) Catalog for the search of SNPs associated with GP (P-value<0.05). 159 SNPs were found for the GP PheWAS group which consisted of 718 women. These SNPs were assigned to 175 Hermansky Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) is a heterogeneous group of genetic dis- genes with GSA-SNP web server. The enrichment analysis of the PheWAS orders that typically manifests with oculocutaneous albinism and bleeding Catalog gene set associated with GP was performed with KOBA
S2 .0 resour- diathesis. HPS is associated with defects in Biogenesis of Lysosome-related ce in comparison with the NHGRI Catalog gene-phenotype associations. Organelle Complexes (BLOCs), a unique group of proteins that function tog- We set the minimum number of genes per category to five, and Benjamini- ether in the formation and/or trafficking of endo-lysosomal compartments. Hochberg FDR corrected P-value<0W.10LS. ,G SPP 7a, sMsoEcPiEat-iHoSnPs9 c0oArBr3esPp, Co6nOdRedF 1t0o, BLOC-2, for example, consists of three proteins HP
S3 , HP
S5  and HP
S6 . Here tChCoDsCe1 f7o0und f oSrP TbBoNne1 mineral density (BMD) (spine). The mSoPs7t pronoun- we present a patient with defective BLOC-2 due to a novel mutation in HP
S5 . ScePd7 effect in the series of six genes ( Under NHGRI clinical protocol 95-HG-0193, we performed extensive pheno- and ) related to BMD was oPbserved for the gene. The typing in a patient with mild oculocutaneous albinism, easy bruising, absent rs10876432-ASP a7llele has been associated with BMD decrease in the NH- platelet dense bodies, and no pulmonary fibrosis. Targeted panel sequen- GRI GWAS Catalog and with genital prolapse ( =0.006243, OR=1.195) in the cing identified a novel homozygous intronic mutation (NM_181507.1:c.285- PheWAS Catalog. controls mesenchymal-stem-cell differentiation; it is a 10A>G) in HP
S5  that predicted to activate a cryptic acceptor splice site. RT- bone specific transcription factor required for osteoblast differentiation and PCR analysis showed an insertion of nine nucleotides in the transcript level bone formation. Relationship between lower BMD and POP is well-known, that predicted to lead to in-frame insertion of three amino acids (p.Ser95_ with a purported pathophysiological mechanism based on the global colla- Gln96insSerCysSer) in protein level. Gene expression analysis revealed 60- gen dysfunction for both disorders. Since supporting and binding tissues of 70% reduction of two shorter transcripts of HP
S5  and significantly redu- all sorts are differentiated from common precursors, the role of the genes ced amounts of HP
S5  protein and its interacting partners (HP
S3 &HP
S6 ). related to skeletal progenitor differentiation in POP development is plau- Western blot and immunofluorescence microscopy showed accumulation sible. of early endosomes (EEA1) and altered expression and distribution of late This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, (Rab7) and recycling (Rab11) endosomes and lysosomes (CD63) in patient Project 15-04-02378. cells compared to control, affirming pathogenicity of the mutation. Our stu- 
P04 .051 dy broadens the genetic and phenotypic data of HPS subtype 5 and confirms Characterization of germline genotypes in M
C1 R, ATM and MITF the distinctive role of BLOC-2 in endosome maturation. genes in Spanish Giant Congential Melanocytic nevi patients 
P04 .053 J. A. Puig-Butillé1,2, G. Tell3,2, V. Martins da Silva3, K. Jagirdar4, M. Potrony3, D. L. Duffy5, H. P. Soyer6,4, S. Puig3,2, R. Sturm4, A. Vicente7, M. A. Gonzalez-Ensenyat7, J. Malvehy3,2; Pleiotropic effects of noncoding variants near EFEM
P1 , WT1, 1Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Melanoma Unit, Hospital Clínic ADAMT
S6 , and EBF2 on the risk of abdominal hernias support & IDIBAPS (Institut d‘Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer), Barcelona, an etiological role for collagen and elastin homeostasis in hernia Spain, 2CIBERER, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Barcelona, Spain, 3Dermatology susceptibility Department, Melanoma Unit, Hospital Clínic & IDIBAPS (Institut d‘Investigacions E. Jorgenson1, N. Makki2, K. K. Thai1, D. C. Chen3, W. L. Eckalbar2, A. Avins1, N. Ahituv2; Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer),, Barcelona, Spain, 4Dermatology Research Centre, 1Kaiser Permanente Division of Research, Oakland, CA, United States, 2University of School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3UCLA Lichtenstein Amid Brisbane, Australia, 5QIMR-Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia, Hernia Clinic, Los Angeles, CA, United States. 6Department of Dermatology, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Australia, 7Clinic of Dermatology, Hospital Universitari Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain. Abdominal hernias are some of the most frequently diagnosed conditions in clinical practice, with more than twenty million hernia repair surgeries per- Introduction: Giant congenital melanocytic nevi (GCMN) are rare melano- formed annually around the world. While family studies suggest that gene- cytic benign tumors associated with neurocutaneous melanosis and risk of tic factors play an important role in hernia susceptibility, studies assessing melanoma and other malignancies. The genetic cause is likely to be the ac- specific genetic risk factors have been limited. Because the risks associated quisition of postzygotic alterations. There are evidences of predisposition with hernias, specifically, bowel incarceration with a substantial risk of mor- for GCMN development. We hypothesized that germline variants in mela- tality, must be balanced against the risks associated with their treatment, noma susceptibility genes (M
C1 R, ATM and MITF) have a role on this pre- which include chronic pain (6%) and hernia recurrence (10%), there is a disposition. clear need for a better understanding of hernia etiology and improved treat- Materials and Methods: Analysis of M
C1 R gene was performed in 21 pati- ment options. We conducted the first large-scale genetic study of hernia risk, ents by Sanger sequencing. Evaluation of ATM and p.
E318 -MITF variant was identifying noncoding variants at four novel genetic loci underlying the risk performed in 76.2% (16/21) of them by CoreExome genotype platform (Il- of inguinal hernia—the most common type of hernia. We showed that four lumina). ATM variants were evaluated by ExAC Browser European frequen- genes in these loci (EFEM
P1 , WT1, EBF2, and ADAMT
S6 ) are expressed in cy (EB-E freq) and functional effect (Polyphen and Shift information). mouse connective tissue. We investigated whether risk SNPs in these loci Results: were associated with other abdominal hernia subtypes, specifically, um- M
C1 R variants were detected in 57.1% GCMN patients. Statistically signi- bilical, femoral, and ventral hernias. We observed significant associations ficant differences between patients and control population (N=296) in between the EFEM
P1  and WT1 loci and each of these subtypes, including a terms of number of alleles or type (REedS hHaGir v2s0 n1on6- R| eBdA hRairC aEllLeOlesN) Awe, rSe PA gIN en o| mW e-W wiW de. E siS gnH ifG ica. nO t R asG sociation between EFEM
P1  and ventral h1er0n5iaABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (p = 7.9*10-10). Pathway analysis suggested that WT1 and EFEM
P1  might gnosis establishing the genetic cause may have important clinical implicati- influence connective tissue maintenance/homeostasis through their action ons for prognosis, follow-up, and accurate genetic counseling. on extracellular matrix enzymes, including matrix metalloproteinases that Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) may be a favorable method to reach a degrade collagen and elastin fibers. This indicates that these loci affect the molecular diagnosis, due to the complex features of the different ichthyoses, risk of hernias across anatomical sites and suggests their mechanism of ac- the lack of definite genotype-phenotype profiles, and the high number of tion may underlie hernia susceptibility more generally. genes involved. Method: Between 2013 and 2015 26 patients clinically diagnosed with con- 
P04 .054 genital ichthyosis were analyzed with NGS. All patients were investigated Molecular and clinical characterization of 48 patients with with a panel of 40 genes using Whole Exome Sequencing with Agilent Sure- Hypophosphatasia Select capture kit on Illumina HiSeq 2500, followed by bioinformatic analy- J. Tenorio1, I. Álvarez2, L. Riancho-Zarrabeitia3, G. A. Martos4, G. Mandrile5, M. de la Flor Crespo6, M. Sukchev7, M. Sherif8, I. Kramer9, M. T. Darnaude10, P. Arias1, J. Martínez- sis and filtering. Villanueva11, R. Gómez12, J. M. Iturzaeta12, G. Otaify13, M. García-Unzueta14, A. Rubinacci15, Results: Pathogenic genetic variants providing a molecular diagnosis were J. A. Riancho16, M. Aglan17, S. Temtamy17, M. Abdel Hamid18, J. Argente19, V. L. Ruiz-Pérez20, identified in 17 patients (65%). K. E. Heath1, P. Lapunzina1; Conclusion: Performing NGS with a panel of 40 well-established genes 1Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM), Madrid, Spain, 2Alexion seems an efficient method in clinical practice for reaching a molecular dia- Pharmaceuticals, Medical Division, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Rheumatology, gnosis in patients with congenital ichthyosis. Hospital Universitario Marqués Valdecilla, IDIVAL, Santander, Spain, 4Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario Niño Jesús, IIS La Princesa. Department of 
P04 .056 Pediatrics, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. Centro de Investigación A novel homozygous IFT122 p.I460N (c.1379T>A) mutation in Biomédica en Red (CIBEROBN): Fisiopatología de la obesidad y nutrición. I, Madrid, Sensenbrenner syndrome: a rare disorder within two cousins. Spain, 5Medical Genetics, San Luigi University Hospital, Orbassano, Italy. University of I. Akalin1, N. Elcioglu2, Z. Gormez3, C. Candan4, S. Yilmaz1, B. Yuceturk3, H. Demirci3, P. Torino, Dept. Clinical & Biological Sciences, Torino, Italy, 6Department of Pediatrics, Turhan4, B. Yuksel5, M. S. Sagiroglu5, S. Ceylaner6; Hospital de la Moraleja, Madrid, Spain, 7Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Diagnostic specialist., 1Istanbul Medeniyet University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 8Alexion Pharma Middle East, Medical Division, Dubai Istanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Media City, United Arab Emirates, 9Department of Pediatrics, Privat Hospitalet Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3TUBITAK, Advanced Genome & Bioinformatics Research Danmark, Charlottenlund, Denmark, 10Dept. of Genetics, Hospital Universitario de Center (IGBAM), Kocaeli, Turkey, 4Istanbul Medeniyet University, Goztepe Training and Móstoles, Madrid, Spain, 11Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario Niño Research Hospital, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Istanbul, Turkey, 5TUBITAK, Jesús, IIS La Princesa. Department of Pediatrics, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Marmara Research Center, Kocaeli, Turkey, 6Intergen Genetic Diagnosis Center, Ankara, Madrid, Spain. Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red (CIBEROBN):Fisiopatología Turkey. de la obesidad y nutrición ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 12Department of Biochemistry, Hospital Universitario La Paz. IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain, 13Department of Clinical Genetics, Division of Human Genetics and Genome Research, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 14Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Hospital Universitario Marqués Valdecilla, Introduction: Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED) also known as Sensen- IDIVAL, Santander, Spain, 15Bone Metabolism Unit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, brenner syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive heterogeneous ciliopathy Torino, Italy, 16Dept. of Internal Medicine. Hospital Universitario Marqués Valdecilla, primarily characterized by skeletal and IeFcTt1o2d2e rmal abnormWaDliRti3e5s accompa- IDIVAL, University of Cantabria, RETICEF, Santander, Spain, 17Dept. of Clinical Genetics, nIFieTd4 3with progressive WreDnRal1 f9ailure. Genetic heterogeneity has been descri- Division of Human Genetics and Genome Research. Centre of Excellence for Human bed with at least 4 associated genes: (606045), (613602), Genetics. National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 18Centre of Excellence for Human (614068) and (608151) on chromosomes 3q21, 2p24.1, Genetics, National Research Centre. Department of Medical Molecular Genetics, Division of Human Genetics an 14q24.3 and 4p14, respectively. Materials and Methods: We present two cousins with similar phenotype from both consanguineous parents. Whole exome sequencing and analysis Introduction: Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare skeletal dysplasia caused by was performed by core facility of IGBAM (TUBITAK) using Illumina HiSeq a deficiency in the tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase enzyme, which 2000/2500 and HomSI (TUBITAK, Turkey) homozygosity mapping analyses is encoded by ALPL. Clinical features ranges from extremely severe pheno- program. type up to moderate adult forms. Modes of Inheritance could be either auto- Results: The boys (at 9 and 5 y.o. when referred) presented similar dysmor- somal dominant or recessive. phic facial appearance (high prominent forehead, frontal bossing, telecan- Material and Methods: Patients were classified according their first clini- thus, hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, broad nasal bridge, anteverted nares, cal evidence as: i) Intra-utero and perinatal: Perinatal HPP. ii) After birth full cheeks, micrognathy and low-set prominent ears). Skeletal findings and before 6 months of age: Infantile. iii) Between 6 months to 18 years: were short stature, limb shortening, short ribs, narrow chest, brachydactyly. Childhood and iv) after 18 years old: adult. Sequencing of ALPL has been Ectodermal findings were abnormally shaped teeth, dental fusion, hypo/mi- performed in 49 index patients and eleven familiars. In silico analysis for crodonty, sparse hair, clinodactyly, abnormal nails and skin and joint laxity. those mutations without evidence of HPP has been performed. Elder patient had progressive renal failure and transplantation is program- Results: 37 different mutations have been found in all the 49 patients with med. Both haIFdT n1o2r2m al karyotypes: 46,XY. HPP. Additionally familial study was positive in the 11 families. Interestingly, Using WES, we found novel homozygous missense p.I460N (c.1379T>A) we found in 13 patients 11 new mutations that have not been previously mutation in gene that cosegregated with the disease (transcript ID: related to HPP yet. In silico analysis these 11 mutations have shown a clear ENST0000029IF6T216262 and p.I200N for transcript id: ENST00000440957). Re- pathogenic effect. Cosegregation analysis also supported this idea. Clinical sults were Sanger confirmed. features of these new variants included: 4-adult, 2-childhood, 4-infantile Conclusions: is essential in cilia development and mutations were and 3-perinatal HPP. prone to Sensenbrenner Syndrome. We report a novel conserved delete- Conclusions: Although ALPL has been widely studied in Hypophosphatasia, rious (Polyphen2, SIFT) homozygous p.I460N (c.1379T>A) mutation unique our studies highlighted the possibility to find new undescribed mutations to these consanguineous families, up to the literature. that expands the genotype responsible for HPP and adds clinical infor- Granted by TUBITAK (#:100132) and Ministry of Development mation correlated to these new variants that is very useful for molecular (#:2011K120020), Turkey. diagnosis and also to follow-up patients with HPP because a new enzyme- 
P04 .057 replacement therapy for HPP has been developed. Co-segregation of both dominant and recessive mode of inheritance in 
P04 .055 a novel family with IGF1R mutation High diagnostic yield using next generation sequencing in patients M. Willems1, F. Brioude2, C. Amouroux3, C. Jeandel3, L. Hebrard4, M. Boubal5, O. Prodhomme6, M. Al Khoury7, D. Genevieve1, I. Netchine2; with congenital ichthyosis 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, T. Skodje, J. C. Sitek, K. B. Rypdal, M. A. Kulseth, S. S. Amundsen, E. Nafstad, H. Johnsen, V. 2Laboratoire de Biologie moléculaire et d‘explorations fonctionnelles endocriniennes, Boger, M. Kirkevold, B. Skinningsrud, Y. Sheng, Y. Strahm, L. Retterstøl; hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 3Département d‘Endocrinologie Pédiatrique, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 4MPEA, Pedopsychiatrie, Hôpital Saint ELOI, Montpellier, France, 5Département de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 6Département de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Background: Congenital ichthyosis encompasses a heterogenous group of Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 7Département de Gastro-enterologie skin cornification disorders. It is characterized by scaling and hyperkerato- pédiatrique Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France. sis of the skin. Ichthyosis may be isolated or syndromic. The severity of the disease varies significantly with a clinical spectrum ranging from dry skin t 1o 0lif 6e-threatening conditions. Genes involved inE kSeHraGtin 2oc0y1te6 d i|f fBerAenRtCiatEioLnO NB Aa ,c Skg Pr Aou In Nd : | L Woss W o Wf fu .n Ec Sti Hon G m .Out Rat Gions in the IGF1 receptor (IGF1R) gene and skin barrier function are known to cause ichthyosis. A molecular dia- lead to prenatal and postnatal growth retardation associated with insulinABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index resistance. To date, both dominant and recessive transmissions were repor- tor-negative polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). Genome-wide ted but without phenotypic expression in heterozygous carriers in families SNP genotyping and whole-exome sequencing (WES) were performed in with recessive mode of inheritance. affected and unaffected siblings to identify the causative gene defect. Methods: We investigated a consanguineous family consisting in two Four homozygosity regions in chromosomes 3, 6 (n: 2) and 13 were identi- parents and their four children, including the proband, referred for primor- fied as exclusively shared by affected siblings. WES identified three potential dial dwarfism. She had prenatal and postnatal short stature and microce- candidate variants in these regions: two amino acid substitutions, Pro86Ser phaly below -4SD for height and OFC, moderate developmental delay, fee- in TATDN2 and Asp169Val in FAR
S2 , and a frameshift deletion in the LAC
C1  ding difficulties, minor facial features, and normal X-rays. Two children had gene. Genotyping of 352 healthy Moroccan individuals and bioinformatic normal psychomotor development and height at average range. The fourth analyses supported the frameshift c.128_129delGT variant in the LAC
C1  child had learning difficulties and height at -2SD. Their mother and father‘s gene, leading to a truncated protein (p.Cys43Tyrfs*6), as the most probable heights were at -2,5 SD. Based on unusual high IGF1 levels in the proband, causative gene defect in this family. Additional analyses of the LAC
C1  gene we performed IGF1R molecular analysis in this family. in a group of 23 Spanish sporadic patients with systemic-onset JIA revealed Results: An Homozygous missense mutation c.384T>C;p.Phe112Leu was no additional pathogenic mutations. identified in the proband. Both parents and the child having height at -2SD Our findings show a homozygous truncating LAC
C1  mutation as the genetic and learning difficulties were heterozygous, whereas both siblings having defect underlying a severe inflammatory joint disease that segregated in a average height didn’t harbour the mutation. family with a recessive mode of inheritance. These evidences expand the Discussion: To our knowledge, this is the first family described with pheno- clinical phenotype associated with LAC
C1  mutations to other forms of JIA typic expression in both heterozygous and homozygous carriers of IGF1R than the previously described systemic-onset JIA. mutation. It seems that each pathogenic allele confers a -2SD height and OFC Support: SEV-2012-0208, 2009 SGR 1502, SAF2008-00357 and FIS drop associated with learning difficulties, leading to mild phenotype in he- P
S09 /01182 terozygous carriers and severe phenotype evoking primordial dwarfism in 
P04 .060 homozygote carrier. Since this diagnosis requires special care, it is necessa- Loeys-Dietz syndrome 2 might be caused by a new mutation in ry to identify these patients referred for primordial dwarfism by performing TGFBR2 gene IGF1 dosage. A. Khmyrova, O. Agranovich, E. Mikiashvili, S. Vissarionov, V. Larionova; 
P04 .058 The Turner׳s Scientific and Research Orthopeadic Institute for Children, Saint- Petersburg, Russian Federation. Mosaic mutation of KITLG in a non-progressive, congenital, linear nevoid hyperpigmentation A. Sorlin1, A. Maruani2, Y. Duffourd1,3, P. Kuentz1,3,4, M. Chevarin1, J. St-Onge1, T. Jouan1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,3,5, L. Faivre1,3,5, J. Rivière1,3,4, P. Vabres1,5,6; The Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is autosomal dominant disease caused by 1EA4271 GAD, Université Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, France, 2Service de mutations in TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFB2, TGFB3, and SMAD3 genes, characte- Dermatologie, CHU de Tours, Université François Rabelais, Tours, France, 3FHU rized by systemic involvement of arterial tortuosity and aneurysms, hyper- TRANSLAD, CHU de Dijon et Université Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, France, telorism, bifid uvula or/and cleft palate. 4Biologie moléculaire, Plateau Technique de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 5Centre We report on 3.5-year-old male patient with clinical features of LDS. He de référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 6Service de Dermatologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France. was born with congenital clubfoot fingers deformations and compensated hydrocephalus. He presented with craniosynostosis, dolichoplagiocepha- ly, microretrognathia high palate; hypertelorism, blue sclerae, hyperopia; patent foramen ovale of the heart; Increased elasticity of the skin, velvety Linear and whorled naevoid hypermelanosis (LWNH) consists of hyperpig- texture; clinodactyly and camptodactyly of 2nd-5th fingers, flexion contrac- mented macular swirls and streaks following Blaschko’s lines. This conditi- ture with ulnar deviation of 3rd-5th fingers, arachnodactyly; talipes equi- on has often been considered as a nonspecific manifestation of mosaicism. novarus, recurvated knee joints; scoliosis, pectus carinatum, straightening It has sometimes been mistaken with the pigmentary stage of incontinentia of physiological curves of the spine, spina bifida posterior displastica 
S1 - pigmenti. In a few patients, various X chromosome rearrangements have 
S2 ; hypermobility, dolichostenomelia, hydrocephalus. Aiming to confirm been reported, but the molecular basis of LWNH has remained unknown. the diagnosis, we have sequenced genes known to be associated with con- We performed deep exome sequencing on skin DNA from a 6 year-old pati- tractural arachnodactyly, Marfan syndrome, and other congenital diseases ent with congenital non-progressive linear naevoid hyperpigmentation fol- with similar clinical features. New mutation was found in exon 6 of TGFBR2 lowing Blaschko’s lines on his trunk and limbs, without other cutaneous or gene (chr3: 30715721G>C) causing an amino acid substitution Arg485Pro neurosensory symptoms. We identified a postzygotic heterozygous KITLG (NM_001024847.2). This mutation has not been described in control samp- c.329A>G (p.Asp110Gly) mutation, confirmed by targeted deep sequencing les of “1000 genomes”, ES
P6500 , and ExAC. Pathogenicity prediction algo- in skin fibroblasts (28% of reads) and blood (18%). rithms defined this mutation as most likely pathogenic (SIFT: 0.000, Poly- KITLG (c-KIT Ligand) regulates skin pigmentation through control of me- phen2_HDIV: 1.000, Polyphen2_HVAR: 1.000, MutationTaster: 1.000, PRO- lanocyte migration, proliferation and survival, and melanin synthesis. VEAN: -6.820, LRT: D). Conclusions: Based on clinical features and genetic Germline KITLG mutations have been reported in patients with Familial testing results we proposed that the mutation detected might be pathogenic Progressive Hyper-and Hypopigmentation (FPHH), who exhibit early-onset one causing the Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 2. The proband’s relatives did hyperpigmented macules, increasing in size and number until adulthood, not demonstrate any clinical features, thus this mutation occurred de novo. hypopigmented macules and larger café-au-lait macules, and recently in pa- tients with isolated hearing loss or Waardenburg syndrome type 2A (conge- 
P04 .061 nital hearing loss, pigmentary abnormalities of the hair, skin, and eyes). The Novel mutations in LR
P6  highlight the role of WNT signaling in tooth p.Asp110Gly mutation is the first reported mosaic mutation of KITLG, in a agenesis patient with normal hearing, extending the spectrum of clinical manifestati- C. W. Ockeloen1, K. D. Khandelwal1, K. Dreesen2, K. Ludwig3, R. Sullivan4, I. A. L. M. ons associated with mutations in KITLG. This is also the first report of a ge- van Rooij1, M. Thonissen1, S. Swinnen2, M. Phan1, F. Conte1, N. Ishorst3, C. Gilissen1, netic basis for LWNH, which can now - at least in this patient - be considered L. RoaFuentes1, M. van de Vorst1, A. Henkes1, M. Steehouwer1, E. van Beusekom1, M. Bloemen1, B. Vankeirsbilck2, S. Bergé1, G. Hens2, J. Schoenaers5, V. Vander Poorten2, as a mosaic presentation of a Mendelian disorder, FPHH. J. Roosenboom2, A. Verdonck2, K. Devriendt2, N. Roeveldt1, S. N. Jhangiani6, L. E. L. M. 
P04 .059 Vissers1, J. R. Lupski6, J. de Ligt7, J. W. Von den Hoff1, R. Pfundt1, H. G. Brunner1, H. Zhou1, A novel truncating LAC
C1  mutation in patients with rheumatoid J. Dixon4, E. Mangold3, H. van Bokhoven1, M. Dixon4, T. Kleefstra1, A. Hoischen1, C. E. L. Carels1; factor-negative polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University Hospitals KU R. Rabionet1,2, A. Remesal3, A. Mensa-Vilaró4, S. Murias3, R. Alcobendas3, E. Gonzalez- Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4University of Manchester, Roca4, O. Drechsel1, E. Ruiz-Ortiz4, A. Puig1, D. Comas5, S. Ossowski1, J. Yagüe4, R. Merino3, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5University Hospitals KU Leuven, Leuven, Netherlands, X. Estivill1, J. I. Arostegui4; 6Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 7KNAW and University Medical 1Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 2Dept. of Genetics, University Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Dept. of Pediatric Rheumatology, Hospital la Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4Dept. of Immunology-CDB, Hopsital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 58Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Institute of Evolutionary Biology. CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: We aimed to identify a novel genetic cause of tooth agenesis (TA) and/or orofacial clefting (OFC), both common and burdensome con- genital defects, by combining whole exome sequencing (WES) and targeted We observed three siblings from a Moroccan consanguineous family with an re-sequencing in a large cohort of TA and OFC patients. early-onset chronic and symmetric arEthSrHitiGs d2ia0g1no6s e|d B aAs RrhCeuEmLOatoNidA f,a cS-PAMINat e| rWialWs aWnd. mESetHhoGds.O: WREGS was performed in two unrelated patients1, 0on7eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index with severe TA and O(FLCR Pa6n)d another w, ith severe TA only. After identifying tution was found to co-segregate with the disease. The variant was shown deleterious mutations in a gene encoding the low density lipoprotein recep- to decrease TUFT1 expression at both mRNA and protein levels in HEK293 tor-related protein 6 with WES all its exons were re-sequenced with cells. Thr175Met overexpression in ATD
C5  cells resulted in increased calci- molecular inversion probes, in 67 patients with TA, 1,072 patients with OFC um content and reduced proteoglycans in ECM when compared with over- and in 706 controls. LR
P6  expression of wild type TUFT1 and cells with empty vector. Furthermore, Results: We identified a frameshift (c.4594delG, p.Cys1532fs) and a cano- ATD
C5  cells overexpressing wild type and mutant TUFT1 displayed reduced nical splice site mutation (c.3398-2A>C, p.?) in respeLcRtiPv6ely in the pa- expression of marker genes of chondrogenic differentiation and disrupted tient with TA and OFC, and in the patient with severe TA only. The targeted formation of cartilage nodules during differentiation. re-sequencing showed significant enrichment of unique variants in Conclusions: We identified a novel susceptibility gene for MTP I OA. Further TA patients, but not in nonsyndromic OFC. From the 5 variants in patients studies are needed to fully characterize the role of TUFT1 in the pathophy- with TA, 2 affect the cadneo nnoicvaol. splice site and 3 were missense variants; all siology of OA. LvaRrPia6n ts segregated with the dominant phenotype and in 1 case themissen- 
P04 .064 se mutation occurred Additional features in patients with unique Neuromuscular disease as sole symptom in a patient with COMP- variants were short stature (4/7), other dental anomalies (5/7) and related multiple epiphyseal dysplasia: a case report clinodactyly (3/7). LR
P6  J. M. Jensen1, H. Okkels2, M. B. Petersen1, C. K. Lautrup1; LR
P6  acts as a co-receptor in the WNT/ β-catenin signaling pathway. Our 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, findings further expand thLeR sPp6ectrum of phenotypes and highlight the 2Section of Molecular Diagnostics, Clinical Biochemistry, Aalborg University Hospital, role of WNT signaling in dental and orofacial development. Aalborg, Denmark. Conclusion: Mutations in cause (severe) tooth agenesis. 
P04 .062 Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) is a clinically and genetically hetero- Whole exome sequencing study identifies HSPG2 and MAM
L1  as novel geneous group of skeletal dysplasias. MED is characterized by pain parti- candidate genes for vertebral bone marrow signal changes(Modic cularly in hips and knee joints. Early-onset joint pain usually progress to changes) M. Kraatari1,2,3, S. Skarp1,2,4, J. Karppinen5, M. Männikkö1,2,4,4; osteoarthritic degeneration, necessitating total joint arthroplasty. A short 1Center for Life Course Health Research, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, stature, waddling gait, and enhanced fatigability are often seen. Mild child- Finland, 2Center for Cell – Matrix Research, Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular hood neuromuscular disorders have previously been reported as a presen- Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 3Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu tation of MED caused by mutations in COMP. University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 4Biocenter Oulu, University of Here, we present a striking case of a 68-year-old woman initially diagnosed Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 5Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Health and Work Ability, with myopathy from the age of 50. Throughout life, she exhibited difficul- and the Disability Prevention Center, Oulu, Finland. ties in more heavy physical activity due to fatigue, but otherwise she had no joint-related symptoms. The pedigree revealed multiple members diagnosed with early onset ar- Introduction: Low back pain (LBP) is a common debilitating condition. It thritis or Legg-Calvé Perthes disease, as well as several members diagnosed was ranked as top cause for global years lived with disability in all develo- with childhood or adult onset of myopathy. Within the family, numerous ped countries. Lumbar disc degeneration (LDD) is one of the contributing analyses had been conducted without final molecular diagnosis. factors behind low back pain (LBP). Vertebral bone marrow signal changes According to the pedigree, an autosomal dominant inheritance was stron- also known as Modic changes (MC) are a specific phenotype of LDD. MC have gly suspected. Molecular analysis of five MED-related genes identified a heritability of MC is estimated around 30% and strong association with LBP. c.2152C>T mutation in the COMP gene consistent with the diagnosis of au- Materials and Methods: Two Finnish families were studied using whole exo- tosomal dominant MED. me sequencing and traditional genotyping to identify variants co-segrega- To our knowledge, this is the first case of COMP-related MED with myopathy ting with MC. We focused on rare (MAF < 0.01) and private variants with in adulthood without other MED characteristic joint symptoms. As patients harmful in silico predictions and variants located in regulatory regions. with MED may be wrongly diagnosed with neuromuscular disorders, it is Results: In Family I an insertion and deletion mutation in the heparan sul- important to be aware of neuromuscular symptoms as a sole symptom in fate proteoglycan 2 (HSPG2) gene, resulting in a premature stop codon, co- MED in all age groups. segregated with MC. The HSPG2 encodes structural protein in mammalian cartilage and basement membranes called perlecan. Mutations in HSPG2 
P04 .065 cause rare autosomal recessive disorders with osteochondrodysplasia. Mu- Myhre syndrome with a full spectrum of cardiovascular and tations in HSPG2 have also been associated with idiopathic scoliosis. In the gastrointestinal complications Family II a single nucleotide polymorphism in the MAM
L1  gene was iden- A. M. Spinelli1, A. Morgan2, E. Rubinato1, M. C. Pellegrin3, A. Delise3, V. Guastalla3, A. tified in all affected family members. Maml1 knock out mice suffer from Benettoni2, I. Bruno2, F. Faletra2; 1University of Trieste and University of Padova, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal and impaired chondrocyte maturation. Additionally MAM
L1  affects the activity Child Health - IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. of RUNX2 transcription factor. RUNX2 affects the osteoblast differentiation, bone formation and chondrocyte maturation and is highly expressed in the degenerated discs. Introduction. Myhre syndrome/LAPS is a rare cause of syndromic limitation Conclusions: We identified two promising candidate genes for MC, HSPG2 of the range of joint motion, generally presenting with variable degrees of and MAM
L1 . Our findings are novel in lumbar spine degenerative pheno- intellectual disability and short stature. Fifty-six molecularly proven cases types. have been reported in the medical literature to date. 
P04 .063 Clinical report. The patient was born SGA at term as the only child of healthy TUFT1 - A novel susceptibility gene for metatarsophalangeal arthritis Italian parents. Paternal and maternal ages at conception were 39 and 31 E. Sliz1, M. Taipale1, M. Welling1, J. Ignatius2, L. Ruddock1, R. Nissi2, M. Männikkö1; years respectively. We evaluated the girl at 14 years. Cardinal history fin- 1University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 2Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland. dings were delayed motor milestones with normal speech development and a full-scale IQ of 74; mild autistic traits; stiffness gradually involving small and large joints and resulting in pronounced functional impairment Background: Osteoarthritis (OA) is a common musculoskeletal disease cha- of the shoulder girdle and tibiotarsal joints in her early teens; GH defici- racterized by degeneration of the protective cartilage layer of articulating ency; thelarche variant; bilateral chronic otitis media with effusion lea- joints. The first metatarsophalangeal (MTP I) joint is commonly affected by ding to tympanosclerosis; marked retinal vessel tortuosity; astigmatism; OA, but MTP I OA is poorly studied when compared to hip or knee OA. Nissi laryngospasm during procedural sedation. Congenital heart disease (CHD) et al. reported a Finnish family with 13 out of 52 family members affected requiring surgery (tetralogy of Fallot and peripheral pulmonary stenosis) by early-onset MTP I OA. The aim of the present study was to identify the was identified at 2 weeks of age. Her long-standing hepatomegaly, alrea- genetic defect(s) causing this disorder using exome sequencing. dy present at 6 months, and mild protein losing enteropathy might be pa- Methods: Three patients and two healthy non-family members were exome thogenetically related to perturbed extracellular matrix homoeostasis, as sequenced. Rare variants with harmful prediction that were shared by the both of them were not significantly modified either by cardiac therapies or, patients, but not found from the healthy controls, were validated by Sanger more recently, by constrictive pericarditis. Ond ep hnyosviocal examination stocky sequencing in four affected and five unaffected family members. The func- build, short palpebral fissures and skin thickening were noted. Direct se- tional role of the identified variant was studied in vitro. quencing of SMAD4 identified the recurrent mutation p.Ile500Val R1e0su8lts: A variant rs41310883 on TUFT1 intEroSdHucGin g2 T0h1r617 
|5  BMAet RsCubEsLtiO- N(AN,M S_
P00 A5I3N59 |. 5W:c.W149W8A.E>SGH).G.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .068 Nine novel mutations in NF1 gene in patients with Neurofibromatosis Conclusions. We report a new case of Myhre syndrome whose gastrointe- type 1 stinal features and unusually severe CHD broaden the clinical spectrum of C. Martinez-Bouzas1,2, M. A. Lopez-Ariztegui1,2, I. Llano-Rivas1,2, M. Garcia-Barcina3, R. the disease. Saez4, H. Maortua1,2, B. Gener1,2; 
P04 .066 1Department of Genetics, OSI Ezkerraldea-Enkarterri-Cruces, BioCruces Health Research Myhre to Marfan Syndrome: Two opposite ends of the TGFβ/BMP Institute, Cruces. Vizcaya, Spain, 2GCV-CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER-ISCIII), driven connective tissue disorder spectrum with new evidence for an Madrid, Spain, 3Genetics Unit. OSI Bilbao-Basurto, Bilbao. Vizcaya, Spain, 4Genetics Unit . abnormal fibrotic process in Myhre syndrome OSI Donostialdea, San Sebastian. Guipuzkoa, Spain. L. J. Starr1, D. Perry2, L. Y. Sakai3, D. Keene3, J. W. Delaney2, J. M. Hammel2, A. Lin4, J. R. NF1 Stone4, M. E. Lindsay4, A. Haskins Olney1, J. N. Sanmann1, A. T. Yetman5; 1University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States, 2Children‘s Hospital Neurofibromatosis type 1 ( ) is a clinically heterogeneous genetic disor- and Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States, 3Shriner‘s Hospital, Portland, OR, United der characterized by café-au-lait spots, iris NLiFs1ch nodules, axillary and ingui- States, 4Mass General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5Children‘s Hospital Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States. nal freckling, and multiple neurofibromas. It is caused by dominant loss of function mutations in the suppressor gene that encodes for neurofibro- min that functions as a negative regulator of RAS activity signalling. Patients with either Myhre or Marfan syndrome may have devastating com- In the present study we report clinical and molecular findings of 14 patients plications of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, and skeletal systems, but with (6 unrelated and 7 from 3 families). We screened DNA and RNA isolated nearly opposite characteristics. Herein we provide thorough phenotypic from peripheral blood leucocytes from patients that fulfil cliNniFc1al criteria information on Myhre patients, including the first detailed report of advan- for NF1. In addition, single and multi-exon deletions/duplications screening ced pathologic findings in the heart, lung, and other tissues in the less-un- was performed by MLPA (Kits 
P81 , 
P82  and 
P122 ). The entire gene co- derstood Myhre syndrome. We provide evidence that an abnormal fibrotic ding region was PCR amplified from total cDNA in several overlapdpein gn foravgo- process is occurring in these patients and provide pathFoBloNg1ic, evidence of the ments, and sequenced afterwards. life-threatening abnormal wound healing that leads to restrictive disease. We identified 9 novel mutations 6 of those were : Marfan syndrome, caused by pathogenic mutations in involves dysre- c.1218_1224delTCACTAT; c.1569delA; c.6752delG; c.3975-? _8457+?del, gulation of TGFβ/SMAD pathways and is chaSrMacAtDer4i,zed by long bone over- r.1722_1748del27 and c.7044G>A (p.Gly23478Stop). The c.6987del24 cau- growth, joint laxity, cystic lung disease and aortic dilation. Myhre syndrome, ses a frameshift mutation which co-segregates with the cliinni csailli cpohenotype caused by mutations in one of two codons in is a condition in which in family one. The missense mutations c.3965A>G (p.Asp1322Gly) and patients have short long bones, compact body habitus with tightening of the c.4972A>G (p.Ile1658Val) is considered likely pathogenic analysis joints, hearing loss and thickening of tissues. As we describe, this thicke- and in 2 families co-segregate with the clinical phenotype in the proband ning includes cardiac and lung tissue, which can cause restrictive disease. and in at leasdt eo nneo vaoffected relative. Although undoubtedly underdiagnosed in the past, greater awareness of Besides, clinical follow-up is ibne isnilgic operformed in patient less than 4 years this condition and the availability of clinical whole exome sequencing have old with the missense variation c.2188A>T (p.Asn730Tyr) despite resulted in a rapid increase in the number of reported patients with Myhre it is considered likely benign analysis who shows already five café- syndrome. au-lait spots. We provide the first reported images and descriptions of Myhre tissue, This study expands the database for NF1 mutations in patients with neuro- demonstrating an abnormal healing process, which involves proliferative f Pib 0r 4o .0m 6a 9tosis type 1. fibrosis and adhesions. We propose screening protocols for patients with The non-coding RNA, PRINS regulates IL-6 production of human Myhre syndrome and recommend restricting instrumentation and elective keratinocytes procedures for these patients to prevent significant morbidity and mortality. J. Danis1, A. Göblös1, Z. Bata-Csörgő1,2, L. Kemény1,2, M. Széll3,2; 1University of Szeged, Dept of Dermatology and Allergology, Szeged, Hungary, 2MTA- 
P04 .067 SZTE Dermatological Research Group, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 3University Targeted next-generation sequencing provides novel insights into the of Szeged, Dept of Medical Genetics, Szeged, Hungary. genetic basis of amelogenesis imperfecta M. Prasad1, H. Dollfus1,2, A. Bloch-Zupan3,4; 1Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, INSERM U1112, Fédération de Médecine The previously identified non-coding RNA, PRINS, is differentially expressed Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), Institut de Génétique Médicale d’Alsace, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Centre de Référence pour les in psoriatic uninvolved and healthy epidermis. Our in vitro experiments in Affections Rares en Génétique Ophtalmologique, Service de Génétique Médicale, HUS, keratinocytes showed that PRINS expression is altered after exposure to Strasbourg, France, 3Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire; Hôpitaux various stressors i. e. UVB, translation inhibition and microbial agents. A re- Universitaires de Strasbourg (HUS), Pôle de Médecine et Chirurgie Bucco-dentaires, cently described potential stress signal in psoriatic involved skin may be the Centre de Référence des Manifestations Odontologiques des Maladies Rares, Strasbourg, extracellular DNA, a potent activator of several inflammatory pathways, but France, 4Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire and Cellulaire, Centre Européen its involvement in PRINS signaling was not studied before. de Recherche en Biologie et en Médecine, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS UMR7104, The aim of our study was to investigate which pathways are induced in ke- INSERM U964, Illkirch, France. ratinocytes by extracellular DNA, and whether PRINS is able to affects the induced inflammatory reactions, thereby its high expression in psoriatic un- involved epidermis may contribute to disease pathogenesis. Amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous The synthetic DNA analogue poly(dA:dT) induced PRINS expression and group of diseases characterised by enamel defects. To date, mutations in >20 the production of psoriasis associated cytokines IL-6, IL-8, IL-12, IL-23 genes have been implicated in either isolated or syndromic AI. We used a and TNF-α. Cytokine production was mediated through NFκB-, STAT3- next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel targeting 585 known or candida- and MAPK- pathways in keratinocytes. To study the role of PRINS in the te genes in dental disorders to screen a cohort of 61 patients with isolated poly(dA:dT) induced cytokine production we silenced or forced its expres- and syndromic forms of AI. We were able to identify the molecular defect sion by vector based methods. Robust overexpression of PRINS reduced underlying the patients’ phenotypes in 15 cases (~25%), suggesting that se- poly(dA:dT) induced IL-6 and IL-8 production on mRNA as well as protein veral additional genes mutated in AI remain to be discovered. Interestingly, level, but did not affected the production of the other investigated cytokines. mutations in CO
L17 A1 were the most frequent cause of isolated AI in our In silico analysis revealed an approximately 100 nucleotide long comple- cohort, accounting for 8% of patients with isolated AI. Furthermore, NGS- mentary region between PRINS and IL-6, suggesting the direct interaction based screening of multiple AI genes allowed us to identify a rare case of di- between the two RNA molecules. According to our result we propose that genic inheritance in AI, with unlinked heterozygous mutations in CO
L17 A1 PRINS might act as a regulator of IL-6 production through the interaction and LAMA3 modifying the severity of the phenotype. Finally, sequencing in with IL-6 mRNA, leading to the degradation of it. a seven-year-old patient presenting with isolated AI revealed the presence of a homozygous missense mutation in CNNM4, mutations in which result in Jalili syndrome, a diagnosis that was subsequently confirmed by ophthal- mological investigation. Therefore, we demonstrate that a large proportion of the genetic heterogeneity of AI remains unsolved and that non-Mendelian inheritance patterns exist in AI. We also demonstrate that the dental clinic may be a gateway for the diagnosis and management of rare genetic disor- ders. This EU-funded project (ERDF) A27 „Oro-dental manifestations of rare diseases“ is supported by the RMT-TMO Offensive Sciences initiative, INTER- REG IV and INTERREG V RARENET prEogSrHamGs . 2w0w1w6.g e| nBoAsmRilCe.EeuL.ONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 109ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .070 Loss-of-Function mutations in the WNT co-receptor LR
P6  cause autosomal-dominant oligodontia the minor allele for the T950C, G1181C and rs2062377 variants had an in- M. P. G. Massink1, M. A. Créton1, F. Spanevello1, W. M. Fennis1, M. S. Cune2, S. M. creased fracture risk which was independent of BMD (adjusted OR: 2.7 [1.2- Savelberg1, I. J. Nijman1, M. M. M. Maurice1, M. van den Boogaard1, G. van Haaften1; 6.5], 2.7 [1.2-6.6], 2.4 [1.1-7.0] respectively). The same variants increased 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center wrist and humerus fracture risk. No association with BMD or fractures was Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. seen for the T245G variant. Haplotype-based analysis revealed that the hap- lotype block containing all major alleles was protective for fractures (OR: 0.7 [0.5-0.8]), whereas that containing the minor allele for the T950C and Introduction: Tooth agenesis is one of the most common developmental G1181C variants increased fracture risk by 3-fold, highlighting the possi- anomalies in man. Oligodontia, a severe form of tooth agenesis, occurs both bility that the effect of the rs2062377 could be through linkage with these as an isolated anomaly and as a syndromal feature. polymorphism. Materials and Methods: We performed exome sequencing on 20 unrelated Conclusion: OPG gene polymorphisms predispose to reduced BMD or in- individuals with apparent non-syndromic oligodontia and failed to detect creased fracture susceptibility in Maltese postmenopausal women. 
P04 .073 mutations in genes previously associated with oligodontia. Changes in telomere position effect contribute to primary Results: In three of the probands, we detected heterozygous variants in osteoarthritis LR
P6 , and sequencing of additional oligodontia-affected individuals yiel- L. Kuszel1, T. Trzeciak2, B. Begier-Krasinska3, J. Eastwood4, M. Richter2, J. Zhang5, V. ded one additional mutation in LR
P6 . Three mutations (c.1144_1145dupAG Dasa6, M. Czarny-Ratajczak1,4; [p.Ala383Glyfs(∗)8], c.1779dupT [p.Glu594(∗)], and c.2224_2225dupTT 1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, [p.Leu742Phefs(∗)7]) are predicted to truncate the protein, whereas the Poland, 2Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Poznan University of Medical fourth (c.56C>T [p.Ala19Val]) is a missense variant of a conserved residue Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Hypertensiology, Angiology and Internal located at the cleavage site of the protein‘s signal peptide. All four affected Diseases, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Tulane Center individuals harboring a LR
P6  mutation had a family history of tooth agene- for Aging, Department of Medicine, Tulane School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, sis. LR
P6  encodes a transmembrane cell-surface protein that functions as a United States, 5Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States, 6Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, co-receptor with members from the Frizzled protein family in the canonical United States. Wnt/β-catenin signaling cascade. In this same pathway, WNT10A was re- cently identified as a major contributor in the etiology of non-syndromic oligodontia. We show that the LR
P6  missense variant (c.56C>T) results in Introduction: Osteoarthritis is one of the most debilitating diseases invol- altered glycosylation and improper subcellular localization of the protein, ving degeneration of the articular cartilage of joints and causing disabilities, resulting in abrogated activation of the Wnt pathway. especially in the elderly population. Genetic and epigenetic factors contribu- Conclusions: Our results identify LR
P6  variants as contributing to the etio- te to development of primary osteoarthritis. In this study we analyzed the logy of non-syndromic autosomal-dominant oligodontia and suggest that consequences of telomere shortening on cartilage transcriptome in patients this gene is a candidate for screening in DNA diagnostics. This work was with osteoarthritis. The silencing effect of telomeres on genes located near- supported the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research NWO (VICI by is known as telomere position effect and the aim of our study was to de- grant to M.M.M.). termine if telomere shortening causes changes in expression of these genes. 
P04 .071 Materials and Methods: We analyzed patients with knee osteoarthritis and A novel de novo Mutation in Frizzed2 gene in a patient with an utilized unaffected and affected cartilage, collected from the same joint of autosomal dominant Omodysplasia each patient during total joint replacement surgery. We measured relative S. Türkmen1,2, M. Spielmann2,3, N. Günes4, R. Flöttmann2, S. Mundlos2,3, B. Tüysüz4; telomere length in chondrocytes obtained from 50 patients with qPCR. Ad- 1Labor Berlin Charité Vivantes, Berlin, Germany, 2Charité Institute of medical Genetics, ditionally, analysis of 20 cartilage transcriptomes was completed via RNA- Berlin, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, Seq on Ion Proton in 10 patients with osteoarthritis. RNA-Seq data were 4Department of Pediatric Genetics, Cerrahpaşa Medical School, Istanbul University, analyzed with STAR, Bowtie2, HTSeq and R. Istanbul, Turkey. Results: Analysis of relative telomere length in 50 patients with osteoarthri- tis revealed severe shortening of telomeres in affected cartilage compared to unaffected cartilage. Analysis of cartilage transcriptomes showed significant Omodysplasia-2 (OMOD2; OMIM #164745) is a rare autosomal dominant enrichment in differentially expressed genes from the telomere-proximal skelatal dysplasia characterized by shortened humeri, shortened first me- regions of all chromosomes in the cartilage with telomere shortening. tacarpal, and craniofacial dysmorphism including depressed nasal bridge, Conclusions: Our results show that telomere shortening affects telomere po- broad base of the nose, and long philtrum.Recently a de novo heterozygous sition effect and contributes to osteoarthritis pathology through changes in nonsense mutation (p.Trp548*) in the Frizzled2 (FZD2) gene was shown the cartilage transcriptome of telomere-proximal genes. to cause autosomal dominant omodysplasia syndrome. Here we present Acknowledgments: This research was funded by a grant from the Na- the clinical and molecular genetic data of a Turkish patient with OMOD2 in tional Science Centre 2011/03/B/NZ2/06409 and NIH (NIGSM) grant whom the whole exome sequencing revealed a novel second mutation in the 
P20 GM103629:552729. FZD2 gene. This is the published second mutation in the literature. This data 
P04 .075 support the findings of Haal et al and point that the heterozygous FZD2 is What may be hidden behind a clinical diagnosis of OI the cause of OMOD2. S. Ivanov1, R. Vazharova1,2, L. Balabanski1, S. Andonova3, M. Malinov1, A. Savov3, D. Toncheva1,4; 
P04 .072 1GARH Malinov, Genomic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Sofia University St. Kliment Polymorphisms in the Osteoprotegerin gene are associated with bone Ohridski, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3UHOG Maichin dom, National genetic laboratory, Medical mineral density and fracture risk in Maltese postmenopausal women University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University M. M. Formosa, A. Xuereb-Anastasi; Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta, Msida, Malta. Introduction: Establishing proper diagnosis is critical for therapeutic treat- ment and reproductive planning of patients and families affected by rare Introduction: Osteoprotegerin (OPG) is a decoy receptor for the Receptor monogenic disorders. NGS gives opportunity to shorten the way to reliable activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL), which blocks the in- diagnosis and to enable correct genetic counseling. Here we report a rare teraction between RANKL and RANK thereby inhibiting osteoclastogenesis case of male with severe X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets who was be- and bone resorption. Four polymorphisms within the OPG gene, and one lieved to be affected with Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) for 32 years. The polymorphism located 43kB upstream of OPG were analysed in relation patient sought confirmation of the clinical diagnosis by DNA testing during to bone mineral density (BMD) and low-trauma fractures in Maltese post- the first pregnancy of his wife. menopausal women. Materials and methods: Analysis of patient’s genomic DNA was performed Methods: A case-control collection of 1045 women was used. Cases were using TruSight One gene panel on the Illumina MiSeq system and confirmed women who suffered a fracture, whereas controls had no fracture history. by Sanger sequencing. Genotyping was performed by polymerase chain reaction followed by re- Results: Patient‘s diagnosis was believed to be Osteogenesis imperfecta type striction fragment length polymorphism or real-time PCR. 1 based mainly on observation of 11 long bones fractures during childhood, Results: Homozygosity for the A163G minor allele G was associated with asymmetric legs shortening and short adult height. No fractures have been lower spine BMD (adjusted OR: 2.6 [95% confidence interval 1.0-7.0]) rela- observed after puberty. During one hospitalization for surgical treatment t 1iv 1e 0to research subjects with a normal BMD. WEoSmHenG c a2rr0y1in6g t|w BoA coRpCieEs LoOf NiAnc, rSeaPsAedI Nlev |e Wl ofW seWrum.E pSaHraGth.yOroRidG hormone was registered but no furtherABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Accession Gene Variant (Hnu Gm Mbe Dr / Classification tests have been performed. NGS testing revealed no mutations in all known NCBI) CO
L1 A1 genes implicated in OI, but a rare probably pathogenic missense variant in (*) PHEX gene (p.Pro401Leu). Further laboratory tests of blood and urine con- c.1249C>T (p.Pro417Ser) - Variant Of Unknown clinical Significance firmed diagnosis of X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. (VOUS) Conclusion: Phenotypic variability is well-known feature of many genetic c.3564_3572dupCCCTGGTC CI013220 Pathogenic disorders, may cause misdiagnosis and even mistreatment of patients. NGS CO
L1 A2 technology gives opportunity to resolve at early stage such complex cases and correct patient‘s medical management. c.3313G>A (p.Gly1105Ser) CM123314/ Likely pathogenic 
P04 .076 rs139851311 Absence of the ER cation channel TMEM38B/TRIC-B disrupts intracellular calcium homeostasis and dysregulates collagen (*) Without literature information. synthesis in recessive osteogenesis imperfecta The familial analysis of these variants was: J. C. Marini1, W. A. Cabral1, M. Ishikawa2,3, E. N. Makareeva4, B. M. Sargent1, M. Weis5, A. M. Barnes1, E. A. Webb6,7, N. J. Shaw7, L. Ala-Kokko8, F. L. Lacbawan9,10, W. Högler6,7, S. - Proband’s brother: the same genotype as the proband. Leikin4, D. R. Eyre5, Y. Yamada2; - Proband’s father: the same genotype as the proband. 1Section on Heritable Disorders of Bone and Extracellular Matrix, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, - Proband’s mother: c.1249C>T and c.3313G>A. Heterozygous state. MD, United States, 2Molecular Biology Section, NIDCR, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, - Paternal aunt 1: c.3313G>A. Heterozygous state. 3Present Address: Department of Restorative Dentistry, Division of Operative Dentistry, - Paternal aunt 2: no mutations. Tohoku University, Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan, 4Section on Physical Conclusions. According to the evidences for the segregation and clinical Biochemistry, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Department of Orthopaedics findings, the mutation c.3564_3572dupCCCTGGTC in CO
L1 A1 gene could and Sports Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 6School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Research, University be the molecular cause of the pathology, and it could be in somatic mosa- of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 7Department of Endocrinology and icism in the proband’s father. The previously considered deleterious variant Diabetes, Birmingham Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 8Connective c.1249C>T, according to HGMD database, and the VOUS c.3313G>A seem not Tissue Gene Tests, Allentown, PA, United States, 9Department of Medical Genetics, to be the molecular cause of the clinical findings in this family. Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States, 10Present Address: Molecular Genetics Pathology Section, Department of Molecular Pathology, Robert 
P04 .078 Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, Prenatal diagnosis of the Otopalatodigital Spectrum Disorders: a case United States. report M. Mijovic1, G. Cuturilo1,2, A. Miletic1, J. Ruml1, N. Borlja1; TMEM38B TMEM38B 1University Children‘s Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, Introduction: Type XIV osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a novel form of mo- 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. derately severe OI caused by null mutations in . en- codes the ER membrane monova2l+ent catTioMnE cMh3an8Bnel, TRIC-B, proposed to counterbalance I
P3 R-mediated Ca release from intracellular stores. Howe- Introduction: The otopalatodigital (OPD) spectrum disorders are charac- ver, the molecular mechanisms by which mutations cause OI are terized primarily by skeletal dysplasia, inherited in an X-linked manner. In unknown. recent years, the interest in the fetal phenotypes in OPD spectrum disorders Methods: We identified 3 probands with recessive mutations in TMEM38B has been increased. The couple has been admitted to our genetic outpatient and investigated calcium signaling and collagen synthesis in proband fibro- clinic during the second pathological pregnancy. The first pregnancy was blasts and osteobTlaMstEsM. 38B completed by giving birth to a male newborn, who died after a few days, due Results: TRIC-B protein is undetectable in proband fibroblasts and osteo- to poor postnatal adaptation and respiratory complications. The newborn blasts, although transcripts are present at 19-86% of 2c+ontrol had skeletal dysplasia with broad thumbs and cleft soft palate. The Rubin- levels. TRIC-B deficiency causes impaired release of ER luminal Ca , asso- stein-Taybi syndrome had previously been diagnosed in other institution. In ciated with deficient store-operated calciu2+m entry, despite normal stability the second pregnancy, with male fetus, the following anomalies have been of SERCA and2 I+
P3 R, the channels for ER Ca uptake and release, respectively. discovered by ultrasound: low-set ears, microretrognathia, widely spaced Disturbed Ca flux is consistent with ER stress and increased BiP. In the eyes, small trunk and anomalies of the thumbs, fingers and carpal bones. absence of TRIC-B, synthesis of type I collagen is dysregulated at multip- Mother has telecanthus, and her healthy daughter has mild hypertelorism le steps. Collagen helical lysine hydroxylation is reduced despite incre2+ased and mandibular hypoplasia. LH1, and telopeptide hydroxylation is increased despite decreased Ca -de- Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted frFoLmN Afetal blood samp- pendent FKB
P65 . Although PDI levels are maintained, procollagen chain as- le. We performed next generation sequencing and analysis of genes related sembly is delayed in proband cells. The resulting misfolded collagen is sub- to cFlLinNiAca l presentation observed in patient, primarily gene. stantially retained in TRIC-B null cells, consistent with a 50-70% reduction Results: We identified the hemizygous variant c.620C>T (NM_001110556.1) in secreted collagen. Lower-stability forms of collagen that elude proteoso- in gene, which causes a substitution of amnioacid proline with ami- mal degradation are not incorporated into extracellular matrix, resulting in noacid leucine in position 207. The variant has previously been reported as matrix insufficiency. TMEM38B 2+ patogenic in cases OPD1 (OMIM:300017.0009, ClinVar). Conclusions: These data support a role for TRIC-B in intracellular Ca Conclusion: Some typical radiological and craniofacial findings in OPD FspLeNcA- homeostasis, and demons2+trate that absence of causes OI by dys- trum disorders allow prenatal diagnosis. Molecular diagnosis is useful for regulation of multiple Ca -regulated collagen-specific chaperones and mo- refining the clinical diagnosis according to the type and location of difying enzymes in the ER. mutation and for completing genetic information of the family. 
P04 .077 
P04 .079 Familial case of osteogenesis imperfecta with three variants of clinical Frequent genetic disorder associated with premature loss of teeth interest. I. S. M. Sayed, T. Elbadry, M. I. Mostafa, M. R. Abouzaid, N. F. Hassib, H. A. Elsadek, N. M. J. López1, S. Franco2, S. Carmona1, C. Torres1, J. Lezana1, I. Diez1, M. Ruíz1, C. Benito2, C. Ahmed, M. A. Ibrahim, M. I. Mehrez; Sánchez1, J. López-Siles1; Orodental Genetics department, National Research Centre, Dokki, Egypt. 1M.G.C. Genetaq, Málaga, Spain, 2Fetal-Maternal Hospital, Málaga, Spain. : Introduction Premature loss of teeth is one of the features of some genetic Introduction. vWaleg usshow a consanguineous family case with diagnosis of disorder. The aim of this retrospective study is to determine the most fre- osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). The two siblings exhibited multiple bones quent genetic disorders associated with premature loss of teeth. fractures and foot, compatible with OI type I. No relatives had clinical Materials and Methods: The patients were selected from data record of the features of the disease. outpatients clinic of the Orodental Genetics department, National Research Materials and methods. The sibling with the most severe clinical findings Centre, Giza, Egypt over a period of three years. was selected for the sequencing of all genes (14) associated with OI so far. Results: The most frequent genetic disorders associated with premature Targeted genes were captured and amplified using TruSight One library and loss of teeth were Papillion Lefevre syndrome and Congenital insensitivity sequenced by NextSeq (Illumina). to pain with anhydrosis. One of the characteristic features of Papillon-Lefe- Results. Three variants of clinical interest were detected in heterozygous vre Syndrome is early-onset aggressive periodontitis that affects both the state in the proband: primary and permanent dentitions and leads to early loss of teeth. Congeni- tal insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis is a disorder characterized by lack ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPA oIN f s e| n W satW ionW to.E pS aH infG ul. O stiR mG uli and self mutilating behavior which resu1lt1s 1inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .082 : Clinical study of 459 polydactyly cases in China, 2010 to 2014 autoextraction and premature loss of teeth. Y. Xiang, J. Bian, Z. Wang, Y. Xu, Q. Fu; Conclusions Papillon-Lefevre Syndrome followed by Congenital insensiti- Shanghai Children‘s Medical Center, Shanghai, China. vity to pain with anhydrosis were the most frequent genetic disorders as- sociated with premature loss of teeth and we report that both diseases may share similar clinical pictures and they should be included in the differential Background: Polydactyly is one of the most common hereditary limb mal- diagnosis of premature loss of teeth. formations, involving additional digits on the hands and/or feet, which is a very attractive model to appreciate clinical and genetic heterogeneity. A 
P04 .080 high level of heterogeneity in polydactyly has been identified in different A novel homozygous nonsense mutation in the calpastatin (CAST) regions. However, such data of the medical literature for Asian populations gene associated with peeling skin phenotype in a Turkish child is relatively less. S. G. Temel1,2, H. Sarıcaoğlu3, B. Turkgenc4,5, U. Kıran3, B. Erguner6, B. Yuceturk6, M. Sagiroglu6, H. Demirci6, M. Yakicier7; Methods: This study was intended to shed light on the phenotypic manifes- 1University of Near East, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology & Embryology, tations of polydactyly in the recruited Chinese population and to character- Lefkosia, Cyprus, 2University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology ize the medical literature on this condition. A total of 459 well-characterized & Embryology, Bursa, Turkey, 3University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department polydactyly cases from Shanghai Children’s Medical Center were recruited. of Dermatology, Bursa, Turkey, 4Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department Their phenotypes, inheritance patterns, and clinical heterogeneity were ob- of Medical Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5University of Acibadem, Acibadem tained from clinical medical records. Genetic Diagnostic Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Advanced Genomics and Bioinformatics Results: It was found that 4.8% of cases were familial and 95.2% were spo- Research Group (İGBAM) TÜBİTAK BİLGEM UEKAE, Gebze/Kocaeli, Turkey, 7University of Acibadem, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Department of Molecular Biology and radic. The proportions of preaxial and postaxial polydactyly types were Genetics,, Istanbul, Turkey. 74.7% and 25.3%, respectively. In preaxial polydactyly, type I formed the overwhelming majority (95.9%). Among the postaxial polydactyly cases, type A was most prevalent at 69.8% and type B was witnessed in 30.2% of Peeling skin syndrome (PSS) is characterized by continuous shedding of cases. Familial and sporadic polydactyly patients mainly had unilateral pre- the stratum corneum of the epidermis with onset from birth or infancy and sentations. A total of 583 limbs with additional digits were recorded in the lasting throughout life. Skin peeling can be accompanied by erythema, ve- 459 subjects. Upper limb involvement was more common than lower, and sicular lesions, or other ectodermal features including fragile hair and nail right hand involvement was more common than left for preaxial polydac- abnormalities. PSS can be divided into acral and generalized PSS. We report tyly, and lower limb involvement was more common than upper in postaxial a 5.5 year old boy who initially presented with skin fragility. He was the first- polydactyly. born of IVF twins from a consanguineous marriage at 33+5 week gestational Conclusions: This cohort adds useful clinical/epidemiological information age with hypotonia at birth. Clinical findings included fragile skin, woolly to the polydactyly literature in the Chinese population and highlights its hair, sparse eyelashes and brows, palmoplantar punctate keratoderma, fol- marked clinical heterogeneity. licular hyperkeratosis, knuckle pads and cheilitis. Moreover mild cerebral 
P04 .083 atrophy and mild muscle involvement were observed on his MRI and NCV/ GAPO syndrome versus Cleidocranial dysplasia regarding EMG, respectively. His aunt also had similar clinical features but in milder management of pseudoanodontia form with in addition nail dystrophy. Exome sequencing revealed a homozy- N. F. Hassib1, M. I. Mostafa1, M. A. AbdelRahmen1, H. A. ElSadek1, M. I. Mehrez1, M. A. gous c.544G>T (p.Glu182*) nonsense mutation in the CAST gene. The segre- AbdelKader2; gation of this rare variant in the family was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. 1National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt, 2National Research centre, Giza, Egypt. This novel stop-gain 
E182 X variant produces a truncated protein lacking in- hibitory domains II-IV. CAST is an endogenous specific inhibitor of calpain, a calcium-dependent cysteine protease. Recently, autosomal recessive loss Introduction: Pseudoanodontia is considering one of the most challenging of function mutations in CAST were described in PLACK syndrome charac- problems encountering the dental field. GAPO syndrome and Cleidocrasni- terized by generalized peeling skin, leukonychia, acral punctate keratoses, al dysplasia anomaly are characterized by the presence of impacted teeth cheilitis, and knuckle pads. As far as we know our case is the fifth case of known as pseudoanodontia. The aim of the study is to present a case of PLACK syndrome without leukonychia but with some additional previously GAPO syndrome and another case of Cleidocranial dysostosis and their sug- unreported associated features including mild cerebral atrophy and muscle gestive dental managements done. Materials and Methods: The two cases involvement. were collected from the out patients clinic of the Oro-dental genetics depart- ment, National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt. Results: Despite, the pseudo- 
P04 .081 anodontia are one of the main feature in both diseases, the ankylosed teeth Epidermolysis bullosa simplex versus peeling skin syndrome present in the patient of GAPO syndrome required to be treated using remo- N. Nagy1,2,3, K. Farkas2, A. Sulák1, K. Tripolszki1, L. Kemény2,3, M. Széll1,2; 1University of Szeged, Dept of Medical Genetics, Szeged, Hungary, 2MTA-SZTE vable appliance, while, an orthodontic traction intervention to pull impacted Dermatological Research Group, Szeged, HUNGARY, Szeged, Hungary, 3Department of teeth and put them in their correct position in the dental arches was the Dermatology and Allergology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. suggested dental treatment with the patient having Cleidocranial dysplasia. Conclusions: Pseudoanodontia in both GAPO syndrome and Cleidocranial dysplasia required a separate and different dental management regarding Introduction: Localised epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS, OMIM 131800) teeth ankylosis, teeth position and occlusion evaluation. is a rare monogenic skin disease featured by development of blisters on 
P04 .084 the hands and feet. Acral peeling skin syndrome (APSS, OMIM 609796) is Rare modifier variants alter the severity of cardiovascular disease in a monogenic condition characterized by superficial painless peeling of the Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum skin predominantly on the dorsal aspects of hands and feet. In this study, we E. Y. De Vilder1,2, L. Martin3, G. Lefthériotis4, P. Coucke1, A. De Paepe1, F. Van investigated a Hungarian patient, whose clinical symptoms suggested the Nieuwerburgh5, O. M. Vanakker1; localised form of EBS. 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, Materials and methods: After informed consent was given, genetic investiga- 2PhD Fellow of the Research Foundation - Flanders, Gent, Belgium, 3Department of tions have been performed in order to identify the causative genetic abnor- Dermatology, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France, 4Department of Vascular maly responsible for the development of the skin symptoms. Physiology and Sports Medicine, Angers University, Angers, France, 5Department of Pharmaceutics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Gent, Results: Mutation screening with direct sequencing of the coding regions Belgium. and the flanking introns of the keratin 5 and keratin 14 genes detected only wild type sequences. Since the clinical symptoms of localised EBS and APSS may overlap with each other, mutation screening of the transglutaminase 5 ABC
C6  ENP
P1  Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), an autosomal recessive (TGM5) gene has been also performed. Two missense mutations have been ectopic mineralization disorder caused by and mutations, is detected in heterozygous form: one is a novel mutation (p.Trp143Arg) and characterized by skin, ocular and cardiovascular symptoms. Due to striking one is a recurrent mutation (p.Gly113Cys) of the TGM5 gene. phenotypic variability, modifier genes are intensively researched to improve Conlusions: Taken together, we report that patient with clinically suspected counseling. We evaluated the collective influence of multiple rare variants EBS carried TGM5 mutations and in fact suffered from APSS. Our study give on cardiovascular disease severity in PXE. further insight into the understanding of the underlying genetic background Material and Methods: Mixed effects of rare missense/nonsense variants of those patients whose have been diagnosed with localised EBS, but the were assessed by Whole Exome Sequencing in 12 PXE patients with an ex- disease-causing mutation could not be identified with the screening of the c1la1s2sical EBS genes. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONtAre,m SeP cAarIdNio |v aWscWulaWr p.EheSnHotGyp.eO (RbaGsed on clinical presentation and vascu- lar calcium scoring). Statistical analysis (SKAT-O and C-alpha testing) wasABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index I
L36 RN performed to identify new modifier genes significantly associated with the zygous carriers of mutations (25.5%)) and 3 carriers of a single mutation severe cardiovascular cohort and enrichment analysis was used to evaluate (5.9%) in . Carriers of two mutations had a significantly lower age pathway and gene ontology features for these modifiers (Reactome Pathway of onset than noIn
L3 -c6aRrNriers (p<0.01). Concomitant skin/ mucous manifesta- Database). tions as well as a continuous course of disease were less often observed in Results: Respectively 16 (SKAT-OOT)O aPn2d H57C A(CR-3alpha) genes were significantly carriers of twILo3 6RN mutations than in non-carriers, while there was no associaTteOdR t2oA thNeL sRePv1ere cohort. Top significant genAeHs cNoAuKld2 bBeR sWtrDat1ified in 3 difference in frequency of psoriatCicA aRrDth1r4itis. Two of the four ACH patients groups - calcium homeostasis ( , )F, aLsGsociation with vascular di- carried one -mutation. We identified 4 GPP patientAs Pth1aSt3 carried he- seasGeG (CX VKO, R
C1  ) and induction of apoptosis ( , ) - while terozygous missense variants in predicted/ previously shown to enriched pathways involved FGFR1 signaling ( ) and gamma-carboxylati- lead to a change in NF-κB levels. Allele-frequency of two mutations on ( , ), both associated with mineralization. was similar in pustular psoriasis (2.6%) and in normal individuals (2.3%). Conclusion: This study explored for the first time the cumulative effect of We did not observe any evidence for quantitative changes or point mutati- rare variants on the severity of cardiovascular disease in PXE, leading to a ons in genes coding for other members of the IL-36-pathway in any of the panel of candidate modifier genes. Hypothesis-free analysis revealed the 58 patients. I
L36 RN most significant genes and enriched pathways to be already involved in Our analyses point to further genetic overlap between pustular psoriatic vascular disease or mineralization, both hallmarks of PXE. This panel will manifestations and indicate a specific phenotype in -caused genera- aid in risk stratification and genetic counseling of PXE patients (FWO14/ lized pustular psoriasis. ASP/084). Supporting grants (UH): DFG-CR
C1181  A05, DFG 2163/1-1, laboratory ro- tation (IZKF) 
P04 .085 Functional investigation of a genetic locus associated with psoriasis 
P04 .087 H. F. Ray-Jones, K. Duffus, A. McGovern, S. Eyre, R. B. Warren; The molecular basis of a cluster of Pycnodysostosis in a region of the University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Brazilian Northeast and the analysis of the spreading of the CTSK mutations from a highly inbreeding region T. F. Araujo1, E. M. Ribeiro2, A. P. Arruda3, C. A. Moreno1, D. P. Cavalcanti1; Introduction: Psoriasis is a complex, chronic autoimmune condition with a 1State Uniersity of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil, 2Hospital Infantil Albert Sabin, genetic component. Recent genome-wide association studies have identi- Fortaleza, Brazil, 3Faculdade de Medicnia de Juazeiro do Norte, Campinas, Brazil. fied several psoriasis-associated loci in intergenic regions whose function is not well understood. Here, bioinformatic and molecular biology techniques were used to identify potentially disease-causing variants and their target Pycnodysostosis is a rare AR disease classified among the sclerosing skeletal genes in an intergenic risk locus at 9q31. dysplasia. Despite its estimated low prevalence (1 per million), in the last Materials and methods: The 9q31 locus was characterised using several years we found 27 affected individuals (22 families) in the Ceará State (CE) available datasets in order to (1) identify all SNPs in tight linkage disequi- at the Brazilian Northeast, giving a local prevalence of 3 per million (popula- librium with the lead SNP, rs10979182, and (2) search for regulatory fea- tion of CE: 8,904,459 inhabitants). This cluster prompted us to genotype the tures within the SNP set. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and chro- affected individuals, under the work hypothesis of a possible founder effect. mosome conformation capture (3C) were used to confirm the presence of This investigation also included 15 families from other Brazilian regions. regulatory SNPs and identify gene targets, respectively, in a keratinocyte cell We have studied 39 individuals (33 families), of which 18 were from Ceará. line (HaCaT). The sequencing of the CTSK by the Sanger method identified six different Results: 90 SNPs were highly correlated with rs10979182 (r2>0.8) and in- mutations, being five previously described, and a novel one - W29Mfs*10. tersected three regions clearly displaying marks of enhancers, H3K4me1 This mutation appears to be concentrated in the northwest of the Ceará. The and H3K27ac, in several cell types according to ENCODE. ChIP confirmed molecular analysis associated with the investigation of the origin of the pa- that three SNPs in these regions also bind to these histone marks in Ha- rental families allowed us to the following conclusions. 1 - The high frequen- CaT cells. Preliminary 3C experiments suggested the presence of long-range cy of Pycnodysostosis in the CE is a consequence of the high inbreeding, DNA interactions between intergenic regions and the candidate gene KLF4, rather than a founder effect. 2 - The analysis of the origin of the families but further tests are required to confirm if the psoriasis-associated SNPs are showed that the most of the found mutations in the other Brazilian regions involved in these interactions. came from Northeast by a process of intern migration of the population. 3 Conclusions: This work has identified SNPs in the 9q31 locus that have a po- - The haplotype study reinforced the hypothesis of founder effect related to tential regulatory function in psoriasis. Further 3C analyses, alongside other the novel mutation. 4 - The high frequency of homozygous mutations among functional techniques, must be conducted to identify which genes are likely the patients from CE (close to 80%) suggests that the real inbreeding is hig- to be affected by these SNPs. her than the referred consanguinity (33%). Funding source: PhD studentship from The Sir Jules Thorn Charitable Trust. 
P04 .088 
P04 .086 Analysis in Chilean population of the contribution to the rheumatoid Analyses of candidate genes and genotype-phenotype analyses in arthritis susceptibility of the marker SNPs previously described by pustular psoriasis GWAS in European and Asian populations V. Oji1, R. Mössner2, D. Wilsmann-Theis3, P. Schulz4, A. Körber5, J. Prinz6, R. Renner7, K. P. Castro-Santos, B. Assor-Cordones, G. Essmann-Antonio, M. Yáñez-Martínez, R. Díaz- Schäkel8, K. Peters9, S. Philip10, K. Reich11, L. Ebertsch12, A. B. Ekici12, S. Uebe12, C. Thiel12, Peña; M. Sticherling7, H. Traupe1, U. D. Hüffmeier12; Universidad Autónoma de Chile, Talca, Chile. 1Department of Dermatology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 2Department of Dermatology, Georg-August-University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 3Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Introduction: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune inflammatory Dermatology, Fachklinik Bad Bentheim, Bad Bentheim, Germany, 5Department of rheumatic disease that affects many tissues and organs, mainly synovial Dermatology, University of Essen, Essen, Germany, 6Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Ludwig-Maximilian University Munich, Munich, Germany, 7Department joints. Like many other autoimmune diseases, RA exhibits a multifactorial of Dermatology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 8Department of etiology in which genetic and environmental factors have been established. Dermatology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 9Department of The aim of this study was the analysis of previously described associations Dermatology and Allergology, Hospital Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany, 10Department in GWAS developed in Caucasian and Asian populations in a Chilean popu- of Dermatology, University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 11Department of Dermatology, lation. Dermatology Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 12Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Materials and Methods: We carried out a high-density genotyping study in Erlangen, Germany. candidate genes, evaluating their association with RA in Chilean populati- I
L36 RN CARD14 A
P1 S3
 on accomplishing the ACR 1987 criteria (313 cases/487 controls). In total, we have genotyped 128 SNPs using the OpenArray®™ TaqMan platform Mutations in , and have been implicated in different (Applied Biosystems Inc.). Additionally, we have identified the HLA-DRB1 pustular psoriatic manifestations, especially in generalized pustular psoria- alleles using the commercial typing kit for Luminex HLA-DR SSO (Tepnel sis (GPP). We recruited 51 GPP patients, 3 patients with acute generalized Lifecodes). Statistical analyses were made using the software PLINK and Ha- exanthematouIsL p3u6sRtNuloCsAisR D(A1G4EP) aAnPd1 4S 3patients with acrodermatitis con- ploview. For HLA-DRB1 alleles association with RA susceptibility testing we tinua Hallopeau (ACH), and screened them for qualitative and quantitati- used the statistical software IBM SPSS Statistics 21. ve changes in , and as well as for point mutations in Results: We have evaluated SNPs from previous GWAS (SNPs selection from further 4 genes coding for other members of the IL-36-pathway. the literature), including also haplotype-tag (ht)-SNPs located inside the Within the GPP cohort, we identifiedE 1 S3
H hGom 2o0zy1go6u |s /B cAomRpCoEuLnOd-hNeAte,r oS-PArIeNg io| nWs Wof sWom.EeS cHanGdi.dOatRe Ggenes (PTPN22, CTLA4, TNFAI P3
, CCR6,  S1
TA1T34ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and PADI4). In general, significance values of the associations described in Conclusions: A cause for the severe AN was not established in this case. GWAS are moderate, suggesting the existence of genetic particularities in Further assessment should investigate malignant causes for acanthosis nig- Chilean, and probably other Latin-American populations. ricans and a specific genotype correlated with this phenotype. Conclusions: Our results support the existence of some genetics factor for This research was done in the Center of Genomic Medicine from the Univer- RA risk shared with Caucasian and Asian population but also the presence of sity of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes, POSCCE Project ID1854, cod some differential genetic characteristics of the RA Chilean population. SMI S48749
.  P04
.091  P04
.089 WES approach for an early diagnosis of Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen A 34-year-old ‎girl with PEX7-related rhizomelic chondrodysplasia syndrome in a pair of siblings with skeletal defects, severe intellectual punctata disability and cerebral abnormalities L. Gigante1,2, E. Pisaneschi3, F. C. Sangiuolo4, A. Novelli3, T. Levade5, F. Brancati6,7; M. Dentici, M. Niceta, F. Pantaleoni, M. Tartaglia, B. Dallapiccola; 1Division of Cardiology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Parma, Parma, Italy, Bambino Gesú Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy., Rome, Italy. 2Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Milano, Italy, 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 4Genetics Section, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome ‘‘Tor Vergata’’, Rome, Italy, 5Laboratoire de Biochimie Métabolique, Institut Fédératif de Biologie, and INSERM Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen syndrome (DMCs) is a rare skeletal dysplasia UMR1037, CRCT, Toulouse, France, 6DSMOB Department Gabriele D‘Annunzio University belonging to the group of the Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (DSME), of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy, 7Medical Genetics Unit Policlinico Tor Vergata University characterized by progressive short-trunk dwarfism, short barrel chest, mi- Hospital of Rome, Rome, Italy. crocephaly and mild/moderate intellectual disability (ID). Skeletal radiogra- phic features include flattening of vertebral bodies, barrel chest and atlan- toaxial instability. Mutations have been identified in the DYM gene with an Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata type 1 (RCD P1
) is a peroxisome bio- autosomal recessive inheritance. genesis disorder caused by mutations in PEX7 gene encoding a peroxisomal We report two male dizygotic twins first evaluated at 4 years of age with matrix proteins receptor with type 2 peroxisome targeting signal (PT S2
). severe short stature (-4.6SD and -6.9SD, respectively), microcephaly (-5SD), Punctate calcifications in epiphyseal cartilages and coronal clefts of verte- severe ID. In both siblings radiologic findings enclosed generalized pla- bral bodies, cataract, intellectual disability and growth retardation charac- tyspondyly with minimal notches and anterior pointing of the vertebral bo- terized RCD P1
. Most patients die before 10 years for respiratory distress or dies, rhizomelic limb shortening. Both siblings have cerebral abnormalities cardiac malformations. Less than 20% survive 12 years, and single patients (hypoplastic corpus callosum, lateral ventricular dilatation and one sibling beyond 20 years are reported. presents cerebellar vermian hypoplasia with secondary dilatation of the IV We describe a 34 year-old girl, second child of healthy parents from a small ventricle). Differential diagnosis was discussed among DSME group arguing Italian village. Pre and post-natal growth restriction, congenital bilateral ca- that cerebral malformations are not typically reported in the DSME. Moreo- taract, seizures, absence of pituitary gland with GH deficiency and mitral in- ver, the typical barrel chest of DMCs was not clinically evident at our first sufficiency with atrial regurgitation were recorded. At clinical examination evaluation. she presented with severe intellectual disability, shortening of long bones We performed WES (Illumina platform HiSeq 2000), on the siblings samp- with prominent proximal involvement, spasticity, keratosis pilaris and sca- les using an in-house implemented pipeline. The analysis identified in both ling skin. RCD P1
 was suspected but skeletal X-rays of childhood were not patients a homozygous known mutation in the DYM gene (c.1877delA; available. p.Lys626AsnfsX720), for which predictive studies suggested loss of function Peroxisomal function evaluation revealed reduced red blood cell plasmalo- of the relative protein. The variant was confirmed with Sanger sequencing. gens, increased plasmatic phytanic acid concentration, and normal levels of This study prompted to an early diagnosis of DMCs allowing an earlier very long-chain fatty acids. PEX7 molecular testing demonstrated a homo- access to a long term care, crucial for the progressive orthopaedic compli- zygous c.653C>T (p.Ala218Val) mutation, a recurrent mutation previously cations that, at the time of the diagnosis, were not fully conclamate in our associated to milder RCD P1
. patients. We report clinical, biochemical and molecular features of one of the oldest ever-reported patients with RCD P1
, the first with congenital pituitary hypo-  P04
.092 plasia and GH deficiency. Interestingly, mutations in PEX7 can also cause an From phenotype to genotype and back again: effective whole exome atypical phenotype with longer survival and milder neurologic involvement, sequencing in patients with skeletal dysplasia normal or near-normal growth, and absence of rhizomelia. More studies are P. Louro1,2, A. Beleza1, S. Lillis3, M. Jansson3, J. Ahn4, K. Ryan3, A. Calder5, C. Hall5, A. Offiah6, M. Simpson7, S. Yau3, S. Mohammed1, M. Irving1,7; needed to clarify the mechanisms underlying clinical variability. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy‘s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London,  P04
.090 United Kingdom, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, What is the etiology of acanthosis nigricans in SADDAN syndrome? Coimbra, Portugal, 3Genetics Laboratories, Viapath, London, United Kingdom, 4Genetics Laboratories, Guy‘s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, I. T. Perva1, M. Puiu2, R. A. Popp3, A. Chirita-Emandi2; 5Radiology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation 1University of Medicine &Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Trust, London, United Kingdom, 6Academic Unit of Child Health, Sheffield Children’s Medicine &Pharmacy Victor Babes, Genetics Department, Center of Genomic Medicine, NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 7Division of Genetics and Molecular Timisoara, Romania, 3Medical Genetics, Molecular Science Department, Iuliu Haţieganu Medicine, King‘s College London School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom. University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. Background: Skeletal dysplasia (SD) is a genetically heterogeneous group Background: SADDAN syndrome is a rare severe form of achondroplasia as- of rare diseases. The clinical diagnosis of a specific SD condition may be sociating developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans. accomplished by a clinician with expertise with the aid a skeletal survey. Aim: To present a case report and perform a literature search to understand However, it is frequently challenging to make a diagnosis without accompa- the aetiology of the severe AN, within the syndrome. Method: The child had nying molecular testing. Thus, our purpose is to highlight the clinical utility history and clinical assessment, laboratorz work-up (for the aetiology of of whole exome sequencing (WES) as a diagnostic tool for SD. AN), genetic testing and imaging to evaluate foramen magnum and cranium. Methods: Eighteen suspected SD patients were selected, including cases of Results: A 7 year old boy, known with achondroplasia phenotype from birth, osteogenesis imperfecta type 1, osteopetrosis, spondylocostal dysostosis presents with specific dysmorphic features of achondroplasia, severe obe- and spondyloenchondromatosis. WES was performed using Agilent Sure- sity (BMI=33.9 kg/m2,>3SD WHO reference), scoliosis in the thoracic and SelectXT Human All Exon V5 followed by sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq lumbar spine, cervical, axillary and arm folds achantosis niachantosis and 2500. Raw sequence data was aligned using Novoalign, and variants called linguistic delay, with difficulties adjusting to normal school curriculum. He with Samtools. Qiagen Ingenuity Variant Analysis was used to aid assess- had normal values of glucose, insulin (HOMA index 0.93), Hb1C and IGF-I. ment of variant pathogenicity after applying a virtual panel of 220 SD genes Hypothalamic-pituitary axis assessment was normal. Other lab work were in combination with multidisciplinary clinical interpretation. unremarkable. CT of the neck and cranium revealed slightly reduced fora- Results: Pathogenic variants were detected in six cases, while in four cases men magnum and mild hydrocephalus (Evans index=32). The PCR-RFLP variants were identified that require additional work to clarify their patho- test showed a heterozygotic G1138A mutation in FGFR3 gene. The clinical, genicity. Of the remaining eight cases with no detected pathogenic variants paraclinical workup, genotype and imagistics, suggested the diagnoses of in the selected SD genes, clinical reassessment suggests that three are un- SADDAN syndrome and severe obesity. Diet and lifestyle changes were re- likely to have SD. commended. The genetic cause for this severe form of achondroplasia in not Conclusions: WES analysis provided a definitive diagnosis in at least one k1n1o4wn. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG third (6/18) of our selected SD patients. These results demonstrate WESABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P04
.095 TGFB1 variant and MLH1 mutation in a patient with aortic aneurysm analysis using targeted gene analysis is an effective diagnostic tool for SD. and colon cancer However, it also emphasizes the importance of a thorough clinical evaluati- S. Azzarello-Burri, P. Joset, A. Baumer, T. Herget, A. Rauch; on and close analytical liaison with clinical scientists to provide an optimal Institute of Medical Genetics, 8952 Schlieren, Switzerland. and efficient service.  P04
.093 Aortic aneurysms and dissections are a typical complication of connecti- Sweet’s syndrome in a patient with compound heterozygous ve tissue disorders such as Marfan and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, which are mutations in the Mediterranean fever gene (MEFV) caused by increased TGFB signaling. Since the latter was also found in cancer, M. Michelson Kerman, Chana Vinkler, Dorit Lev; Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel. the question of increased cancer risk in patients carrying germline mutati- ons of TGFB signaling members raised when we recently observed a patient who next to an aortic aneurysm and skeletal signs of Marfan syndrome had Sweet’s syndrome (SS) is a rare disorder that often occurs in association colon cancer at the age of 60 years. We therefore performed exome sequen- with other systemic diseases. cing with selective analysis of known connective tissue genes and found a The disorder is characterized by development of nonpruritic, painful ery- potentially disease causing TGFB1 variant c.553C>T/= (p.Arg185Trp/=). thematous plaques with pseudovesicles, pustules and rare bullae. SS con- Mutations in the TGFB1 gene are known to cause Camurati-Engelmann sists of a triad of erythematous plaques infiltrated by neutrophils in asso- disease, which is characterized by hyperostosis of the long bones and the ciation with fever and leukocytosis. The pathological features of SS involve skull, proximal muscle weakness, severe limb pain, a wide-based waddling the dermis. gait, and joint contractures. Since there is one patient with Camurati-En- The treatment of choice are systemic corticosteroids. gelmann disease and aortic dissection in his teenage years described in the We present an unusual course of SS in a man who carries compound hetero- literature, we assumed that the connective tissue phenotype of our patient gous mutations in the MEFV gene. was caused by this variant. We considered that his colon cancer might also A 38 year old man from Sephardic Jewish ancestry, had suddenly developed be related to the TGFB1 variant, but for safety reason extended the exome fever, malaise, artralgia and painful erythematous plaques with pustules analysis to known colon cancer genes, which indeed showed in addition a and bullae on the the upper extremities. Diagnostic evaluation included leu- known MLH1 splice site mutation c.2103+1G>T/=. Our observation there- cocytosis, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation and C-reactive protein rate. fore indicates that despite the link between TGFB signaling and cancer deve- The symptoms exacerbated despite treatment with systemic corticosterids. lopment, increased cancer risk in patients with germline mutations has not Mutational analysis of the MEFV gene revealed compound heterozygous been described so far and may actually be attributable to an independent M694V and V726A mutations. Clinical improvement appeared after admi- second disorder. nistration of colchicine .  P04
.097 Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disease cha- TRP S1
 gene defects in patients with trichorhinophalangeal syndrome racterized by recurrent attacks of fever with serosal inflammation. The FMF R. Solc1, K. Hirschfeldova2, M. Klugerova1, J. Vcelak3, A. Baxova2, M. Kuklik3,4, J. Vseticka5; gene (MEFV) encodes the protein pyrin that plays an important role in mo- 1Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Science, Department of Anthropology and dulating the innate immune response. Human Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Charles University in Prague, 1st Faculty of MEFV mutations have been identified primarily in patients from Mediterra- Medicine, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Endocrinology, Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic, nean populations 4Genetic clinic Olsanska, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Genetika Ostrava s.r.o., Ostrava, Czech Sweet’s syndrome has been described in a patient with classical FMF as a Republic. possible new cutaneous feature and has never been described as a presen- ting sign of FMF. We suggest that SS skin lesions might be an only cutaneous presentation Introduction: The aim of the study was to determine genetic defects in the of FMF. group of patients with a trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS) pheno-  P04
.094 type derived from the Czech population. Identification of intragenic deletions of TCF12 by whole genome Materials and Methods: Each of 9 probands (8 with TRPS I aTnRdP  S11
 with TRPS sequencing IEIX) Tw1as analyzed by use of the 228-B1 MLPA kit (MRC Holland), which covers J. A. C. Goos1, A. L. Fenwick2, S. M. A. Swagemakers1, S. R. F. Twigg2, A. J. M. Hoogeboom1, the relevanTt R8Pq S214
 chromosomal region in order to detect gene and M. F. van Dooren1, F. J. Magielsen1, I. M. J. Mathijssen1, A. O. M. Wilkie2,3, P. J. van der Spek1, gene rearrangements. Additionally, mutational analysis of the coding A. M. W. van den Ouweland1; part of the gene was coTnRdPuSc1ted. EXT1 1Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2MRC Weatherall Results: In the proband with TRPS II, a large deletion was detected (about Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, 10 MbT)R, wPSh1ich includes genes and . In 6 of 8 probands with TRPS United Kingdom, 3Craniofacial Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. I we found some mutations which consider to be the causal onneosn. Iste wnsaes one large intragene deletion (exons 2 – 5); two smmailsls setnrsuectural mutations (a deletion in the exon 5, an indel mutation in the exon 4); two nons seunbse- Introduction: Coronal synostosis can be caused by heterozygous loss-of- stitutions (in the exon 4 and in the exon 5); and one substitution (in function mutations of TCF12. Until now, however, large intragenic deletions the exon 6). Both the two small structurTaRl Pab S1
errations and the two in this gene have not been described as a cause of TCF12-related craniosyn- substitutions have not been described yet. Moreover we discovered several ostosis. Here, we describe three large intragenic deletions in TCF12 identi- probably polymorphic substitutions in gene 3’UTR sequences. fied by whole genome sequencing (WGS). The study was supported by the Charles University in Prague, project Materials and methods: Within the framework of a broader study on cranio- GAUK202615. synostosis, WGS of nineteen index-cases with coronal synostosis and their  P04
.098 family members (forty-six samples in total) was carried out by Complete Ge- Sclerotic bone lesions in Tuberous Sclerosis Complex nomics, a BGI Company (Mountain View, CA, USA). The WGS data were ana- S. Boronat1,2, I. Barber1, E. A. Thiele2; lyzed using an autosomal dominant disease model. Deletion-specific PCR 1Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, and dideoxy-sequence analysis were performed to confirm the WGS results. United States. Results: Using WGS, three large intragenic deletions of 84.949, 8.580 and 5.363 base pairs were identified in TCF12, deleting exons 7-18, 19, and 20, respectively. The first two deletions overlap the exons in which most patho- Background: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is due to mutations in TS C1
 genic point mutations have been described. All index patients had coronal or TS C2
 genes resulting in hyperactivation of the mTOR pathway. Many tis- suture synostosis and all deletions were inherited. However, not all parents sues can be affected, including brain, skin, eye, heart, bone, kidney or lung. with the deletions showed clinical signs. Similar non-penetrance has pre- Sclerotic bone lesions have been reported in TSC but there is scarce infor- viously been described in TCF12-related craniosynostosis caused by point mation about them in the literature. mutations. Methods: Abdominal MR scans of 70 children with TSC who had TS C1
/TS C2
 Conclusions: Three large intragenic deletions were identified in TCF12 using mutational studies were reviewed for sclerotic bone lesions, and a longitu- WGS, indicating the importance of screening for larger rearrangements in dinal study was performed in 50 patients who had two or more MR scans. patients suspected for TCF12-related craniosynostosis. Chest CT scans of 92 adult TSC patients (70 with mutational TSC studies) were reviewed for sclerotic bone lesions. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPARINes u| lWts: W173W s.cEleSroHtiGc b.OonRe Glesions were detected in 51 of 70 children (7 13 1% 5)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P04
.101 Role of missense variants in Wnt pathway genes in BMD and affected mainly the vertebrae pedicles. The youngest patient with these determination lesions was 18 months old. New lesions appeared in 50% of the patients N. Martínez-Gil1, N. Roca-Ayats1, R. Urreizti1, H. Franco-Valls1, N. Garcia-Giralt2, L. during a follow-up period of 1 to 6 years and growth of previous lesions Mellibovsky2, X. Nogués2, A. Díez-Pérez2, D. Grinberg1, S. Balcells1; was documented in 37% patients. Patients with sclerotic bone lesions were 1Universitat de Barcelona, IBUB, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 2URFOA, RETICEF, IMIM, more frequently females (75% vs 37%) and they had more renal involve- Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain. ment than patients without bone lesions (84% vs 47%). Sclerotic bone le- sions were found in chest CT studies of 82 adult patients (89%). Patients without bone lesions had no mutation identified in 86%. Osteoporosis is a common disease characterized by decreased bone mine- Conclusion: Sclerotic bone lesions are very frequently found in MR and CT ral densietty a(lB.MD) and anl oicnicreased fracture risk. It is determined by envi- studies of TSC patients. They are usually present within the first years of life, ronmental and additive genetic susceptibility factors. In a meta-analysis by and new lesions appear with age. Estrada (2012), 56 were found associated with BMD, 14 of which were also associated with osteoporotic fracture. Notably, the list was enri-  P04
.099 ched for genes of the Wnt pathway. SOST WNT16 A case of Weaver Syndrome caused by a novel frameshift EZH2 DToK Kb1etter understand the role of Wnt pathway genes in determining osteo- mutation porosis, we aimed at exploring the allelic architecture of , and H. Simsek, B. B. Geckinli, K. Delil, M. A. Soylemez, A. Turkyilmaz, E. Arslan Ates, M. Avsar, with an emphasis in their coding regions. We resequenced all the P. Ata, A. I. Guney, A. Arman; exons and intronic flanking regions in two extreme BMD groups from the Medical Genetics Department, Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey. BARCOS cohort of Spanish postmenopausal women. Selected varianWtsN wTe1r6e tShOeSnT genotDypKeKd1 i,n the full cohort and tested for association to BMD. Initially, 17, 3 and 13 single nucleotide variants were identified in , Weaver Syndrome is a rare overgrowth syndrome characterized by prena- and respectively. Seven SNPs showing biased frequencies in tal/postnatal overgrowth, accelerated osseous maturation, characteristic the two extreme groups and 6W rNarTe1 6variants located in putative regulato- craniofacial appearance and developmental delay. Weaver syndrome is rWyN eTle1m6ents were genotyped. Significant results were obtained for an in- an autosomal dominant disorder caused by heterozygous mutation in the tSrOoSnTic SNP (rs142005327) in and for all the missense variants in EZH2 gene which encodes histone methyltrasferase. (rs2908004, p.G72R/p.G82R; rs2707466, p.T253I/p.T2SO63STI) and Our patient is a 4 year-old girl who was referred to our clinic due to speech (rs17882143, p.V10I). The associated SNPs are in linkage disequilibri- and neurodevelopmental delay. She was born at 32nd weeks of gestation by um with the respective GWAs hits. A rare varianSt O(rSsT57075W47N9T21,6 ) was cesarian section because of mothers’ preeclampsia. Her birth weight was found in 3 women whose BMD was below the mean of the BARCOS cohort. 3000 gr(>97P), height was 52 cm (>97P), occipitofrontal circumference was Our results, suggest that missense variants in and are most 34 cm(>97P). On physical examination, she weighed 24 kg (>97P), lengthed likely to influence BMD. 117 cm (>97P), and occipitofrontal circumference was 54,5 cm (>97P). Cli- Funding: 2014SGR 932 (Catalan Government), SAF2014-56562-R (Spanish nical examination showed macrocephaly, a broad forehead, round face, long Government). philtrum, hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, large ears, large hands and feet, tibial bowing, enlarged wrists and knees, hallux valgus, umbilical her-  P04
.102 nia and pigmented nevi on trunk. Her radiographic findings were advanced Novel mutations in the keratin-74 (KRT74) gene underlie autosomal carpal bone maturation of 6 years and enlarged metaphysis of long bones. dominant woolly hair/hypotrichosis in Pakistani families DNA sequence analysis of EZH2 gene showed a de novo novel heterozygous N. W. Naveed1, W. Ahmad2; p.D730* (c.2187_2188insT) frameshift mutation in exon 19. This truncating 1 Institut für Humangenetik, Uniklinik, Ulm, Germany, 2Department of Biochemistry, QAU, mutation is identified at the SET domain. Identification of EZH2 gene mu- Islamabad, Pakistan. tations is important to clarify genotype-phenotype correlations in Weaver syndrome. Autosomal dominant woolly hair (ADWH) is an inherited condition of tight-  P04
.100 ly curled and twisted scalp hair. Recently, a mutation in human keratin-74 Whole Exome Sequencing reveals a mutation in an osteogenesis (KRT74) gene has been shown to cause this form of hereditary hair disor- imperfecta patient der. In the present study, we have described two families (A and B) having M. A. Ergun1, G. Bilgili2, U. Hamurcu3, A. Ertan4; multiple individuals affected with autosomal dominant form of hair loss 1Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, disorders. In family A, 10 individuals showed ADWH phenotype while in Turkey, 2Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Physiology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hamurcu Clinic, Ankara, Turkey, 4Hacettepe University, Faculty of Dentistry the family B, 14 individuals showed hypotrichosis of the scalp. Genotyping Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, Ankara, Turkey. using polymorphic microsatellite markers showed linkage of both the fami- lies to type II keratin gene cluster on the chromosome 12q12-14.1. Mutation analysis of the KRT74 gene identified two novel mutations in the affected Introduction: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is an autosomal dominant dis- individuals of the families. The sequence analysis revealed a splice acceptor order characterized mainly by bone fragility and blue sclerae. OI is caused site mutation (c.IV S8
-1G>A) in family A and a missense variant (c.1444G>A, by mutations in type I collagen genes; CO L1
A1 and CO L1
A2. Dentinogenesis p.Asp482Asn) in family B. Mutations identified in the present study extend imperfecta is a common disorder for osteogenesis imperfecta patients. More the body of evidence implicating the KRT74 gene in the pathogenesis of au- than half of the OI patients have also dentinogenesis imperfecta. Whole Exo- tosomal dominant hair loss disorders. me sequencing (WES), involves exome capture, which limits sequencing to The work presented here was funded by Higher Education Commission the protein coding regions of the genome, composed of about 20,000 genes, (HEC), Islamabad, Pakistan. 180,000 exons, and constituting approximately 1% of the whole genome. A major indication for use is molecular diagnosis of patients with suspected  P05
 Cardiovascular disorders genetic disorders or of patients with known genetic disorders with substan- tial genetic heterogeneity involving substantial gene complexity. Materials and Methods: In this study, we performed WES for a patient pre-  P05
.01 diagnosed as Ostegenesis Imperfecta. He had also dentinogenesis imperfec- Genetic variants in familial abdominal aortic aneurysms identified by ta. whole genome and exome sequencing. Results: The WES results confirmed with Sanger sequencing revealed as a A. IJpma, D. Heijsman, M. Oomen, H. Brüggenwirth, I. van den Boogert, D. Majoor- misense mutation at codon 560 of CO L1
A1 gene: c.1678 G>A (G560S). The Krakauer; mutation was on exon 25 and according to the dbSNP database this mutati- Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. on corresponded to rs67507747. Conclusions: It is very important to perform WES after an algorithm. This algorithm has to include, a suspect of a mendelian disorder, multiple genetic Introduction: Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a frequent disorder with conditions in the differential diagnosis, and even if it is available the con- a prevalence of approximately 5% in the elderly population. In 20% of the ventional diagnosis is prohibitively expensive. Finally, Sanger sequencing in patients AAA is familial. No genetic causes for AAA have been identified so order to confirm the results is also advised. far. The goal of this study is to identify genes that play a role in the formation of abdominal aneurysms. Methods: The study includes approximately 950 AAA patients. So far we sequenced the DNA of 341 patients with a family 116 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONhAis, tSorPyA oIfN ab |d WomWinWal .aEoSrtHic Gan.OeuRryGsm. Whole genome sequencing (WGS)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P was performed in 3 families (15 individuals) and whole exome sequencing ( =0.71, 95% CI -0.30-0.20). The first-stage F-statistics was 12.87, indica- (WES) was performed in 50 families (107 individuals) and 219 single AAA ting sufficient strength to ensure the validity. patients with familial disease. Prioritization of resulting variants was per- Conclusions: Mendelian randomization analysis indicates that hs-CRP level formed according to the following gene sets: 1. Genes in diagnostics panel as may not be causally associated with AAA in this population. This suggests applied in the Erasmus MC in thoracic or syndromic aneurysms (n=25) 2. A that the results of conventional analysis may affected by confounding or re- broad selection of genes involved in vascular function or disease (n=4209) verse causality. 3. All genes in the genome Results: We present the detailed workflow of the  P05
.05 analysis of the genomics data, including the results so far. In 105 out of 267 Is there any association between insulin resistance and apelin gene families a variant in one of the set 1 genes was found. Further analysis of the expression in non-diabetic subjects? set 2 and 3 genes so far led to the identification of several candidate genes M. Zarkesh1, E. Yuzbashian2, G. Asghari2, M. Hedayati1, P. Mirmiran2, A. Khalaj3; that show variants in more than one AAA family and that have not been lin- 1Cellular and Molecular Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for endocrine ked to AAA before. sciences Shaheed Beheshti University of Me, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Nutrition Supported by Stichting Lijf en Leven. and Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid  P05
.02 Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Associations between selenoprotein gene variants and selenoprotein 33Obesity Treatment Center, Department of Surgery, Shahed University, Tehran, Iran, levels and aortic diseases: abdominal aortic aneurysm and aortoiliac Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. occlusive disease Background and aim: E. Strauss1,2, J. Tomczak1, L. Wawrzynska1, R. Staniszewski1, G. Oszkinis1; 1Department of General and Vascular Surgery, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Adipose tissue-derived hormones like apelin play a Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, functional role in the glucose tolerance through its effects on insulin secre- Poland. tion and insulin sensitivity which is also is a risk factor for type 2 diabetes. In the current study, we aimed to investigate the association of apelin mRNA eMxaptreersisaiol n& imn oemtheondtsa:l and subcutaneous adipose tissues with fasting gluco- Introduction. In this study the role of common genetic variants in sele- se, insulin, and insulin resistance among non-diabetic subjects. noprotein genes (SEP P1
 rs3877899, rs7579, SELS rs34713741 TXNRD1 Under a cross-sectional analytical design a total of 62 rs35009941, TXNRD2 rs9605031, GPX4 rs713041) and SOD2 gene (rs4880) non-diabetic subjects, aged ≥18 years, were eligible for the study. Omental in the development of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and aortoiliac oc- and subcutaneous adipose tissues were obtained during open abdominal clusive disease (AOID), as well as their associations with cardiac diseases surgery. The mRNA expression of apelin in omental and subcutaneous adi- and function in patients were evaluated. pose tissues were assessed by Real-Time PCR. Serum levels of apelin, trigly- Materials and methods. A series of 516 AAA patients, 352 AIOD patients, cerides, total cholesterol, glucose, and insulin were measured and homeo- and 510 controls were analyzed. Patients were characterized in terms of co- static model assessment of insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR), β-cell func- ronary and non-coronary atherosclerosis and its complications. Genotyping tRioensu (lHtsO: MA-B), and the quantitative insulin sensitivity check index (QUIK- was performed using the TaqMan-based assays. Selenoprotein P (SeP) and thioredoxin (Trx) levels in plasma were assessed by ELISA. KI) were calculated. P Results. Higher plasma SeP levels were associated with more favorable car- P Apelin mRNA expression in omental adipose tissuPe was positively correlated with insulin levels (r=0.281, =0.034) and HOMA-IR (r=0.270, dio-metabolic profile in our patients (BMI values, HDLC, TG levels). In AIOD, =0.043) and negatively correlated with QUICKI P(r=-0.270, =0.043). In ad- as compared to AAA, the increased frequency of the GPX4 rs713041TT ho- dCiotniocnlu, aspioenlin: gene expression in subcutaneous adipose tissue was negative- mozygotes was observed: OR=1.66, P=.023 (OR=1.62, P=.046 for AAA wit- ly correlated with triglycerides levels (r=-0.404, =0.041). hout concomitant peripheral atherosclerosis). In patients with systolic heart In conclusion, our data indicate that up-regulation of apelin in failure, lower frequency of carriers of the SEP P1
 rs3877899G-rs7579G ha- oStmaetenmtael natd iopfo sfien atinsscuiael issu apspsoocrita:t ed with glucose hemostasis and insulin plotype, and increased levels of studied selenoproteins were found. Higher resistance. plasma selenoprotein levels were also associated with presence of small This study was supported by Grant No. AAA. 757 from the Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti Conclusions. This study identified variant alleles of the selenoprotein genes University of Medical Sciences of Iran. as potential genetic markers that indicate predisposition to occlusive and aneurysmal types of arterial disease and to systolic heart failure. Expression  P05
.06 of selenoproteins seems to be induced during AAA and heart failure deve- Clinical application of a multigene panel associated with many lopment, to protect against oxidative stress. Supported by the NSC in Poland inherited cardiac conditions: challenges of defining risks, clinical under NN403250440 grant, and PUMS under 502-01-02214335-05962 and outcomes and off-target findings 502-14-02214335-10268 grants. D. du Sart1, B. Chong1, S. Pantaleo1, I. Macciocca1, P. James2; 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne,  P05
.03 Australia, 2Clinical Genetics, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. Association between C reactive protein and abdominal aortic aneurysm: Mendelian randomization analysis J. Juan1, X. Qin1, Y. Wei2, K. Sun1, S. Zuo3, W. Guo3, Y. Hu1; Introduction: Genetic testing for inherited cardiac conditions impacts on 1Peking University, Beijing, China, 2Beijing Center for Diseases Prevention and Control, Beijing, China, 3Chinese PLA general hospital & medical school PLA, Beijing, China. clinical management options for families. These conditions have complex genetic pathology, often heterogeneous disorders with overlapping clinical symptoms that are not always penetrant. Classifying variants as pathogenic, as influencing clinical severity or just normal variation is complex. Introduction: Several studies have suggested C-reaction protein (CRP) is Materials and Methods: Multigene panels are cost- and time-effective analy- associated with the development of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), but ses to identify familial pathogenic variants. Patients with inherited arrhyth- it is unclear whether this association is causal. To avoid confounding or re- mia, cardiomyopathy, aortopathy and sudden death conditions are screened verse causality, we used Mendelian randomization analysis to study the cau- with a 101-cardiac-gene NGS panel. Gene variants are analysed according to sal role of CRP and diameter of abdominal aorta. patient phenotype, but the analysis flags variants classified as pathogenic Materials and Methods: 465 Chinese participants were included in the in all genes. analysis. CRP gene rs1205 was used as an instrumental variable of plasma Results: More than 1000 probands were tested, followed by segregation high-sensitivity CRP level. We assessed the association of hs-CRP levels with analyses for clinically actionable variants (see table). Pathogenic variants diameter of abdominal aorta and other risk factors or confounders in the in “off-target” genes (1.6%) lead to many challenges for both laboratory and conventional models, and also assessed the associations of the gene with the clinical teams. Biological interpretation of variants suggest a strong asso- diameter of abdominal aorta, hs-CRP and other factors. We used two-stage ciation with clinical disease, but lack of information on clinical outcomes least squares for the Mendelian randomization analyses to assess the relati- make pathogenic classification uncertain. Counselling challenges included onship between the expected hs-CRP level estimated from the gene and the conveying unexpected information about different cardiac genes. Clinical dPiameter of AAA. assessment revealed no evidence of clinical association with the “off-target” Results: In tPhe conventional analysis, hs-CRP was associated with AAA genotype. ( <0.001, 95% CI 0.03-0.12). rs1205 in CRP gene was associated with hs- Conclusion: Pathogenic variants in “off-target” genes identify significant CRP levels ( <0.0001), but unrelated to other factors, including age, gen- gaps in our gene-specific phenotype knowledge base. Documentation of the- der, smoking, drinking and history of hypertension. The results of Mende- lian randomization analysis showed aE nSuHll Gas s2o0ci1at6io n| BofA hRs-CCREPL wOiNthA A,A SA PAsIeN c a| sWes WwiWll i.mEpSrHovGe .kOnoRwGledge about the spectrum of disease assoc 1ia 1te 7d with genes and will impact on future management in families with asso-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ciated phenotypes. Does this justify the complexities raised by “off-target” KCN E3
, CACNA1B, KCNQ1, KCNK3). gene variants? Conclusions. The presence of rare likely pathogenic variants in non-desmo- somal genes in AC probands may exert independent or synergistic effect Sudden on pathogenesis of AC. Deeper investigation is necessary to determine the Arrhyth- Cardiomy- Aortopa- Death / role of these variants on the onset of the clinical phenotype. Cascade genetic mia opathy thy Extended screening remains imperative to clarify their role in AC families and to iden- Panel tify relatives at risk. Pathogenic / Likely 45% 51% 26 % 33% pathogenic variant  P05
.09 Variant of unknown Mutation screening of a panel of genes involved in inherited 24% 38% 34% 57% significance cardiomyopathies by using targeted next generation sequencing No clinically action- M. Calore1,2, I. E. A. Li Mura3, A. Telatin3, I. Zara3, A. Lorenzon2, M. De Bortoli2, G. Poloni2, able variant 31% 11% 40% 10% B. Bauce4, B. Simionati3, A. Rampazzo2; 10 pro- 1Department of Cardiology, School for Cardiovascular Diseases, Faculty of Health, bands: 2 pro- 4 pro- Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department “Off-target” gene 7 stop/ bands bands of Biology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 3BMR Genomics, Padua, Italy, 4Department pathogenic variants in frame shift -pathogen- 3 stop of Cardiac, Thoracic, and Vascular Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy. 1000 probands 1 splice 3 splice ic in LQT [-1] [+1] Inherited cardiomyopathies are caused by mutations in different genes,  P05
.07 which makes genetic screening particularly challenging. Targeted-next-ge- Desmosomal genetic variants in young competitive athletes: neration sequencing (NGS) enables mutation detection in large cohorts of pathogenic mutations or innocent bystanders? patients affected with genetically heterogeneous diseases. M. Cason1, M. Schiavon2, A. Zorzi1, R. Celeghin1, E. Lazzarini1, E. Carturan1, B. Bauce1, I. Purpose: developing and validating a targeted-NGS system for the genetic Rigato1, C. Basso1, D. Corrado1, G. Thiene1, K. Pilichou1; diagnosis of inherited cardiomyopathies. 1Dept. of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of Padua, Padova, Italy, 2Sports Medicine & Phys. Activities Unit, ULSS 16, Padova, Italy. Methods: Mutation screening was performed in 19 probands affected with arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM), 2 with hypertrophic cardiomyo- pathy, and 1 with dilated cardiomyopathy, using a NGS gene-panel compri- sing the exons and adjacent boundaries of 56 genes involved in the main Introduction. Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy (AC) is an inherited myocar- inherited cardiomyopathies. Target capture was performed by HaloPlex kit dial disease characterized by fibro-fatty replacement of myocardium and in- (Agilent) and samples were sequenced on a MiSeq sequencer (Illumina) creased risk of sudden death (SD), which may be the first disease manifesta- at BMR-Genomics (Padua). Variants were called using GATK Unified Geno- tion in young and athletes. About half of AC patients harbor genetic variants typer, GATK Haplotype Caller, FreeBayes and VarScan2 and annotated with in genes encoding for desmosomal proteins. Annovar and SNP-Shot (BMR-Genomics), the latter used also for variant Purpose. To assess the frequency of rare desmosomal variants in a cohort of prioritization. apparently healthy athletes in order to evaluate their pathogenic role. Results: We identified 38 variants validated by Sanger sequencing (SS) Methods. 188 unrelated young athletes (mean age 20 yrs, male/female ratio and 2 expected false positives (unbalanced variants) and we confirmed 25 3:1), eligible at the pre-partecipation clinical evaluation, underwent conven- out of 27 variants previously detected by SS. Coverage >20X was obtained tional genetic screening for major disease causative genes: Desmoglein2- for 91.95% of 1.416.998 analyzed nucleotides and 90.93% of ACM genes. DSG2, Desmoplakin-DSP, Plakophilin2-PK P2
, Desmocollin2-DS C2
, Plakoglo- Among ACM patients, 11 carried mutations in ACM genes and 3 genotype- bin-JUP. Variants selection was based on the absence or low frequency (mi- negative carried variants in genes associated to other cardiomyopathies. nor allele frequency <0.0002) of the genetic variants in the general popula- Conclusions: Our approach represents a valuable tool for mutation scree- tion, aminoacid conservation across species, in silico pathogenic evaluation. ning in patients affected with inherited cardiomyopathies. Optimization of Results. Genetic screening identified putative pathogenic rare genetic vari- target capture will further improve the ability of mutation detection. ants in 8 (4.26%) athletes: 3 in DSG2, 2 in DSP and PK P2
 respectively and Grants: Strategic Program of the University of Padua, Ricerca Sanitaria Fi- 1 in DS C2
. Only one of these variants was also reported in a patient with nalizzata (Veneto Region), University of Padua research project (PRAT) definite AC criteria. All 8 genotype positive athletes had no family history CPDA133979, POR CRO parte FESR 2007-2013-Asse1-Azione1.1.3 for AC or SD and showed no clinical signs of the disease at the second-level cardiological evaluation.  P05
.10 Conclusion. Our study demonstrated the presence of rare genetic desmo- Diagnostic utility of the extended next generation sequencing gene somal variants in healthy athletes, questioning their contribution in AC panel in a cohort of 31 Czech patients with arrythmogenic right phenotype. The presence of desmosomal variants in the healthy population ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVD/C): a pilot study highlights the importance of clinical evaluation and cascade genetic scree- L. Piherová1, J. Paderova2, A. Krebsova3, P. Kubus4, M. Kubanek3, J. Kautzner3, J. Janousek4, ning in the families of mutation carriers to determine genetic variants pa- S. Kmoch1, M. Macek Sr.2, M. Macek Jr.2; thogenicity. 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, 1st Faculty of Medicine and VFN, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine  P05
.08 and FN Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Cardiology, Institute of Clinical Contribution of non desmosomal variants in AC pathogenesis. and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Children´s Heart Centre, 2nd R. Celeghin, E. Lazzarini, I. Rigato, M. Cason, E. Carturan, D. Corrado, G. Thiene, B. Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. Bauce, C. Basso, K. Pilichou; University of Padua, Padova, Italy. Introduction: ARVD/C is a rare hereditary cardiovascular disorder asso- ciated with a higher risk of sudden cardiac death. Introduction. Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy (AC) is an inherited myocar- Patients and Methods: Altogether, 31 cases with clinical diagnosis of dial disease characterized by fibro-fatty replacement of myocardium, main- ARVD/C underwent genetic counseling followed by TruSight One panel se- ly linked to mutations in desmosomal genes. Next Generation Sequencing quencing (Illumina, USA). Detected variants, classified according to ACMG. (NGS) enables the analysis of many genes at the same time in a single run. net , were confirmed by Sanger DNA sequencing and familial segregation Purpose. We developed a targeted NGS panel for the parallel analysis of 150 analysis, where possible. genes associated with different cardiomyopathies in the diagnostic setting. Results: Positive family history was present only in 3 cases (10%) with se- Materials and methods. 62 AC patients were analyzed using NGS technology vere ARVD/C. Likely pathogenic variants were revealed in 22/31 (71%) of on a Miseq platform (Illumina) using a custom panel of 150 genes associated patients in known ARVD/C-associated genes, mainly PK P2
 in 10/31 of all with cardiomyopathies. The selection of the detected variants was based on cases (32%). In addition, variants in DSP, DSG, DSC were identified in 2/31 the frequency, the conservation rate of the aminoacid, the potential patho- (6% each). Likely pathogenic variants in DES, TMEM43, TGFB3, ANK3, LDB3, genicity and the functional effect on the protein. JPH2 and SCN5A occurred once (3% each). One compound heterozygote for Results. We identified 92 potentially pathogenic variants in desmosomal DSP/JPH2 mutations was revealed. In 9/31 patients (29%) the molecular genes in 27 patients (43%), 7 of them carried 11 additional non-desmoso- etiology was not elucidated by our approach. Only 4/9 patients did not have mal variants, while 26 probands (44%) carried exclusively rare variants in a detectable DNA variant, in 5/9 patients variants in genes associated with sarcomeric (MYO6, MYH7, MYBP C3
, MYH13, TNNI3, TNNT2) and ion-chan- other type of hereditary cardiovascular disease were observed (e.g. KCN E3
/ n1e1l 8genes (KCNQ3, CACNA1C, SCNN1G, TRPM E4
S, HSCGN 52A0, 1S C6
N  |1
 0BAA, RKCCNEA L5
O, NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index TRPM4, SCN10A/TRDN, TRPM2, SO S1
, FBN1). neutropenia and increased urinary levels of 3-methylglutaconic and 3-me- Conclusion: We carried out a pilot study of ARVD/C variant distribution by thylglutaric an extended next generation sequencing panel in a representative cohort of acid. The molecular genetic testing of the TAZ gene revealed a novel muta- Czech patients with a predominantly severe ARVD/C. Majority of likely pa- tion c.253insC, p.(Arg85Profs*54) in exon 3 of the TAZ gene. Both siblings thogenic variants were found in PK P2
 and the significance of DNA variants carry the same mutation. The mutation was inherited from asymptomatic in other “non-ARVD/C-related” genes should be further assessed in order to mother. provide clinical guidance and risk assessment in extended families. To the best of our knowledge this is the first case of Barth syndrome phe- Supported by: 00064203, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022, NF-CZ11-PDP-3-003-2014, notypically manifested in a heterozygous female carrier with normal karyo- LD14073 and MZ 15-27682A type. A possible explanation could be non-random X inactivation predomi- nantly involving the non-affected X chromosome.  P05
.11 Association study of polymorphic variants in leading candidate-genes  P05
.14 from genome-wide association study in Bulgarian coronary artery Exome-wide association study fails to identify genetic variation disease patients and healthy population controls contributing to the development of bicuspid aortic valve R. Tzveova1, G. Naydenova2, T. Yaneva-Sirakova3, G. Dimitrov3, S. Vandeva4, D. M. Gago-Díaz1,2, C. Newton-Cheh3,4, S. Body4,5, Á. Carracedo2,6, G. Teixidó-Turà7, D. García- Pendicheva5, P. Atanasov6, I. Popov1, C. Naydenov7, R. Turnovska-Kadreva3, G. Nachev8, V. Dorado7, A. Evangelista7, B. María1,2; Mitev1, R. Kaneva1; 1Xenética de enfermidades cardiovasculares e oftalmolóxicas, Instituto de Investigación 1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Second Department of Cardiology, UMHAT de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Grupo de Medicina Xenómica, Instituto „Dr. Georgi Stranski“, Pleven, Bulgaria, 3Department of Internal Medicine, UMHAT de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela-Universidade de Santiago de „Alexandrovska“, Cardiology clinic, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Clinical Center Compostela-Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, of Endocrinology and Gerontology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Department of Spain, 3Cardiovascular Research Center and Center for Human Genetic Research, Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University, Pleven, Bulgaria, 6National Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United Sport Academy, Sofia, Bulgaria, 7Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, States, 4The Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 8University National Specialized Hospital for Active University, Cambridge, MA, United States, 5Anesthesia and Pain Management, Brigham Treatment Hospital “Sv. Ekaterina”, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 6Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research (CEGMR), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 7Servei de Cardiologia, Hospital Universitari Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. The polymorphic variants in or near NR P3
, AT P2
B1 and CDH13 genes have been found to be associated with blood pressure measurements in some Eu- ropean populations. Hypertension is a major cause for coronary atheroscle- Introduction: Bicuspid aortic valve is the most common cardiovascular con- rosis, therefore the aim of this study was to investigate the possible associa- genital malformation affecting humans with a prevalence of 0,5- 2% in gen- tion of three markers, rs1173771 (NPR3- C5
orf23), rs2681472 (AT P2
B1), eral population. Although it can be diagnosed as an incidental finding, many and rs11646213 (CDH13), with the risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) patients develop life-threatening complications that have awoken interest and myocardial infarction (MI) in Bulgarians. in understanding a molecular basis that remains unknown. Based on 90% The study included both 324 CAD patients (199 with MI and 125 without heritability and high incidence of familial clustering, our objective was to MI) and 496 population controls. The studied variants were genotyped by identify any genetic factor that could predict patients at risk of developing using TaqMan genotyping assays. Genotype and allele frequencies were cal- symptomatology. culated and associations with disease were estimated using χ2. Materials and Methods: Assuming a complex mode of inheritance, we con- The polymorphic variant rs1173771 did not show association with corona- ducted a transversal exome-wide association study in a discovery cohort ry atherosclerosis in the studied group (Aallele OR1.03;CI0.78-1.37;p=0.58). of 570 cases and 484 Spanish controls that we genotyped with the Axiom The Gallele of rs2681472 showed a link to higher risk of both CAD without Exome Array (Affymetrix) and imputed association results based on the MI(OR1.40;CI1.09-1.82;p=0.01) and with MI (OR1.48;CI0.10-1.99;p=0.009). Phase 3 1000 Genomes Project reference panel. We performed association In the subgroup analysis, this dependence was recorded only in men with analysis for the total sample and 6 different subgroups classified based on CAD without MI(OR1.60;CI1.14-2.24;p=0.01). Furthermore, the same al- thoracic aortic measurements and valve morphology. The replication series lele was associated with an increased risk of MI in men (OR1.87;CI1.29- comprised 512 cases and 1,483 European controls that we genotyped with 2.72;p=0.001). Finally, allele А of rs11646213 showed an association with MassArray System (Sequenom). Finally, we performed meta-analysis using lower risk of MI(OR0.56;CI 95:0.38-0.85;p=0.005). METAL. In this study we found for the first time association between investigated Results: We prioritized 13 markers identified during the discovery study for polymorphisms and CAD with/without MI in Bulgarians. Further studies in replication along with 5 FBN1 markers previously described as associated, larger cohorts are needed to confirm the obtained results. but were not able to replicate any result. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: This work was supported by Project Discussion and Conclusions: These negative results support bicuspid aor- №78/07.01.2015, Grant №1/29.06.2015 by the Science Fund, MU-Sofia and tic valve complexity (that should not longer be considered a unique entity), DUNK01/2/28.12.2009 funded by National Science Fund, Ministry of Edu- the need to establish worldwide collaborations to increase sample size and cation and Science, Bulgaria. power and the association of FBN1 with thoracic aortic dilation and not the valvular malformation itself. Funding: PI13/00933 and RD12/0042/0037,  P05
.13 ISCIII-FEDER. Barth syndrome phenotypically manifested in a heterozygous female carrier  P05
.15 T. Todorov1, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella2, H. Kathom2, I. Yordanova1, M. Ivanova3, R. Tincheva2, Genetic characterization of a BAV population of Italian origin. Results A. Todorova4,1; from GISSI OUTLIERS VAR study. 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Pediatric S. Pileggi1, S. Barlera1, B. Merlanti2, B. De Chiara2, L. Martinelli3, A. Maseri4, M. G. Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National Genetic Laboratory, Franzosi1; University Hospital “ Majcin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Medical University Sofia, Sofia, 1Department of Cardiovascular Research, IRCCS Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Bulgaria. “Mario Negri”, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Surgery, Niguarda Ca‘ Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy, 3Cardiothoracic Surgery, ICLAS–Istituto Clinico Ligure Alta Specialità, Rapallo, Italy, 4Heart Care Foundation, Florence, Italy. Barth syndrome (BTHS) is an X-linked recessive disease typically charac- terized by dilated cardiomyopathy, predominantly proximal skeletal myo- pathy, prepubertal short stature and neutropenia. From biochemical point Introduction: Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) formation is genetically determi- of view the disease is associated with excess of 3-methylglutaconic acid, ned, with reduced penetrance and variable expressivity. NOTCH1 gene is a hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, hyperammonemia. The disease is caused by well-proved candidate gene and its mutations have been found both in fami- mutations in the tafazzin gene (TAZ) which lead to cardiolipin deficiency lial and sporadic cases of BAV. and mitochondrial dysfunction. Male patients have variable clinical findings, Materials and Methods: 66 BAV patients from the GISSI VAR study have been while female carriers are usually asymptomatic. genotyped for the NOTCH1 gene. The TAZ gene was screened for mutations by Sanger sequencing (using Big- Results: We identified 64 variants, both in heterozygous and in homozygous Dye terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit) in male and female siblings both state. Fifty-two are common polymorphisms present in almost all patients. with left ventricular noncompaction and hypotonia. Additionally, the brot- Eleven variants are new and never reported in literature: two are non- her presented an intermittent ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAs Iy Nn o |n Wym Wou Ws s .u Eb Ss Htit Gut .i Oon R, G Gly540Asp in exon 10 and Glu851Gln in exo 1n 1 1 96;ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index one is in the 3’UTR region and 7 in introns, one corresponds in a T allele DCM and LV dysfunction without dilatation. Prognosis is worse in both insertion in intron 27. We selected four statistically relevant and seven new DCM and LV dysfunction patients with a genetic or familial predisposition. variants identified in six BAV patients and correlated them with clinical and Therefore, genetic screening should also be performed in patients with LV demographic variables as well as imaging and histological parameters. Our dysfunction. preliminary data show that 4 were BAV patients with isolated stenosis in  P05
.18 over 60 year-old patients. We suppose that these variants correlate with a Genetic testing in dilated cardiomyopathies: increasing the diagnostic late necessity to undergo to surgery that is driven by the presence of ste- yield by next generation sequencing techniques nosis and not by aortic valve regurgitation or ascending aortic aneurysm. A. T. J. M. Helderman-vd Enden1, M. Riemersma1, E. K. Vanhoutte1, L. van Montfort1, Conclusions: We completed the genotyping of 66 BAV patients and found 11 M. I. Witjens1, M. B. Hoos1, M. R. Hazebroek2, F. H. J. van Tienen1, G. F. R. Claes1, S. R. B. new variants in the NOTCH1 gene never reported in literature. These data Heymans2, I. P. C. Krapels1, A. van den Wijngaard1; confirm that the identification of new clinically relevant biomarkers for BAV 1Department of Clinical Genetics,Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, requires a deeper genetic understanding of the NOTCH1 gene variants, that Netherlands, 2Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University Medical Center, could be targeted by future diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. Maastricht, Netherlands.  P05
.16 Copy number variation in clinical tests for inherited Purpose: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by ventricular cardiomyopathies and arrhythmias chamber enlargement and systolic dysfunction. Nowadays 30-50 genes are J. Tahiliani, N. Johnson, S. Aguilar, A. Daly, E. Decker, B. Herrera, D. Beltran, L. Murillo, R. associated with DCM and a genetic cause of this heterogeneous disorder Harte, J. Garcia, S. Lincoln, E. Haverfield, S. Aradhya; is found in 30-40% of all patients. The aim of this study was to increase Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States. the diagnostic yield of genetic testing by using next-generation sequencing (NGS) techniques. Methods: In 406 idiopathic DCM patients Sanger sequencing was performed Introduction: The clinical significance of exon-level copy number variation for several genes. A subgroup of 172 patients received one or both of the (CNV) in inherited cardiovascular conditions has not been widely studied to following gTeTnNe panel tests: CardioChip (34 genes) and next-generation who- date. Sequence changes make up the vast majority of reported pathogenic le exome sequencing using a targeted filter (45 genes). In the gene panel variants in genes associated with inherited cardiomyopathies and arrhyth- subgroup, was tested in 93 patients. Genetic variants were defined as mias. variants of unknown clinical significance (VUS), likely pathogenic (LP) and Methods: We considered a sequential series of 287 patients submitted for pathogenic (P) variants. an arrhythmia panel, 370 for a cardiomyopathy panel, and 36 for both. Germline DNA from blood was tested, and the gene panels were selected Results: Sanger sequencing of several genes detMecYteHd7 ,a P gLeNnetic LvMarNiaAnt in 16.5%. Genetic v.a riants were found in 46% by gene panel te.s ting. In the by ordering physicians based on each patient’s clinical indication. Sequence gene panel subgroup of 172 patients, a variant in and was and CNV analysis was performed by validated Next Generation sequencing detected iTnT 4N.1 % A varRiaBnMt 2in0 other genes wMaYs Hfo7u nd in 40.7% The highest (NGS) methods, and identified CNVs were confirmed by microarray analysis. detection rates of likely pathogenic variants or pathogenic variants were Results: Six single- or multi-exon deletions were identified in patient samp- found in (13%), (3.2%) and TTN(2.5%).Conclusions: Our les: two deletions in MYBP C3
 in two unrelated patients presenting with hy- data illustrate that gene panel testing in DCM patients increases the diagno- pertrophic cardiomyopathy; two RYR2 deletions in two unrelated patients stic yield, with the highest diagnostic yield in . We suggest that genetic presenting with arrhythmia; a PK P2
 deletion in a patient presenting with analysis in idiopathic DCM patients starts with NGS gene panel testing wit- arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy; and a CTNNA3 deletion in a patient pre- hout prior single gene testing. senting with cardiomyopathy. Except CTNNA3, all deletions were classified as pathogenic, and no other pathogenic variants were identified in these  P05
.19 individuals. Detection of known and novel cardiovascular diseases gene variants Conclusions: Historically, CNV analysis for these genes was either not widely by next generation sequencing in terms of improved treatment and available clinically or was available as a reflex test. In this case series, CNVs prognosis accounted for about 4% of the positive findings, suggesting that CNV analy- S. Josifovska1,2,3, R. Vazharova1,4, L. Balabanski1, S. Ivanov1, R. Staneva2, S. Hadjidekova2, sis may be an important component of genetic testing for inherited cardio- M. Malinov1, S. Panov3, D. Toncheva2; myopathies and arrhythmias in the future. 1SBALGAR “Malinov”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, “Ss.  P05
.17 Cyril and Methodius” University, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, Genetic screening in idiopathic cardiomyopathy: should we broaden 4Medical Faculty, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Sofia, Bulgaria. our perspective? E. Vanhoutte1, M. Hazebroek2, L. Montfort1, M. Witjens1, M. Hoos2, A. Helderman-van den Enden1, F. van Tienen1, G. Claes1, A. Wijngaard1, S. Heymans2, I. Krapels1; Introduction:According to the WHO, cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are the 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, main cause of death worldwide. CVD involve a large group of heterogeneous Netherlands, 2Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University Medical Center, disorders that cannot always be precisely diagnosed, so therapy and outco- Maastricht, Netherlands. me heavily depend on pr oper genetic profiling. The aim of this study was to determine genetic variants in patients with CVD. Materials and Methods:DNAs from 11 patients with CVD were analyzed Introduction: The ESC guidelines recommend genetic testing merely in pa- using NGS targeted resequencing of 176 genes included in TruSight Cardio tients with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). However, a significant subgroup gene pan el (Illumina). Variant detection was upon reference humanA gCeTnAo2me presents with left ventricular (LV) dysfunction without dilatation. Our aim (GRCh37). KCNJ2 is to compare the yield of NGS gene testing and prognosis in LV dysfunction Results: Detected gene variants are as follows: heterozygouCsA CNA1C:p. patients versus DCM patients. Arg258Cys, in aS CpNa5tAient with aortic dissection; heterozygous :p. Materials and Methods: 262 DCM and 127 LV dysfunction patients under- Arg218Trp in a patient with LQTS; double heterozygosity for :p. went complete cardiologic evaluation and NGS gene testing of 46 cardio- AELrgN514Gly and S:CpN.A5rAg800His in a patient with severe hypertrophic myopathy genes. Genetic or familial predisposition was defined as familial obstructive cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia; double heterozygosity for inheritance pattern and/or a (likely) pathogenic mutation. Long-term out- :c.890-1G>A and : p.Gly9Val in a patient with SVAS, pulmonary come used a combined endpoint of life-threatening arrhythmia, heart trans- valve stenosis and arrhythmia. An interesting finding is the co-occurrence plantation, and death. of dominant pathogenic variants in different genes, as in the case of two of Results: A genetic or familial predisposition was equally distributed bet- the patients, which may explain the complexity and severity of the observed ween DCM and LV dysfunction patients (100 (38%) vs 57 (45%); P=0.21). phenotypes. A (likely) pathogenic mutation was more frequently found in patients with In conclusion, detection of common and new variants in the patients with positive familial inheritance , irrespective of a DCM or LV dysfunction phe- CVD has confirmed or shifted diagnosis, further establishing genetic asso- notype (20 (25%) vs 17 (9%); P=0.001 and 12 (27%) vs 11 (13%) P=0.049, ciation studies involving NGS as analysis of choice for clinical diagnosis and respectively). After a median follow-up of 56 months, long-term outcome research with large implication on treatment and prognosis of patients and did not differ between DCM and LV dysfunction. However, in both DCM and their families. LV dysfunction patients outcome was worse in the presence of a genetic/ familial predisposition.  C1
o2n0clusion: The diagnostic yield of NGS gene teEstSinHgG is c2o0m1p6ar a| bBleA bRetCwEeeLnO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.21 Molecular autopsy: a potential tool to identify pathogenic CNVs in congenital heart defects Materials and methods: We analysed gene expression data from 849 Mo- F. A. R. Madia1, C. Milani1, A. T. Dias1, E. A. Zanardo1, J. G. Damasceno1, M. Rocha2, A. M. nocyte, and 684 MPLaocSro Gpehnaegte. samples collected from 459 individuals with Nascimento1, T. V. M. M. Costa1, G. M. Novo-Filho1, M. M. Montenegro1, A. F. Amorim1, Y. G. CAD/MI and 458 controls Naus cpleairct Aofc itdhse RCeasr.diogenics transcriptomic study Oliveira1, C. H. Chung1, J. R. M. Ceroni1, R. Schultz1, F. T. Gonçalves1, C. Fridman1, C. A. KIM1, (Rotival M, et al. 2011;12:e1002367). We utilised the QuSAGE L. D. Kulikowski1,2; R package (Yaari G et al. 2013;41(18):e170) to explore 1Faculdade de Medicina da USP, SAO PAULO, Brazil, 2Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, differential expression of pathways between risk/non-risk genotypes for Santo André, Brazil. CAD loci. QuSAGE is a pathway analysis tool, modelling overall pathway fold change between sample groups utilising probability density functions. Results: For seven CAD loci, we identified genotype related differential ex- Introduction: Congenital heart defects (CHD) is the most prevalent group pression in specific pathways at FDR q value <0.1, with functions encom- of congenital malformations affecting approximately 8-1,000 live births and passing cytokine signalling, inflammation, calcium homeostasis and muscle is a significant cause of childhood morbidity and mortality. Recently, the in- contraction (Table). For the 9p21 locus we observed distinct pathways in creased frequency of pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) in congenital monocytes/macrophages suggesting cell type specific effects. heart disease was demonstrated by several different studies. Pathways differentially expressed at specific CAD loci in monocytes/macro- Materials and Methods: We investigate the contribution of CNVs in the pa- phages thogenesis of CHD using molecular methods in 29 cases of stillbirth and new-born from Serviço de Verificação de óbitos, HC-FMUSP. DNA samples Locus Cell type Reactome Pathway Name Log Fold FDR from skin and heart tissues were evaluated using AmpFℓSTR® MiniFiler™ Name Change 6p21.31 Macrophage Synthesis of PIPS at the Golgi -0.053 0.031 PCR Amplification Kit (Life Technologies™, California, USA) and Multiplex Membrane Synthesis and -0.071 0.032 Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) with different kits (MCR- Interconversion of Nucleotide Holland, Amsterdam, the Netherlands). Di and Triphosphates Metabolism of Nucleotides -0.040 0.043 Results: The results showing several different CNVs such as ZNF74, NCAM2, 6p24.1 Macrophage Growth Hormone Receptor -0.050 0.079 Signalling NFAT C1
 and AR genes associate with cardiac phenotype. In 9 of 28 stillbirth G1 Phase 2 0.033 0.079 and new-born (32%) with CHD and additional structural abnormalities, we Elevation of Cytosolic Ca -0.091 0.079 Levels identified cases of Edwards Syndrome, Patau Syndrome, Down Syndrome Striated Muscle Contraction 0.047 0.079 Muscle Contraction 0.040 0.079 and one case of Phelan-McDermid Syndrome with duplication of ZNF74. IL 6 Signalling -0.058 0.079 Also we identified one case of Turner Syndrome and one case of Turner Syn- Antigen Activates B Cell -0.029 0.096 Receptor Leading to drome with Y chromosome mosaicism. Only one isolated CHD case did not Generation of Second Messengers -15 showed pathogenic CNVs. 9p21 Monocyte Peptide Ligand Binding 0.023 <0.1x10 Conclusion: Molecular autopsy showed efficiency for identifying pathogenic Receptors -15 Class A1 Rhodopsin Like 0.015 <0.1x10 CNVs associated with CHD and also allowed the adequate genetic counse- Receptors -15 9p21 Macrophage Innate Immune System -0.011 <0.1x10-15 ling. Cytokine Signalling in -0.0084 <0.1x10 Grants: FAPESP: 09/53105-9 and FINEP-CT INFRA 0160/12 S P8
. Immune System 11q22.3 Monocyte Regulation of RHEB GTPase -0.037 0.019 Activity by AMPK -15  P05
.22 15q26.1 Monocyte Immune System 0.0044 <0.1x10 17q21.32 Monocyte VEGF Ligand Receptor -0.056 0.095 The novel coronary artery disease risk gene KIAA1462 regulates Interactions endothelial cell function P. D. Jones1, R. Rajmohan1, T. R. Webb1, N. J. Samani1,2; 1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2NIHR Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Leicester, United Kingdom. Conclusions: Using QuSAGE we have identified several pathways related to CAD associated variants. This methodology provides a useful tool to exami- ne the biological mechanisms of complex disease genetics. Genome wide association studies have identified 56 chromosomal loci that are associated with coronary artery disease (CAD). However, for most of  P05
.24 these loci both the gene responsible and the mKecIAhAan1i4s6m2 by which they af- Expression of COX7A1 as a potential marker of congenital heart fect CAD risk is unclear. The CAD-associated locus at 10KpIA11A.12416 c2ontains 9 defects A. Dobosz, M. Bik-Multanowski; CAD-associated SNPs, located within the gene , which encodes a Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland. poorly characterised cell junction protein. As the role of is poorly unKdeIArsAt1o4o6d2, we set out to assess its functional role in endKoItAhAe1li4a6l 2cells, using siRNKAIA gAe1n4e6 k2nock-down. Compared with a control siRNA, an siRNA directed * Congenital heart defects occur in approximately 50% of children with at resulted in a consistent 80 % reduction in expressi- Down syndrome and in 1% of general population. The most common de- on. knock down resulted in slower cell proliferatioinn , vwitirtoh appro- fects include ventricular septal defect (VSD), common atrioventricular chan- ximately 15% fewer cells after 48 hours of proliferation compared to control nel (CAVC) and atrial septal defect (ASD). These defects are usually detected siRNA transfected cells (t-test after 48 hours, p=0.00K1IA).A A1n4 62 wound by means of fetal sonographic examination performed during pregnancy. healing assay showed approximately 30% slower migration in knock-down We aimed at defining a molecular blood marker, which could allow for ear- cells (p=0.004). We also found increased apoptosis in knock-dionw vin- ly detection of such defects in case of prenatal testing, performed due to tcreoll s, with a 15% increase in apoptosis as measured by Caspase 3/7 activity suspected congenital malformation. (p=0.030). In addition, we used a matrigel tube-KfoIArAm1a4t6io2n assay as an * Methods: * We conducted a whole genome expression analysis in 21 child- assay for angiogenic capability of the cells. This showKeIdA Aa1p4p6ro2ximately ren with Down syndrome, with or without congenital heart defect. We used a 32% reduction in total tube length formed in knock-down cells microarray technology to compare the whole genome expression in blood compared to controls (p=0.002). These data suggest that is invol- mononuclears between both subgroups. Next we used GeneSpring software ved in the regulation of endothelial cell function and angiogenesis and this for data analysis. Moderated t-test was applied with the Westfall-Young cor- may explain its involvement in CAD. rection for mutliple comparisons to deteCcOt Xsi7gAn1if icant differences between  P05
.23 compared groups. Genotype based pathway analysis of genetic loci associated with * Results: * We found upregulation of the gene in patients born with coronary artery disease heart defect (Fold Change 2.83). The COX7A1 protein is one of the nuclear- S. E. Hamby1,2, T. Webb1,2, N. J. Samani1,2; coded polypeptide chains of cytochrome c oxidase, the terminal oxidase in 1University of Leicester Cardiovascular Research Center, Leicester, United Kingdom, mCOitXo7cAh1o ndrial electron transport in the muscle cell, and can play a role in 2NIHR Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Leicester, United Kingdom. heart muscle pathology. Our results show potential value of assessment of expression in blood as a screening test for prenatal detection of con- genital heart defects. Introduction: Genome wide association studies have identified 56 genetic The study was sponsored by the Polish National Science Centre (DEC- loci associated with increased risk of coronary artery disease (CAD). Many 2011/03/B/NZ5/01328). contain genes not previously linked to disease and potentially involve hi- therto unrecognised biological processes. Investigating differential expres- sion of pathways between risk/non-risk genotypes may allow identification of novel molecular mechanisms. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 121ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.25  P05
.27 The characterisation of a novel nonsense mutation in RYR2 using Genetic testing in a consecutive series of young athletes with human induced pluripotent stem cells suspected cathecolaminargic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia C. Bailey1, A. Tijsen2, L. Maizels2, I. Huber2, G. Arbel2, A. Gepstein2, N. Moreton3, B. Brown4, P. Berne1, N. Marziliano1, D. Fiscella2, A. Fiscella3, M. Monne4, G. Piras4, R. Asproni4, G. La L. Venetucci1, W. G. Newman1,3, L. Gepstein2; Delfa5, D. Occhipinti5, P. A. Merlini6, G. Casu1; 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Technion - Israel Institute of 1Presidio Ospedaliero “San Francesco”, AS L3
 Nuoro, UOC di Cardiologia, Nuoro, Italy, Technology, Haifa, Israel, 3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United 2Azienda Ospedaliera di Rilievo Nazionale e di Alta Specializzazione “Garibaldi, S. Kingdom, 4University Hospital of South Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Luigi-S. Currò, Ascoli-Tomaselli”. Presidio Ospedaliero Garibaldi-Nesima-Catania. UO di Cardiologia, Catania, Italy, 3Fondazione Floresta Longo, Catania, Italy, 4Presidio RYR2 Ospedaliero “San Francesco”, AS L3
 Nuoro, Laboratorio Specialistico di Oncoematologia, Nuoro, Italy, 5Centro di Medicina dello Sport-FMSI, Catania, Italy, 6Azienda Ospedaliera Introduction: Heterozygous missense mutaRtiYoRn2s in are associated Ospedale Niguarda Cà Granda, IV Divisione di Cardiologia, Milano, Italy. with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. We identified a novel nonsense mutation p.(Arg4790*) in in a young woman follo- wing resuscitation from a cardiac arrest. We generated human induced plu- Background. Cathecolaminargic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia ripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) to characterise this mutation. (CPVT; MIM 619138) is a rare inheritable disorder due to mutations in Methods: We generated hiPSCs from the affected individual and differen- RYR2, CASQ, CALM1 and TRDN genes. It can be both autosomal dominant tiated these cells into cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs). We performed confocal (RYR2 and CALM1) or recessive (CASQ2 and TRDN). It is clinically charac- calcium imaging on the hiPSC-CMs and undertook analysis to determine the terised by adrenergically induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) molecular mechanism by which the mutation results in a phenotype. in absence of structural heart diseases. Presentation includes syncope or Results: Baseline calcium imaging showed significantly more patient hiPSC- sudden cardiac death (SCD) in young patients. Exercise testing is the gold CMs displayed calcium transient abnormalities compared to control hiPSC- standard for the clinical diagnosis and genetic testing may unravel additio- CMs (66.7% vs 28%). 52.6% of patient hiPSC-CMs which displayed normal nal asymptomatic carries within the family. transients at baseline developed transient abnormalities in response to iso- Methods. We present a consecutive series of 25 young athletes (aged less proterenol whilst only 19% of control hiPSC-CMs developed abnormalities. than 18) with clinical suspicion of CPVT after undergoing pre-participation More patient hiPSC-CMs displayed spontaneous calcium transients at lo- testing for competitive sports. Clinical assessment included: physical exami- wer external calcium concentrations suggesting a lower threshold for store nation, surface ECG, echocardiogram and exercise testing (Bruce protocol). overload-induced calcium release (SOICR). The appliRcaYtRio2n of carvedilol After genetic counselling, molecular testing was started by means of Next corrected baseline calcium transient abnormalities in 80% of patient hiPSC- Generation Sequencing (NGS) on an Ion PGM platform with a targeted-rese- CMs. Allele-specific qPCR showed expression of both alleles, sugge- quencing panel of 148 cardiac genes. sting that the p.(Arg4790*) mutation does not result in haploinsufficiency. Results and Conclusion. After testing, we found 8 (32%) mutation-carriers Conclusions: The patient hiPSC-CMs display an abnormal calcium handling of the RYR2 gene, 4 (16%) mutations-carriers of the CASQ2 gene and 2 phenotype with increased abnormalities at baseline and after application (8%) mutation-carriers of the CALM1 gene. Cascade testing revealed addi- of isoproterenol, and a reduced threshold for SOICR. The abnormal calcium tionally RYR2 (n=13), CASQ2 (n=7) and CALM1 (n=3) mutations carriers handling phenotype was rescued by carvedilol indicating a potential thera- with (47%) and without (53%) clinical signs. The study proved that proper peutic approach to prevent arrhythmias. clinical for sport activity in the young athlethes is of outmost importance This research was funded by a BIRAX Regenerative Medicine Fellowship and in identifying potentially individuals at risk of life-threatening arrhythmias. facilitated by Manchester Biomedical Research Centre and the NIHR Greater However psychosocial evaluations must included in order to overcome the Manchester: Clinical Research Network. life-style modifications subsequent to the genetic testing for the probands  P05
.26 and their relatives. The RYR2 p.R420W mutation causes premature sudden cardiac death O. Abdel-Razek1, A. Collier2, S. Predham2, F. Curtis2, A. Bullen2, J. Houston2, T. Benteau2, S.  P05
.28 Stuckless3, T. Young2, S. Connors4, K. Hodgkinson2,3; Next-generation sequencing to identify genetic causes of dilated 1Memorial University, Department of Internal Medicine, St. John‘s, NL, Canada, cardiomyopathies 2Memorial University, Discipline of Genetics, St. John‘s, NL, Canada, 3Memorial University, J. Bernasovska1, I. Boronova1, I. Bernasovsky1, J. Kmec2; Unit of Clinical Epidemiology, St. John‘s, NL, Canada, 4Memorial University, Department 1University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia, 2Cardiocentre, Hospital of J.A. Reiman, Presov, of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, St. John‘s, NL, Canada. Slovakia. Background: Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is most common form of heart muscle di- (CPVT) is an arrhythmia syndrome causing sudden cardiac death (SCD). A sease and a leading cause of congestive heart failure. The genetics of cardio- putative founder mutation in RYR2 (p.R420W) located in the cytosolic por- myopathies represents one of the most active areas for the research in mole- tion of the protein crucial for calcium channel regulation has been ascer- cular genetics. The aim of our study was genetic testing of 29 patients with tained in Newfoundland. Juvenile deaths were ascribed to this mutation in a diagnosed DCM using next generation sequencing technology. All probands previous publication without DNA confirmation. underwent clinical examination and genetic analysis. The control group Research Question: Does the RYR2 p.R420W mutation affect survival in a included thirty healthy asymptomatic subjects without cardiovascular di- well ascertained autosomal dominant, multiplex (5 generation) three pedi- sease or a family history of DCM. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole gree population? peripheral blood using the standard extraction kit. Exome libraries were Study population: All persons born at an a-priori 50% risk from three pedi- sequenced on a SOLiD 5500xl flowchip in paired end mode (75plus 25bp). grees segregating the RYR2 p.R420W were ascertained (n=79). Individuals Molecular-genetic analyses included also 50 different genes implicated in were included if the disease status of ≥ 50% of their sibship was known causing DCM. We didn´t find any causal mutation in these genes in patients (n=66). We excluded 6 juvenile (< 9yrs) deaths (n=60). Affected individuals with dilated cardiomyopathy. On the other hand, we found missense muta- included mutation positive and/or obligate carriers (OC) and/or SCD under tions in other genes: SCN5A, SL C9
A5, SL C26
A9, SL C8
A3 and MEGF8. In six 50 years. Unaffected status was defined as mutation negative. The remain- patients with dilated cardiomyopathy was detected a disease causing mu- der were unknown (UK). tation rs1805124, T/C in SCN5A gene. This mutation is disease specific for Methods: Genetic and clinical data from all available medical records were hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, however, the findings in the dilated cardio- collected from family members. Of 60 individuals, 27 (45%) were affected myopathy has not yet been described. We recognised a novel missense mu- (16 mutation positive, 6 OC and 5 SCD) and 26 (43%) were unaffected. The tation in SL C9
A5 (NHE-5) gene, termed c. C826
T:p.R276C (NM_004594.2) unaffected and UK groups were combined. Time to death was compared us- and mapped to the chromosomal, region16:67,289,748 in three patients. ing Kaplan-Meier time to event analysis and multivariate Cox regression. Early diagnosis and correct assessment of the patient’s risk profile plays a Results: Affected status was significantly associated with mortality: RR = 4 key role in determining the start of treatment. This study is the result of im- (95% CI: 1.1-14.5) and affected males died earlier than females RR=7 (95% plementation of the projects APVV-0644-12 and ITMS 26220120241. CI 1.5-34.5). Conclusions: The RYR2 p.R420W mutation significantly affects mortality, particularly for males. Six juvenile deaths (with unknown mutation status) have occurred in these families. 122 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.29  P05
.31 Recurrent early-onset dilated cardiomyopathy and left ventricular Familial Hypercholesterolaemia cascade genetic screening: A blind noncompaction in a family with germline mosaicism for a MYH7 trial to evaluate the Randox FH Multiplex Arrays mutation D. A. Bailie1, P. J. Hart1, M. J. Latten2, R. J. L. Martin1, T. L. Watson2, H. A. Murray2, J. V. L. Fernández1, P. Muñoz-Cabello1, K. Ibáñez1, V. Fdez-Montaño1, F. Nieto1, E. Mansilla1, Lamont2, S. P. Fitzgerald2, M. A. Crockard2, C. A. Graham1,2; F. Santos-Simarro1, J. Silla-Castro1, C. Labrandero2, M. Ortega2, J. Nevado1, S. García- 1Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Centre, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Miñaur1, Á. del Pozo1, P. Lapunzina1, E. Vallespin1; Belfast, United Kingdom, 2Randox Laboratories Ltd, 55 Diamond Road, Belfast, United 1INGEMM-IDIPAZ-HULP, Madrid, Spain, 2Cardiology Deparment-IDIPAZ-HULP, Madrid, Kingdom. Spain. Introduction: Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a common genetic Introduction: Dilated cardiomyopathy and left ventricular noncompaction disorder characterised by elevated low density lipoprotein cholesterol and are overlapping, genetically heterogeneous disorders with an average low early symptoms of coronary heart disease. Estimates suggest <10% of FH diagnostic yield. Multigene testing may raise detection rate, while a larger patients are diagnosed in most countries. Cascade genetic testing, as recom- increase in variants of uncertain significance hinders genetic counseling. We mended by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2008) report a case of recurrent neonatal dilated cardiomyopathy with left ventri- and the European Atherosclerosis Society (2013), may successfully identify cular noncompaction in two consecutive pregnancies from a healthy con- new cases. This study aims to determine the effectiveness of the Randox FH sanguineous couple that suggested autosomal recessive inheritance. Multiplex Arrays for this purpose. This FH array is designed to detect 40 Materials and Methods: The index patient was studied with a custom-desi- FH causing genetic alterations, accounting for 71% of mutations in Great gned CardioMass v2.1 NGS panel including 268 genes associated with car- Britain and Ireland. diomyopathies and cardiac rhythm disorders. Capture was based on Roche Materials and methods: Close relatives (N=199) of mutation-positive index NimbleGen technology and sequencing was performed on a MiSeq Illumina cases (previous confirmation by DNA sequencing) were selected for genetic platform. Family studies confirmed NGS variants by direct sequencing. testing. Screening was conducted as a blind study to remove bias. Mutatio- Results: An apparently de novo mutation in MYH7 in the two siblings dis- nal analysis was performed using the FH Multiplex Arrays I & II and the Evi- closed germinal mosaicism in the family. Furthermore, both children, as dence Investigator analyser (Randox Laboratories Ltd, Crumlin, UK). well as their healthy parents, were carriers of a rare heterozygous variant Results: A true positive rate of 97.8% (89/91 patients) and a true negative in HCN4 which was previously described in association with bradycardia- rate of 100% (108/108 patients) demonstrates the sensitivity and specifici- tachycardia syndrome and left ventricular noncompaction. ty of the test in detecting 37 of 40 targeted family mutations present on the Conclusions: These results highlight the usefulness of a NGS approach for arrays, suggesting a concordance rate of 99% for the Randox FH Multiplex genetically heterogeneous disorders. This case further shows the challenge Arrays for cascade genetic screening. of interpretation and the importance of familial segregation studies in the Conclusion: The FH arrays successfully identify the most prevalent mutati- diagnosis of patients with multiple potentially pathogenic variants. ons in the Great Britain and Ireland cascade screening population. This will This work was supported by grant PI13/1450, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, enable a cost effective method for targeted identification of people affected Spain. by FH, permit enhanced FH monitoring/management thus reducing FH as- sociated morbidity and mortality.  P05
.30  P05
.32 Identification of shear stress responsive enhancer elements in Rare variants in PCSK9 protect against familial endothelial cells hypercholesterolaemia in a patient with a pathogenic LDLR mutation O. Bondareva1,2, R. Tsaryk2, A. Siekmann2, H. Schnittler1; S. Rodriguez-Novoa1, C. Rodríguez1, K. Heath1, A. del Pozo1, M. Tress2, E. Vallespín1, P. 1Institute of Ananomy and Vascular Biology, Münster, Germany, 2Max Plank Institute for Lapunzina1, P. Martínez3; Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany. 1INGEMM-Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 3Medicina Interna- Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Shear stress is a frictional force that significantly modulates endothelium structure and function due to change in metabolism, gene expression and Introduction: Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is characterized by el- posttranslational modifications. Unidirectional arterial shear stress levels evated low density lipoproteins (LDL-c) leading to premature cardiovas- are atheroprotective, supported by negative regulation of apoptotic signa- cular disease. FH is caused by lost-of-function variants in LDLR, APOB and ling in vivo and in vitro. By contrast disturbed oscillatory flow acts as a gain-of-function variants in PCSK9. Lost-of-function PCK S9
 variants lead to pathological stimulus contributing to atherosclerosis and vasculopathies. decreases in LDL-c. Herein, we describe a family with a LDLR pathogenic Many studies demonstrated shear stress induced changes in gene expres- mutation and two rare PCSK9 variants and their phenotype consequence. sion, however the underlying transcriptional regulatory mechanisms re- Patients and Methods: LDLR, APOB, PCSK9 and LDLRA P1
 were analysed in main unknown. In this study we aimed to identify shear stress responsive a FH family, by NGS and MLPA. enhancer elements. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells were exposed to Results: A heterozygous known pathogenic LDLR mutation, c.2479G>A was different shear stress profiles using the co2ne-and-plate based BioTechFl2ow observed in the proband and two offspring (Table). Interestingly, son 3 had System®. After application of 18 dyn/cm unidirectional or ±3 dyn/cm of normal-LDLc levels despite having the LDLR mutation. Two variants in PCS oscillatory shear stress (0.5 and 6 hours stimulation) we performed chro- K9:[c.137G>T;c.2023delG]+[c.137G>T] was also detected. PCSK9:c.137G>T matin immunoprecipitation of H3K27ac mark for active enhancers. Bioin- is a previously described lost-of-function variant associated with decreases formatical analysis of the sequenced immunoprecipitated DNA fragments in LDL-c. PCSK9:c.2023delG;p.Val675Leufs*130 is a rare variant in the C- revealed thousands of unique specific shear stress induced peaks corre- terminal, identified in a single individual in ExCA. In silico analyses predict sponding to activated enhancers which were frequently found in proximity the absence of two conserved Cysteines, critical for the correctly folding of of genes regulated by shear stress. Further investigation of the peaks identi- the protein, therefore leading to a lost-of-function. fied binding sites of several transcription factors implicated in shear stress Table.Phenotype and genotyLpDLeR a gte nLoDtyLpRe andPC PSK C9
S GKe9no ftoypuend in the family. responses and adaptation processes, e.g. SMADs for unidirectional and HI C1
 c.2479G>A c.137G>T; c.2023delG LDL levels for oscillatory flow. In conclusion, we demonstrate a genome-wide analysis ; ; of shear stress responsive regulatory elements that control the expression Proband High-LDLc Yp e.V sa , l h8 t2 z7Ile p Ye.A sr , g h4 tz6Leu p.Val675Leufs*130 of genes important for shear stress-induced physiological and pathological D Da au ug gh ht te er r 1 2 H Noig rh m-L aD l-L Lc DLc Y Ne os, htz Y Ye es s, , h ht tz z Yes, htz endothelial phenotypes. The data provide a deeper insight into the diseases Son 3 Normal-LDLc Yes, htz Yes, hmz Yes, htz such as atherosclerosis and might open novel targets for therapy. Funded by CiM Flexible Funds, Münster, Germany. Discussion: The presence of lost-of-function variants in PCSK9 could ame- liorate the effect of LDLR variants associated with FH. The counteracting effects of different genes should be explored in FH patients in order to im- prove genetic counselling. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 123ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.33 Next generation sequencing of familial hypercholesterolaemia- related genes in a Mediterranean European cohort be the result of parental mosaicism. Thus, it is likely a more common oc- P. F. Dingli, R. Attard, K. Cassar, R. Farrugia, S. Bezzina Wettinger; currence than the expected in genes related with aortic pathology. Detection Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of of these cases improves genetic counseling and allow the parents a cardiac Malta, Msida, Malta. follow up given that the somatic mutation may be expressed in the aortic Introduction: tissue.  P05
.35 Methods: The aim of this study was to identify the polymorphisms re- PHACTR1 is a genetic susceptibility locus for fibromuscular dysplasia sponsible for familial hypercholesterolaemia in the Maltese population. S. R. Kiando1,2, N. R. Tucker3,4, L. Castro-Vega1,2, A. Katz5, V. D’Escamard6, C. Treard1,2, D. Dutch Lipid Clinic Network scores were calculated for each re- Fraher3,4, J. Albuisson1,2,7, D. Kadian-Dodov6, Z. Ye8, E. Austin8, M. Yang5, K. Hunker5, C. search subject in the Maltese Acute Myocardial Infarction Study which in- Barlassina9, D. Cusi10, P. Galan11, J. Empana1,2, X. Jouven1,2,12, A. Gimenez-Roqueplo1,2,7, cluded 423 first myocardial infarction cases, 210 relatives of cases and 465 P. Bruneval1,2,13, E. S. H. Kim14, J. W. Olin6, H. L. Gornik14, M. Azizi15,16, P. Plouin1,2,15, P. controls. Three cases had probable Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) and T. Ellinor3,4, I. J. Kullo8, D. J. Milan3,4, S. K. Ganesh5, P. Boutouyrie1,2,17, J. C. Kovacic6, X. 67 cases had possible FH. All probable FH subjects and three samples from Jeunemaitre1,2,7, N. Bouatia-Naji1,2; the list of possible FH were selected, the latter, based on LDL level. Libra- 1INSERM, UMR970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Center (PARCC), Paris, France, 2Paris- Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 3Cardiovascular research ries for FH were prepared using the SureSelect target enrichment protocol Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, United States, 4Program in (RAegsuilletns:t Technologies) and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 4000.. Next- Medical and Population Genetics, The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, GENEe® software was used to read data and obtain a list of variants. MA, United States, 5Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Human A summary of the SNPs found in LDLR, LDLRAP, APOB and PCSK9 Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 6The Zena and Michael is provided in table 1. A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Icahn School of Medicine, Marie-Josée and Henry Mutation Function APOB LDLR LDLRA P1
 PCSK9 R. Kravis Cardiovascular Health Center at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 7AP-HP, Department of Genetics, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, In-Frame 1 2 8Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MToistaselnse 3918 1114 598 11363 MN, United States, 9Dept. of Health Sciences, Genomic and Bioinformatics Unit, Chair and Noncoding 60 84 88 136 Graduate School of Nephrology, University of Milano, Division of Nephrology, San Paolo TaS by ln eo 1n . y Sm NPo su s in chosen sam6 ples 29 5 12 Hospital, Milano, Italy, 10Institute of Biomedical Technologies, Italian National Centre of Research, Milano, Italy, 11INSERM,Nutritional Epidemiology Research Group, Sorbonne- Paris-Cité, UMR University of Paris 13/Inserm U-557/INRA U-1125/CNAM UMR970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Center (PARCC), Bobigny, France, 12AP-HP, Department of Cardiology, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 13AP-HP, Department Non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms and polymorphisms in of Pathology, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 14Department of the adjacent introns were researched in known databases and in the litera- Cardiovascular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland, OH, ture. 4 candidate SNPs were short-listed – two in ApoB ( P2739
L, T98I) and United States, 15AP-HP, Department of Hypertension, Hôpital Européen Georges Pomp tCwonoc ilnu sPioSnCK9  L22
_ L23
insL, V474I) Introduction: Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a nonatherosclerotic vascu- NFuon sdtirnogng mutation in known FH genes was observed indicating a polygenic lar disease leading to stenosis, dissection and aneurysm affecting mainly the cause for elevated LDL in these subjects. renal and cerebrovascular arteries. FMD is often an underdiagnosed cause of hypertension and stroke, has higher prevalence in females (~80%) but its National Research and Innovation Programme organised by the Malta Coun- pathophysiology is unclear. cil for Science and Technology (NGS Project and MAMI Study) and MGSS Methods and Results: We analyzed ~26K Pcommon variants (MAF>0.05) scholarship. generated by exome-chip arrays in 249 FMD pa-4tients and 689 controls. We replicated 13 modestly associated locPi H(A< C1
T0R1) in 402 cases and 2,537  P05
.34 controls and confirmed an association between FMD and a variant in the Parental somatic mosaicism in FBN1 and TGFBR1 genes in aortic phosphatase and aPctin regulator 1 gene ( ). Three additional case- pathology syndromes P. Fernández Alvarez1, M. Borregan Prats1, L. Martinez Ribot1, M. del Campo control cohorts including 51-120 caPsHesA aCnTdR 1669 controls replicated this result Casanelles1, F. López Grondona1, M. Masas Castro1, A. Outeriral Adán1, G. Teixidó i Tura2, (overall OR=1.39; =7.4×10 ; 1,154 cases and 3,895 controls). The top va- A. Evangelista Masip2, A. Cueto González1, T. Vendrell Bayona1, E. García-Arumi1,3, E. riant, rs9349379, is intronic to , a risk locus for coronary artery Tizzano Ferrari1,3; disease, migraine, and cePrvical artery dissection. The analyses oPf geometri- 1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Disease Unit, Hospital cal parameters of carotids from 2,5-400 healthy volunteers indicate higher Universitari Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Cardiology, Marfan Unit, intima-media thickness ( =1.97×10 ) and wall to lumen ratio ( =0.002) in Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Biomedical Network Research Centre on Rare rs9349379-A carriers, suggesting indices of carotid hypertrophy previous- Diseases (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. ly described in carotids of FMD patPieHnAtsC.T IRm1m unohistochemis try detected PHACTR1 in endothelium and smooth muscle cells of FMD and normal Phuman carPohtaidcst.r 1The expression of by genotypes inprimary hu- Molecular studies in patients with aortic pathology syndromes such as Mar- man fibroblasts showed higher expression in rs9349379-A carriers (N=86, fan and Loeys-Dietz syndromes include NGS of FBN1, TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 =0.003). knockdown in zebrafish resulted in dilated vessels indi- as well as their parents to determine the origin of the mutation. Recent cating impaired vascular development. reports have shown that somatic mosaicism in parents of individuals with Conclusions. We report the first susceptibility locus for FMD and provide autosomic monogenic genetic diseases is more common than previously evidence for a complex genetic pattern of inheritance and indices of shared thought. Thus, an important proportion of de novo mutations could be the pathophysiology between FMD and other cardiovascular and neurovascular consequence of low-level mosaicism in one of the parents. diseases. We analyzed 44 parents of patients considered as de novo mutations in FBN1 (n=42) and TGFBR1 (n=2) in order to detect somatic mosaicism. PCR  P05
.36 amplicons for the exons of interest in each case were obtained followed by Abnormal folate metabolism is associated with metabolic syndrome NexteraXT technology to generate libraries and deep sequencing using Mi- components in spontaneous hypertensive rats (SHR) seq sequencer. The obtained data were analyzed using a somatic alignment V. Kozich1, M. Pravenec2, J. Krijt1, J. Sokolová1, V. Zídek2, V. Landa2, P. Mlejnek2, J. Šilhavý2, to detect low-frequency mosaicisms. M. Šimánková2, V. Škop3, J. Trnovská3, L. Kazdová3, T. W. Kurtz4; In 3 index cases we found low-frequency mosaicism in one of their parents 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University, First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Model Diseases, Institute of Physiology, Czech (in DNA blood sample and buccal cell swab and urine when available). Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Center of Experimental Medicine, Gene Mutation origin %blood % buccal swab % urine Department of Metabolism and Diabetes, Institute for Clinical and Experimental DNA DNA DNA Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of FBN1 c.1664G>A paternal 19.13% 17.69% In California, San Francisco, CA, United States. (p.Cys555Tyr) process FBN1 c.425G>A maternal 13.02% In process In (p.Gly142Glu) process TGFBR1 c.683_685del paternal 4.52% 8.48% 4.36% (p.Glu228del) Background: Metabolic syndrome (MS) is a multifactorial common risk fac- tor for cardiovascular disease. A number of studies indicated that abnormal metabolism of sulfur amino acids and folates is associated with MS compo- A1c2co4rding to our results almost 10% of the deE nSoHvoG F B2N011 m6u |ta BtiAonRs CcoEuLldO NnAe,n StsP.AIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG Methods and results: We analyzed the role folate deficiency in pathogene-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index sis of the metabolic syndrome in the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) Methods: Genetic variants in 42 genes related to complement pathway have model. The SHRs fed a folate-deficient diet showed significantly reduced been analyzed by next generation sequencing (Trusight one sequencing serum folate (104 ± 5 vs. 11 ± 1 nmol/L) and urinary folate excretion (4.3 panel-Illumina) in 48 HT patients, 24 with and 24 without AMR. Statistical ± 0.6 vs. 1.2 ± 0.1 nmol/16 h), ectopic fat accumulation, impaired glucose was performed with SNPstats. tolerance and increased systolic blood pressure. Next, by using BXH/HXB Results: 287 Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 42 genes were ana- recombinant inbred strains derived from the spontaneously hypertensive lyzed in both groups (AMR vs control). Three SNPs (rs1143674, rs7562325 rat (SHR) and Brown Norway progenitors we detected a deletion variant and rs1143676) in ITGA4, which codifies for integrin alpha-4 protein, sho- in the folate receptor 1 (Folr1) promoter resulting in decreased expression wed significant association with AMR. Haplotype-association analysis, com- of Folr1 mRNA in the kidney. Analysis of the SHR.BN-chr.1 congenic strain prising these 3 SNPs, showed that there is a significant association between confirmed that the Folr1 promotor variant in SHR cosegregates with redu- AGT haplotype and AMR (OR (95%)=9.33 (2.14-40.58) p=0.0047). Other ced renal expression of the mRNA and renal folate reabsorption, decreased three SNPS (rs1899450_MB L2
, rs1048118_CFP, and rs3774268_MAS P1
) serum folate levels, ectopic fat accumulation, reduced muscle insulin sen- also showed significant association with AMR (p<0.05). sitivity, and increased blood pressure. Transgenic rescue experiments per- Conclusions: AGT haplotype in ITGA4 gene and rs1899450_MB L2
, formed by expressing a Folr1 transgene in the SHR ameliorated most of the rs1048118_CFP, and rs3774268_MAS P1
 could be associated with develop- metabolic disturbances. ment of AMR in HT patients. However, more research must be done to deter- Conclusions: These data support hypothesis that genetic and nutritional fo- mine the possibly role of these variants in the development of AMR. late deficiency is associated with development of the metabolic syndrome Funding Sources: in SHR model and constitutes a previously neglected mechanism that may This study received financial support from FIS_13/02174 and it is part of contribute to increased risk for cardiovascular disease. the research activities of “Red de enfermedades cardiovasculares del Insti- Supported by grant GA ČR 14-09283S, institutional support by PRVOUK  P24
. tuto de Salud Carlos III (RD12/0042)”.  P05
.37  P05
.39 Molecular screening of GATA4 in a Moroccan population suffering Rare synonymous variants in LDLR gene are associated with Familial from non-syndromic tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) Hypercholesterolaemia I. El Bouchikhi1,2, K. Belhassan1, F. Moufid1,2, M. Iraqui Houssaini2, L. Bouguenouch1, I. C. Rodríguez Antolín1, C. Rodríguez Jiménez1, L. Reinares2, F. Arrieta3, E. Vallespín1, P. Samri1, K. Ouldim1, S. Atmani3; Lapunzina1, S. Rodríguez Nóvoa1; 1Medical Genetics and Oncogenetics Laboratory, Hassan II University Hospital, Fez, 1INGEMM, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, Morocco, 2Laboratory of Microbial Biotechnology, Faculty of Sciences and Techniques, 3Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain. University of Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah, Fez, Morocco, 3Medico-Chirurgical Unit of Cardio-pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Hassan II University Hospital, Fez, Morocco. INTRODUCTION: Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal do- minant disease caused by mutations in LDLR, APOB, PCSK9, characterized Introduction: Tetralogy of Fallot is one of the most common congenital heart by high levels of LDL-c increasing the risk of cardiovascular disease. About disease (CHD) with an incidence of 7% of CHDs. This disorder consists of 35-40% of FH-individuals lack of mutations. Herein we analyse the synony- four anomalies: ventricular septal defect; over-riding aorta; right ventri- mous variants found in individuals without genetic confirmation of the di- cular outflow obsNtrKuXc2ti-o5n andG rAiTgAh4t ventricular hypertrophy. Several tran- sease. scription factors were identified to be involved in non-syndromic Tetralogy PATIENTS AND METHODS: Individuals with possible/confirmed clinical dia- of Fallot, notably and . The latter is a zinc-finger protein that gnosis of FH were remitted to our service for genetic testing. LDLR, APOB, regulates the down-stream target genes, througGhA bTAin4ding to the specific mo- PCSK9 and LDLRPA1 was analysed by Next Generation Sequence (NGS). tif (T/A)GATA(A/G), in order to control cell proliferation in the developing MLPA was performed to detect large insertion/deletions in LDLR. Synony- heart. The aim of this study was to screen the mutations in series of mous variants with frequency <0.01 were selected for in silico analyses. Moroccan patients with Tetralogy of Fallot. RESULTS: Rare synonymous variants were found in 12 out of 100 patients. Materials and Methods: thirty-one patients were recruited in cardio-ped- The synonymous LDLR:c.2388C>T;p.Ile759Ile, with allele frequency of iatric department of HASSAN II university hospital-Fez. After obtGaiAnTiAn4g 0.00001 in ExCA, is located at the -2 position of the splice donor site within consents, we have collected blood samples, and extracted genomic DNA exon-16. In silico analyses using Human Splicing Finder identified a new site specimens. Then, we carried out PCR and direct sequencing of the in enhancer motifs (ESE) and other splicing motifs predicting an impact in coding regions for each patient. The obtained sequences were analysed by protein expression. Ex-SKIP revealed the mutated allele has a higher chance Bioinformatic alignment tool. of exon skipping than wild type. ESEfinder predicts the lost of two junction Results: we detected two missense mutations and five synonymous mutati- sites to SRF1 in the mutated allele with respect to wild type. These data ons. These mutations were clustered on exons two and five. In aGdAdTiAti4on to suggest this variant might affect critical regulatory sequences which could eight polymorphisms spread over the intronic regions, in particular, introns change the primary structure protein. one and four. Considering the non-synonymGAoTuAs4 mutations alone, mu- CONCLUSIONS: Rare synonymous variants should be analysed in pati- tation rate in our cohort reaches 6.5%. ents without genetic confirmation of FH especially those with any predic- Conclusions: given the important role of in regulating the heart de- ted impact on protein regulation. Further studies should be performed velopment process, the identified mutation seems most likely to be respon- in order to dilucidated the mechanism proposed for pathogenicity of sible of the observed phenotype in the mutation carriers. Finally, to confirm LDLR:c.2388C>T;p.Ile759Ile. these results a larger Moroccan TOF cohort will be pertinent.  P05
.40  P05
.38 A genome-wide association study for hypertriglyceridemia in ethnic Relationship between AGT haplotype in ITGA4 gene and antibody- Saudi Arabs mediated rejection after heart transplantation. M. M. Alrasheed1, S. M. Wakil2, R. Ram3, N. P. Muiya2, G. Moraham4, B. F. Meyer2, N. G. Marron-Linares1, L. Nunez1, M. Crespo-Leiro2, N. Suarez-Fuentetaja1, E. Barge- Dzimiri2; Caballero2, M. Paniagua-Martin2, Z. Grille-Cancela2, J. Muñiz-Garcia1, E. Rodríguez3, J. 1College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Faisal Spec. Vázquez2, M. Hermida-Prieto1; Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Western Australian Institute for 1Grupo de investigación en Cardiología. Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Medical Research, University of Western Australia, Australia, Perth, Australia, 43Western Coruña (INIBIC). Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruña (CHUAC), Sergas. Australian Institute for Medical Research, University of Western Australia, Perth, Universidade da Coruña (UDC)., A Coruña, Spain, 2Servicio de Cardiología. Instituto de Australia. Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruña (CHUAC), Sergas., A Coruña, Spain, 3Department of Anatomic Pathology, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic., Cleveland, OH, United States. Introduction: Hypertriglyceridemia (hTG) is a primary cause for coronary artery disease (CAD), with a strong genetic component. However the genetic basis for hTG is not fully understood yet Introduction: Heart transplant (HT) is a life-saving treatment for patients Materials and Method: In the present study, we performed a common vari- with end-stage heart failure. A low incidence but significant problem in HT ant association study (CVAS) using the Affymetrix High Density Axiom plat- is the antibody-mediated rejection (AMR). In AMR, there is complement ac- form on the disease in the ethnic Saudi Arab population (927 cases versus tivation which contributes to graft damage. 3159). Purpose: The aim of this study is to analyze if genetic variants in genes re- Results: The lead variant was the rs1558861 [1.99(1.73-2.30); lated to complements pathway could be associated with the development p=7.37x10-22], residing on chromosome (chr) 11 at the apolipoprotein A-1 of AMR. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 125 (APOA1) locus. The rs780094 [1.34(1.21-1.49); p=8.57x10-8] on chr 2 at theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index glucokinase regulatory protein (GCKR) locus was similarly significantly as- luated patients diagnosed with HCM. A capture library was designed and sociated, while the rs10911205 [1.29(1.16-1.44); p=3.52x10-6] on chr 1 at target regions were sequenced on an Illumina platform. TAhBeC Cst9udAyC TwCa1s the laminin subunit gamma-1 (LAM C1
) locus showed suggestive association AdeCsTiNgn2edB AtoG 3scCreAeSnQ 2theC AcVo3dinCgH RDMN2A sCeRqYuAeBncCeS oRfP e3itDheErS 2D0M, 4D6 DoOr  L5
K7 gDeSnCe2s with disease. Furthermore, the rs17145738 [0.68(0.60-0.77); p=6.69x10-9] DimSpCGlic2atDeSdP inD THNCAM EaMnDd oFtHhLe2r iGnAhTeArDite1dG cLaArdIiLoKm, yJPoHp2at, hJUiePs: LAMA4, LAM P2
, on chr7 at the carbohydrate-responsive element-binding protein-encoding LDB3 L, MNA, MYBPC,3 MYH, 6 MYH,7 MY L2
, MY L3
, MYL, K2 M, YOZ2 ,M YPN, (MLXIPL) gene locus displayed significant protective characteristics, while NEXN, PDLI,M 3 PK,  P2
 P,L N PR, KAG2 PT, PN1,1 RAF1 RBM2, 0 RYR2, SCN5A, another variant rs6982502 [0.76(0.68-0.84); p=5.31x10-7] on chr8 showed SGCD, TAZ TC, AP TMEM, 43 TN, N C1
 T,N NI3 T, NNT2, TPM1 T, RDN TT, N TTR, similar but weaker properties. These findings were replicated in 317 cases VC, L , , , , , , , , , versus 1415 controls from the same ethnic Arab population. , , , , , , , , , , Conclusion: Our data reveal several variants across the human genome that and . are associated with hTG in ethnic Arabs. Results: Pathogenic mutations were detected in 17 patients (28.3%). Conclusions: We developed an NGS procedure for screening mutations in  P05
.41 57 genes associated with HCM. The advantage of expanding the number of Impact of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone polymorphisms and genes screened for mutations will be discussed. mitochondrial haplogroups in phenotyphic expression of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in genotyped patients  P05
.43 I. Perez1, M. Sabater1, E. García-Molina1, C. Muñoz2, M. Navarro2, M. Olmo2, D. López2, J. Clinical application of a whole genome sequencing (WGS) approach to Gimeno2; Inherited Cardiac Disorders 1Hospital Clínico Univeristario Virgen de la Arrixaca.Inherited cardiomyipathies unit, P. A. James1, T. Thompson1, D. Du Sart2, R. Leach3, D. Floeke3, R. Tearle3, D. Zentner1, A. Murcia, Spain, 2University Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Department of Cardiology, Trainer1, J. Vohra1, I. Winship1; Murcia, Spain. 1Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 2Victorian Clinical Genetic Service, Melbourne, Australia, 3Complete Genomics, Mountain View, CA, United States. Introduction: Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a cardiovascular con- dition, with a variable penetrance and expression. The renin-angiotensin- Background: Identifying the underlying mutation in families affected by in- aldosterone system (RAAS) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) inherited va- herited cardiac disorders allows optimal screening and risk management riants have been associated with left ventricular hypertrophy and play a role but in practice this remains unachievable in many families reflecting the in phenotype of HCM. complexity of these disorders. We examined the potential of whole genome Purpose: To study the role of RAAS polymorphisms and mitochondrial ha- sequencing (WGS) compared to current standard practice in the setting of a plogroups on the HCM clinical expression in a population of patients with multidisciplinary cardiac-genetics clinic (CGC). HCM and genetic diagnosis. Methods: Living index cases assessed in the CGC (n=100) were consented Methods: Study population comprised 156 patients with HCM carrying a for WGS alongside usual care. The genome was sequenced and annotated causative mutation in a sarcomeric MYBP C3
 and MYH7 gene. All individuals (Complete Genomics). Variants were filtered against public databases and underwent cardiac examination. We genotyped six RAAS polymorphisms data from healthy elderly controls. Clinical interpretation was applied to and six mitochondrial single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP´s) which defi- high quality calls for SNPs, InDels, structural variants and CNVs. To manage ne the most common European haplogroups. the scope of unintended findings analysis and validation was limited to ge- Results: On multivariable analysis, CMA polymorphism (-1903A) carriers nes associated with a cardiac phenotype (HPO database). showed a phenotype characterised by systolic impairment and left ventricu- Results: Analysis of 75 genomes has been completed (36 Cardiomyopathy, lar dilatation. The DD-ACE was associated with a lower survival free from AF 31 Familial Arrhythmias, 5 Aortopathy) revealing an average of 125 protein- and stroke. Polymorphism T174M, was related to a higher hypertrophy. The altering variants per genome in genes with a reported cardiac phenotype. mitochondrial haplotype V was associated with a reduced survival free from For 21 individuals (28%) a potentially causative mutation was detected AF and limiting dyspnoea. Haplotype U was associated to dyspnoea. Carriers in standard care. This increased to 42 individuals (56%) following WGS of haplotype J had more often systolic impairment. Haplotype HV was as- (p<0.001). In 12% of cases more than one likely pathogenic change was de- sociated with non sustained ventricular tachycardia and sudden death risk tected, while 46 (61%) carry clinically suspicious variants that are currently score. unclassifiable. The broad genetic data allowed the additional identification Conclusions: Our data suggest that the genetic variation at some RAAS SNP´s of undiagnosed syndromic disorders and novel candidate genes where mul- could contribute to the different expression in HCM. Moreover, mtDNA ha- tiple truncating mutations were observed in highly constrained genes. plotypes may have the potential of becoming biomarkers in cardiomyopathy. Conclusion: While highly complex, whole genome sequencing achieved a si- gnificant improvement in genetic diagnosis over standard investigation and SNP´s Variable p gene testing. (-1903A) Systolic impairment <0.001 (-1903A) Left ventricular dilatation 0.02  P05
.44 DD-ECA Survival free from AF 0.017 DD-ECA Stroke 0.032 Correlation with platelet parameters and genetic markers of AGT (T174M) IMLVWT 0.022 thrombophilia panel (factor II g.20210G>A, factor V Leiden, Mitochondrial Haplogroup Variable p MTHFR ( C677
T, A1298C), PAI-1, β-fibrinogen, factor XIIIA (V34L), V Survival free from AF 0.029 V NYHA III-IV 0.002 glycoprotein IIIa ( L33
P)) in ischemic strokes U NYHA III-IV 0.05 S. Tasdemir1, H. B. Erdem1, I. Sahin1, L. Ozel2, G. Ozdemir2, R. Eroz3, A. Tatar1; J Systolic impairment 0.012 1Ataturk University Department of Medical Genetics, Erzurum, Turkey, 2Ataturk HV NSVT 0.031 HV Risk Score 0.015 University Department of Neurology, Erzurum, Turkey, 3Duzce University Department of Medical Genetics, Duzce, Turkey.  P05
.42 Mutation analysis of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy genes using Next- Generation Sequencing Introduction: Ischemic stroke, an important type of arterial thrombosis, is A. M. Coutinho, J. Tavares, M. Carmo-Fonseca; associated with increased mortality risk, severe disability and life quality GenoMed, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de impairment. In this study we analyzed mean platelet volume (MPV), platelet Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. count (PLT) values and genetic thrombophilia markers of patients who have ischemic stroke history and searched the relationship with genetic predis- position of ischemic stroke and platelet parameters. Introduction: Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common autosomal Materials and Methods: A retrospective, clinical trial was performed by dominant genetic disease associated with sudden death and progressive reviewing the ischemic stroke history (except cryptogenic events) of 599 heart failure. Genetic testing is routinely offered to these patients as a means patients, and 100 controls. The results of the genetic thrombophilia panel to improve prognosis through appropriate lifestyle and medical interventi- were used to classify the study group and control group into low and high ons. However, because mutations in at least 30 genes have been linked to risk for thrombophilia groups. The high-risk group included patients homo- HCM, conventional diagnosis by Sanger sequencing is laborious and time zygous/heterozygous for factor II g.20210G>A or factor V Leiden mutati- consuming. Advances in high throughput sequencing technologies have the ons with/without any other polymorphism. The low-risk group included potential to solve this problem, but they also raise new challenges. The aim patients heterozygous or homozygous for MTHFR ( C677
T, A1298C), PAI-1, of this study was to develop a Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) approach β-fibrinogen, factor XIIIA (V34L) and glycoprotein IIIa ( L33
P) polymorphis- t 1o 2sc 6reen for mutations in patients with this diEsoSrdHeGr. 2016 | BARCELONmAs, oSrP nAegINati v| eW inW terWm.sE oSf HboGth. OmuRtGations and polymorphisms. Methods: The study population comprised 60 unrelated consecutively eva-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results: High risk group mutations were significant; but low risk group po- We analysed -by means of NGS - 148 arrythmogenic genes in a consecutive lymorphisms were not significant for ischemic stroke. There was significant series of 400 Sardinian patients enrolled at the San Francesco Hospital form difference between MPV and PLT values of ischemic stroke and control years 2014 to 2015. In addition, to identify genes significantly enriched in group. the Sardinian series, we performed a mutation burden test by using as con- Conclusion: Factor II g.20210G>A and factor V Leiden mutations are im- trol dataset of continental Italians. portant risk factors for ischemic stroke. Thrombophilia mutations and We confirmed the genetic heterogeneity of the BrS, LQTS and CPVT but in polymorphisms do not have a significant effect on MPV and PLT values in addition we identified: a) a burden of complex genotypes (compound/doub- ischemic stroke patients. le heterozygous and triple mutation carriers) with a higher prevalence in Sardinians compared with continental Italians (7.8% vs 3.2%) and b) new Summary of descriptive statistics for the groups. n Mean p Mean p Mutation p potential CPVT/LQTS candidates (such as CACNA1B, CASQ2) thus confir- PLT±SD MPV±SD score ming the idea of a possible genetic overlap between the different disorders. Patients High 139 267±68 0.014a 8.4±1 0.000a 0.275d As expected, the use of NGS in the Sardinian population to assess the con- risk 0.392b 0.365b group 0.048c 0.000c tribution of genetics to such malignant cardiac traits, can further elucidate causal mechanisms and in addition these results identify a burden of com- Low 460 268±65 8.4±1 3.3 plex genotypes that, in panels derived from more cosmopolitan populations, risk group are missing. Control 100 251±57 7.8±0.8 3.2  P05
.47 Identification of genomic region associated with Lipoprotein Cholesterol: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in Tehran Cardio-metabolic Genetic Study (TCGS) M. S. Fallah1,2, M. Daneshpour1, B. Sedaghatikhayat1, K. Guity1, F. Azizi3;  P05
.45 1Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2 New mutation c.IV S2
+45T>G in LMNA gene causing aberrant splicing Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Endocrine and leading to cardiac conduction defect and variable myopathy Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Y. Rogozhina1, S. Mironovich1, A. Shestak1, T. Adyan2, A. Bakulina3, A. Polyakov2, E. Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. Zaklyazminskaya1,4; 1Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre of Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 4Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Introduction: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have become an im- Moscow, Russian Federation. portant strategy for genetic examination of human complex diseases. LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) plays a proven effect as risk factor in the cardiovascular disease and needs further investigation to provide a better understanding of Introduction: Most of mutations in LMNA gene are unique and were found the pathogenesis. Here we report results of a GWAS in an Iranian population in 1-2 unrelated families. Interpretation of new genetic findings especially participating in Tehran cardio-metabolic genetic study (TCGS). beyond the coding area and canonical splice sites can be difficult and re- Material and Methods: GWAS data was used; including 699,950 quality- quires advanced investigation. checked SNPs (HumanOmniExpress-24-v1-0 bead at deCODE genetics) Materials and Methods: The clinical and molecular-genetic study was per- from 8174 participants with measures of blood LDL-C concentrations (with formed for the patient with cardiac conduction defect and variable myopa- normal distribution and excluding outlier data (± 4SD)). Efficient Bayesian thy. Genetic study included: DNA-testing in LMNA gene by Sanger sequence. mixed-model analysis with the help of Bolt-LMM v2.1 was used for associa- The prevalence of new genetic variant was tested in cohort of EDMD patients tion analysis in total population, male and female separately. (99 DNA samples) by MLPA, and in control group (100 healthy volunteers) Results: At the genome-wide level (p<10-7), 27 SNPs that was associated by RFLP method. Potential influence of c.IV S2
+45T>G was performed by with LDL-C concentration in total population mostly in both sexes. Asso- open bioinformatics tools. Bidirectional Sanger sequencing followed non- ciated signals were concentrated in 19p13.2, 1p13.3, 2p24.1 and 5q13.3 quantitative RT-PCR of target fragment of LMNA cDNA was performed. In si- genomic region. lico modeling was performed with CCBulder server and Modeller software. Conclusion: In this study we discovered four loci with protein coding genes Results: Diagnosis EDMD was established in proband based on clinical in- (LDLR, CELSR2, APOB and HMGCR) which confirm the previous reports in vestigation. Genetic testing revealed new intronic variant c.IV S2
+45T>G in other ethnicities. This study is the first GWAS in Iran and results could pro- LMNA gene in proband and affected daughter but not in two healthy sons. vide better understanding of the underlying biological mechanism of LDL-C Activation of cryptic splice site was predicted by open bioinformatics sour- regulation and consequent using in therapeutic targets and clinical care for ces. Insertion of 45 bp was confirmed in proband’s cDNA. The possible func- cardiovascular disease. tional effects of aberrant protein were predicted.  P05
.48 Conclusion: New variantc.IV S2
+45T>G in LMNA gene is pathogenic and cau- A genome-wide association study for low HDL-cholesterol levels in sative for EDMD in this family. Deep intronic variants in the LMNA gene can ethnic Saudi Arabs be responsible for some genotype-negative EDMD cases. N. P. Muiya1, S. M. Wakil1, R. Ram2, E. Andres1, N. Mazhar1, S. Hagos1, G. Morahan2, B. F.  P05
.46 Meyer1, N. Dzimiri1; 1King Faisal Spec. Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Western The burden of complex arrhythmic genotypes in a consecutive Australian Institute for Medical Research, University of Western Australia, Australia, series of Sardinian population of patients with primary arrhythmic Perth, Australia. disorders. N. Marziliano1, P. Berne1, G. Viola1, V. Carboni1, D. Fiscella2, A. Fiscella3, P. A. Merlini4, F. Notarangelo5, N. Gaibazzi5, D. Ardissino5, G. Piras1, M. Monne1, R. Asproni1, G. Casu1; 1Presidio Ospedaliero “San Francesco”, AS L3
 Nuoro, Laboratorio Specialistico di Introduction: The genetic basis for changes in high density lipoprotein-cho- Oncoematologia, Nuoro, Italy, 2Azienda Ospedaliera di Rilievo Nazionale e di Alta lesterol (HDL) levels is not fully elucidated yet. We performed a GWAS for Specializzazione “Garibaldi, S. Luigi-S. Currò, Ascoli-Tomaselli”. Presidio Ospedaliero this disorder in ethnic Arabs. Garibaldi-Nesima-Catania. UO di Cardiologia, Catania, Italy, 3Fondazione Floresta Methods: We employed the Affymetrix high density Axiom Genome-Wide Longo, Catania, Italy, 4Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Niguarda Cà Granda, IV Divisione ASI Array (Asian population) that provides high genetic coverage containing di Cardiologia, Nuoro, Italy, 5Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria di Parma, Parma, Italy. a total of 598,000 SNPs to genotype a total of 5495 individuals in the disco- very and validation experiments. Results: Two variants, the rs1800775 [1.31(1.22-1.42); p=3.41E-12] on Brugada syndrome (BrS), Long QT syndrome (LQTS), Short QT syndrome the CETP gene and rs359027 [1.26(1.16-1.36); p=2.55E-08] on the LMCD1 (SQTS) and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), gene were significantly associated with harbouring of low HDL-cholesterol. are primary inherited cardiac arrhythmic disorders that can lead to sudden Furthermore, the rs3104435 [1.26(1.15-1.38); p=1.19E-06] at the MATN1 death. Prevalence might change according to the ethnicity and affecting locus, rs9835344 [1.16(1.08-1.26); p=8.75E-06] in the CNTN6, rs1559997 mainly male patients in their third to fourth decade of life. They are inhe- [1.3(1.14-1.47); p=9.48E-06] in the SDS and rs1670273 [1.2(1.1-1.31); rited as autosomal dominant traits; but recent studies identified complex p=4.81E-06] at the DMN/SYNM gene locus exhibited suggestive association thought rare genotypes. with the disease. Seven other variants including the rs1147169, rs10248618, We aimed to investigate the prevalence of mutations in the disease-genes rs476155, rs7024300, rs10836699, rs11603691 and rs750134 exhibited underlying such inherited disorders inE 4S 0H 0 G pa t2 ie0 n1 ts6 o f| SB aA rdR inC iaE n L aO ncN esA try, .SPA bIN or d| eW rliW ne W pr. oE teS cH tivG e .O prR opG erties. The validation and joint meta-ana1 ly2 s7 isABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.52 MicroRNA-625-5p as a novel candidate modulator of AMPK pathway experiment resulted in the rs1800775, rs3104435 and rs359027 retaining in statin-treated individuals without coronary artery disease their predisposing properties, as well as the rs10836699 and rs11603691 N. Coban1, D. Pirim2, A. Erkan3, F. Guclu-Geyik4, B. Ekici3, N. Erginel-Unaltuna4; showing protective properties. 1Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Department of Genetics, Istanbul Conclusions: Our data demonstrate association of several variants across Universty, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Mus the genome with changes in low HDL-cholesterol levels in ethnic Arabs. Alparslan University, Mus, Turkey, 3Department of Cardiology, Medical Faculty, Ufuk University, Ankara, Turkey, 4Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Department of  P05
.49 Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. Genetic Testing for Marfan And Loeys-Dietz Syndrome - Utility of the Ghent Nosology as a clinical selection tool J. Dean; Aim: AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a signal molecule that phos- University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. phorylates and inactivates 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reduc- tase, the key enzyme controlling cholesterol biosynthesis. We aimed to test whether AMPK signaling pathway is effective in human macrophages which Marfan and Loeys-Dietz syndromes are aortopathies with additional con- play crucial role in atherosclerosis. In addition, to identify novel modulators nective tissue features. Marfan is associated with mutation in FBN1 and of AMPK pathway while exploring the effect of statins on plasma microRNA Loeys-Dietz syndrome with mutation in TGFβR1 and TGFβR2. The clinical (miRNA) profile of individuals without coronary artery disease (CAD). Med- diagnosis of Marfan syndrome is made using the International (Ghent) No- hod: We measured the expressions of selected genes involved in AMPK path- sology, originally described in 1996, and updated in 2010. Aortic dilatation way in THP-1 macrophages treated with simvastatin to assess dependence or ectopia lentis are key features - other findings are aggregated to create of their expression on cholesterol level. The Agilent’s miRNA Microarray the systemic score. A score of 7 or more contributes to a diagnosis of Marfan. analyses were performed to compare plasma miRNA profile of individuals The nosology does not help directly to diagnose Loeys-Dietz syndrome. 77% (≤30% stenosis) treated with and without statin. MiRDB target prediction of probands attending the Aberdeen Marfan Clinic who fulfil the Ghent 2010 tool was utilized to identify miRNA target genes involved in AMPK pathway nosology for a diagnosis of Marfan syndrome, and 74% who fulfil Ghent for differently expressed miRNAs. Expressions of target genes were ana- 1996 have an FBN1 mutation. In probands who do not fulfil the nosology, lyzed by using real-time PCR. Results: Significantly decreased expression 16% of those with aortic dilatation and any systemic score below 7 have of 5 miRNAs (miR-625-5p, miR-550a-3-5p, miR-550b-2-5p, miR-550a-5p, TGFβR1 or TGFβR2 mutations, but none in this group have FBN1 mutation. miR-let-7d-5p) were observed in individuals receiving statins compared In those with no ocular features, and no aortic findings, around 20% of those to non-statin group (fold change>1.5, p<0.05). In addition, simvastatin with a systemic score of 5 have FBN1 mutations, but few cases with scores increased the expression of AMPK α1, AMPK α2, AMPK β1, AMPK β2 and below this have mutations. This case series suggests it is worth considering SREBF2 in THP-1 macrophages. Using miRDB target prediction tool, we Marfan syndrome and testing for FBN1 in probands with a systemic score identifed AMPK α1 is a strong candidate (target score=95) for miR-625-5p. of 5 or greater under Ghent 2010 but no cardiac or ocular findings, and that Conclusion: Our results suggests that statin may downregulate the expres- probands with aortic dilatation but a systemic score of less than 7 are more sion of miR-625-5p and induce AMPKα1 expression which in turn may ac- likely to have Loeys-Dietz than Marfan. tivates cholesterol syntesis pathway. Apoptosis-associated miR-625 may be  P05
.51 used as a novel biomarker for effectiveness of statins therapy in patients Ventricular fibrillation as presenting symptom in an adolescent with w  P0
it 5h . 5a 3therosclerosis. Marfan syndrome From Facebook to gene: how social media helped to find a gene for a A. Wischmeijer1,2, V. Di Pierro1, E. Micaglio1, M. Ziacchi3, G. Gargiulo4, D. Pacini5, G. cardiac disease Tortora1,6, G. Severi1, E. Mariucci7, L. Lovato8, M. Seri1, C. Rossi1, M. Bonvicini7; W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, B. Frentz1, H. G. Yntema2, T. Rinne2, I. van der Burgt2, P. A. 1Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, van der Zwaag1, K. Löhner1, B. Flapper3, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1; Italy, 2Genetic Counselling Service, Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of 1Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center, Groningen, Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy, 3Instiute of Cardiology, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Pediatric Cardiac Surgery Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Malpighi, Università degli Studi, Bologna, Italy, 5Cardiac Surgery Unit, Policlinico S. Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands. Orsola-Malpighi, Università degli Studi, Bologna, Italy, 6Clinical Immunology Unit, AOU Riuniti Ancona, Università Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy, 7Pediatric Cardiology and GUCH Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 8Cardio-Thoracic Radiology Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, A patient support group, communicating with each other through Facebook, Bologna, Italy. requested us to develop research on chromosome 6 anomalies. With the help of this patient support group, we recruited 253 patients with deletions or duplications of chromosome 6. We received detailed clinical information Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a highly variable, autosomal dominant condition, (including array reports) of 101 of these patieTnAtsB.2 mainly characterized by ocular, cardiovascular and musculo-skeletal ma- Genotype-phenotype comparison revealed a recurrent phenotype in seven nifestations. Aortic root dilatation and mitral valve prolapse are the most patients with an overlapping 6q25.1 deletion. was the most likely can- common cardiovascular signs and source of major clinical concern because didate gene in this region. Their phenotype (mitral valve defect and/or di- they can lead to severe complications. Arrhythmias such as atrial flutter and lating cardiomyopathy (DCM), short stature, hyperlaxity and facial features, ventricular dysrhythmias have been described in MFS, but currently avai- resembling Noonan syndrome) was so specific, that it could beT AmBa2tched lable knowledge is limited. to two unsolved familial cases without chromosome anomalies, known to We report on a 13-year old female who presented with several unexplained our department. Exome sequencing and targetTeAdB s2equencing of was episodes of ventricular dysrhythmia/fibrillation; recurrent myocarditis and performed and mutations sTeAgrBe2gating with the phenotype were detected in cardiomyopathy were excluded and an ICD was positioned. Previously, she both families. We concluded that mutations of and deletions of chro- underwent corrective surgery for inguinal hernia and flat feet. Pre-operative mosome 6q25.1 including are associated with cardiac disease and a ECGs resulted normal. Additional clinical investigations revealed abnormal Noonan syndrome-like phenotype. We show that a Facebook based patient ECGs, severe aortic root dilatation, mitral valve prolapse, mild pectus cari- sFuupnpdoinrgt group was able to participate in research, leading to the recognition natum and scoliosis, arachnodactyly and mild craniofacial MFS signs, while of a disease gene and the associated phenotype. ectopia lentis and myopia were excluded. Molecular genetic analysis of FBN1 (HRM and MLPA), TGFBR1/2, SMAD3 The Chromosome 6 Research Project is funded by an e-health grant from and TGFB2 for suspected MFS or Loeys-Dietz syndrome resulted negative. ZonMw, the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Develop- Therefore, whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed which led to ment and by crowd funding by the parents of the Chromosome 6 Facebook the identification of a de novo heterozygous nonsense mutation in FBN1 group. (NM_000138 c.7800C>G p.Tyr2600X), previously described in a subject with Marfan syndrome (UMD-FBN1 mutations database ID 207), and absent in genetic databases of general population cohorts (1000 genomes, ExAC databases). To our knowledge, this is the first description of ventricular fibrillation as presenting symptom in a pediatric MFS patient. This case confirms that po- tentially life-threatening arrhythmias should be considered in MFS. Large multi-centre studies are needed to gain information on this issue. 128 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.55  P05
.57 Zebrafish model for MYBP C3
 variants demonstrates pathogenicity Genetic evaluation of next-generation sequencing results in dilated M. Sabater Molina1, M. Anchelin2, M. Cayuela2, I. Pérez Sánchez1, E. García-Molina1, M. cardiomyopathies Olmo Conesa1, M. Oliva Sandoval3, J. Gimeno Blanes1; I. Boronova1, J. Bernasovska1, J. Kmec2, I. Bernasovsky3, V. Szabadosova1, P. Ferenc1, E. 1Inherited Cardiac Disease Unit. Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca., Murcia, Petrejcikova1; Spain, 2Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain, 3Cardiology 1Department of Biology, Faculty of Humanities and Natural Sciences, University of Department. Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain. Presov, Presov, Slovakia, 2Cardiocentre, Faculty Hospital of J.A.Rayman, Presov, Slovakia, Introduction: 3Institute of Roma Studies, University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia. The majority of founder MYBP C3
 mutations that cause hy- pertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) are truncation mutations, nevertheless Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a genetically heterogeneous disease, few functional studies exist regarding the different factors that modify HCM known to be one of the leading causes of heart failure and sudden cardiac phenotypes. To elucidate the underlying mechanisms in the phenotypic dif- death. Due to the large number of causative genes and high rate of private fMeraetnecreiasl oaf nHdC MM ectahuosedds : by MYBP C3
 truncated mutation using a zebrafish mutations, mutational screening requires the use of extremely sensitive and model. specific detection methods. Recent technical advances by introduction of We performed the functional study of two new next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies provide new possibilities of founder mutations in MYBP C3
 which cause HCM and origin truncated pro- dilated cardiomyopathies detection. The aim of our study was evaluation of teins of different lengths: variant A (p.Pro108Alafs*9,-91%) and variant B genetic profile of next-generation sequencing results in Slovak patients with (Rpe.Rsu8l9t1s:A fs*160, -17%). We injected MYBP C3
 variants A or B mRNA in ze- dilated cardiomyopathy. In the cohort of 19 unrelated patients with clinical brafish embryos at one cell stage to analyze the cardiac size and function. diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy (n=19; 12 male, 7 female, age range 29- We created a viable zebrafish model of HCM with expression of the 71 years) H558R mutations (exon 12) in SCN5A gene in heterozygous and human variants A and B. Pathogenicity was suggested bvys changes in cardiac homozygous form were detected. Altogether, 105 376 sequence variants chambers. Ventricular size was increased when MYBP C3
 variant A mRNA were identified, 94% were single nucleotide sequence variants, 6% of se- was injected. Similar results were found with variant B control; neverthe- quence variants represented insertions and deletions. Among the 103 non- less the differences were not significant between variant A and B. These pre- synonymous variants three sequence variants (rs34580776, rs41277370, liminary results could indicate that two variants have a dominant effect over rs942077) where predicted to be „damaging” associated with cardiomyo- phenotype expression of HCM, in contrast with others authors who suggest pathy (SIFT score 0-0.5). NGS analyses revealed also the presence of novel haploinsufficiency mechanisms due to a markedly lower protein expression mutation of CANX gene. The results of our study reflect necessity of evalua- of small truncated transcripts. More studies are needed to complete the cha- tion of genomic variants in the genes involved in cardiomyopathies as a part racterization of this animal model and to explore future therapies. p of NGS genetic testing. NGS analyses identifies novel DNA sequence variants End Systolic for which pathogenicity is unresolved. Ventricular Area Control-3 Variant A-3 Variant B-3 Key words: next generation sequencing, mutations, dilated cardiomyopathy (mm2) 7.43x10 -3 8.45 x10 - 4 8.75 x10 - 3 0.057 This study is the result of implementation of project APVV-0644-12. End Diastolic (1.14 x10 ) (7.27 x10 ) (1.55 x10 ) Ventricular Area -2 -2 -2  P05
.58 (mm2 ) 1.03 x10 - 3 1.27 x10 - 3 1.27 x10 - 3 0.002 The necessity of original NGS data reanalysis in the diagnosis of EF (%) (1.66 x10 ) (1.27 x10 ) (1.43 x10 ) inherited cardiac diseases with hindsight of 2 years. Shortening J. Kadlecová1, A. Veverková2, D. N. Grochová1, M. Hiemerová1, M. Matyášová1, I. Fraction Area 62 (7.9) 54 (6.2) 58 (13.4) 0.300 Grochová1,3,4, L. Skutková4, P. Vlašín1,3; (%) 72 (0.06) 67 (0.05) 69 0.298 1Cytogenetic laboratory Brno, s.r.o., Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University Brno, (0.10879) Faculty of Science, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Center of prenatal diagnosis, Brno, Czech Republic, 4International Clinical Research Center, St. Anne´s University Hospital Brno, Data are mean (sd). EF (%) from estimated end systolic/end diastolic Brno, Czech Republic. volume. Spanish Society of cardiology 2016. RIC; RD12/0042/0049,69 (Carlos III Next generation sequencing, also called massively parallel sequencing Health Institute). (MPS), currently is the fastest growing method in the field of molecular  P05
.56 genetics. This new technology enables diagnostics of genetically heteroge- Interactions of coagulation Factor II G20210A and Factor V Leiden neous diseases with a significant phenotypic and genetic overlap. On the with cardiovascular risk factors increase risk of myocardial basis of precise molecular genetic diagnosis it is possible to clarify the dia- infarction. gnosis in patients with cardiac disease and especially to identify pre-sym- J. A. Camilleri*, F. Borg Carbott*, R. Attard, P. Dingli, C. Doggen, K. Cassar, R. Farrugia, S. ptomatic individuals in the family for purposes of monitoring or treatment. Bezzina Wettinger; Here we present our diagnostic NGS workflow for the analysis of 46 genes University of Malta, Msida, Malta. involved in pathogenesis of the inherited cardiomyopathy using TrueSight Enrichment technology (Illumina) and for the 51 genes described in asso- ciation with arrhythmia disorders using PED Mast Plus technology (Multi- Introduction: The effect of Coagulation Factor II G20210A (FIIG20210A) plicom) followed by sequencing on the MiSeq (Illumina). This study com- and Factor V Leiden (FVL) combined with cardiovascular risk factors on the prised group of 130 unrelated patients with DCM, ARVC, ventricular fibril- risk of myocardial infarction (MI) was studied in a Maltese population. lation and arrhythmias. etc. Methods: Samples from the Maltese Acute Myocardial Infarction (MAMI) In this study we reanalysed variants detected in our group of patients with study including 423 cases with first MI and 465 controls were tested for the a hindsight of 2 years. Based on different databases (dbSNP, ClinVar ) as FVL and FIIG20210A mutations using PCR-RFLP with MnlI and HindIII re- well as co-segregation analysis in pedigrees we revealed that several variant spectively. Interactions with lifestyle and metabolic risk factors were tested originally classified as pathogenic or potentially pathogenic were false-posi- using data from questionnaires and medical history. Odds ratios (OR) and tive and are newly classified as variants with unknown clinical significance 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) were calculated to estimate the risk of or benign. We will demonstrate this discrepancy on several selected cases MI overall and in subgroups. and family pedigrees. Results: The estimated risk of MI is 1.6 (95%CI 0.64-3.9) for FVL and 1.5 Our findings point to the need of periodical reassessment of described va- (95%CI 0.76-2.96) for FIIG20210A. An association between FVL and MI riants because their interpretation is constantly changing. Moreover, tight was observed in smokers [OR 5.3 (95%CI 1.3-21.5)] but not in non-smokers cooperation, clinical and NGS data sharing between investigators focused on [OR 0.95 (95%CI 0.24-3.84)]. FIIG20210A was associated with a risk of MI the same diagnostic is extremely important to clarify and interpret detected amongst research subjects with at least one metabolic risk factor (diabetes, variants. hypertension or hypercholesterolaemia), [(OR 3.5 (95%CI 1.5-8.4)]. In indi- viduals having at least one triggering factor (metabolic and/or smoking), a 4.4-fold (95%CI 1.3-14.8) and 3.6-fold risk (95%CI 1.5-8.6) were observed with FVL and FII20210A respectively. Conclusion: FIIG20210A and FVL increase risk of MI in the presence of cer- tain cardiovascular risk factors with which they interact synergistically. This may be the basis of contradictory results in the literature. These findings highlight the importance of prevention and treatment of these risk factors. *These authors contributed equally toE tSheH sGtu d2y0. 16 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 129ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.59  P05
.61 A genome-wide association study in ethnic Arabs reveals novel Genome-wide multi-phenotype and eQTL analyses provide novel susceptibility loci for obesity insights into omega fatty acid metabolism N. Dzimiri1, S. M. Wakil1, R. Ram2, N. P. Muiya1, O. Alboudari1, E. Andres1, N. Mazhar1, S. M. Kaakinen1, A. Claringbould1,2, F. Hagenbeek1,3,4, R. Mägi5, P. Soininen6, M. Järvelin1,7, Hagos1, B. F. Meyer1, G. Morahan2, M. Alshahid1; BIOS Consortium, A. P. Morris8, I. Prokopenko1; 1King Faisal Spec. Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2University of 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University Medical Centre Western Australia, Perth, Australia. Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 6University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland, 7University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 8University of Liverpool, Introduction: Obesity (OBS) constitutes a major predisposing factor for Liverpool, United Kingdom. many cardiovascular diseases. Genome-wide association approach continu- es to reveal association of gene polymorphism with OBS in different popula- tion. Such studies have not been reported for ethic Arabs. Introduction: There is evidence for favourable effects of diets rich in ome- Materials: In this study, we performed a genome-wide association study ga-3 fatty acids (FAs) on cardiovascular disease. However, little is known using the Affymetrix High Density Axiom platform GWAS for OBS incidence on the genetic contribution to FA levels, since most studies have focused on in 5,016 Saudis of Arab ancestry (3013 controls, 2003 cases). serum lipid concentrations typically used in clinical practice. Results: In the discovery set, we identified four susceptibility SNPs for Materials and Methods: We undertook common and rare variant genome- OBS: the rs564702 (OR=1.31; P=1.85x10-8) residing on the KCNMB2 gene, wide multi-phenotype analyses (MPA) of FA levels using nuclear magnetic rs16891982 (OR=1.56; P=4.31x10-8 on the SL C45
A2 gene, rs2523946 (OR resonance-based measures of FAs and 1000 Genomes imputed data from = 1.30; P=2.72x10-8) on the MICD and rs7180536 (OR=1.29; P=4.82x10-8) the Northern Finland Birth Cohorts 1966 (N=4949) and 1986 (N=3055). To on the SQRDL gene that demonstrated genome-wide significance levels. Fur- avoid multicollinearity issues, we selected four FAs for MPA: omega-3, -6, thermore, two variants, the rs7551194 (OR=1.36; p=7.22x10-7) on POU3F1 -7/9 and other polyunsaturated FAs. Expression quantitative locus (eQTL) and rs2171693 (OR=1.39; P=1.08x10-7) on the PBX1 gene both located analysis was performed on the Dutch BIOS consortium RNA-seq data on chr1, were also strongly linked to obesity. Besides, three other variants, (N=2116).P MACROD1 rs10810271 (OR=1.38; p=6.02 x 10-6) on the FREM1, rs7135639 (OR=1.25; Results: The comm-8on variant meta-anaPlCySsKis9 d,eGtCeKctRe,dF 1A0D sSi1g,nZaNlsF a2s5s9ocLiaItPeCd p=5.19x10-6) on the MED13L and rs7890737 (OR=1.30; p=6.92x10-6) on wPDitXhD FCA1s P(B<X45xA1 P0
O)E, incluAdDinAgM aT Sn3o vel FA locus at (rs1006207). the GPM6B as well as two protective variants, the rs17118166 (OR=0.71; Variation in the other identified loci FADS, 1 , P=3.80x10-6) on SGCD and rs35488337 (OR=0.74; p=3.88x10-6) on ET S1
 , , and has previously been associated with tri- gene showed borderline association with disease. These variants retained glycerides and cholesterol levels, but not specifically with FAs. was their associations in the replication set, and several haplotypes were simi- also identified in the rare vaMrAiaCnRt OMD P1
A . The e QTL anal-ysis indicaPtReDdX e5ight larly implicated in the disease. We also replicated 3 SNPs on chromosome 9 out of 10 MPA-identified signals with significant cis-eQTL effects on gene that have been associated with OBS in different populations. expression levels. The novel variantwas a ciseQTL for ex- Conclusion: These findings provide new insights into genetic pathways con- pression, suggesting a role in protection against oxidative stress. tributing to the susceptibility for OBS in ethnic Arabs. Conclusions: With a combination of refined lipid measures, MPA and eQTL  P05
.60 analysis we have identified genetic loci and differentially expressed genes Therapy dependent role of an Oct1 polymorphism in cardiovascular involved in FA metabolism, providing novel clues for the complex relation- death in patients with type 2 diabetes ship between lipids and cardiovascular disease. N. Schweighofer1, B. Genser2,3, W. März4, M. E. Kleber5, O. Trummer1, T. R. Pieber1,6, B. Funding: EU-F P7
 MARVEL (WPGA- P48951
). Obermayer-Pietsch1,6; 1Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Medical  P05
.62 University, Graz, Austria, 2BG Statistical Consulting, Vienna, Austria, 3Institute of Public The effects of diabetes mellitus and/or genetic polymorphisms on the Health, Social and Preventive Medicine, Medical Faculty of Mannheim, University of formation of the peripheral arterial diseases Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 4Synlab Center of Laboratory Diagnostics, Heidelberg, Z. Yalım1, S. Tutgun Onrat2, O. Akci1, G. Ozkececi1, M. Aldemir3, A. Avsar1, I. Dogan4, E. Germany, 5Department of Molecular Evolution and Genomics, University of Heidelberg, Onrat1; Heidelberg, Germany, 6CBmed, Center for Biomarker Research in Medicine, Graz, Austria. 1Afyon Kocatepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 3Afyon Kocatepe University, Faculty of AIM: Type 2 diabetes individuals have high risk for microvascular complica- Medicine, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 4Afyon Kocatepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Afyonkarahisar, tions and cardiovascular incidents are increased two- to three-fold compa- Turkey. red to non-diabetics. Various substrates of organic cation transporter 1 are associated with cardiovascular biomarkers. We investigated, whether the Oct1 polymorphism rs2297374 is associated with cardiovascular biomar- Introduction: Peripheral arterial disease(PAD) is a condition that is caused kers and with the risk of cardiovascular death and if the associations found by narrowing of limb arteries due to atherosclerosis. Femoral, popliteal and are influenced by antidiabetic therapy. tibial arteries are more affected in patients with diabetes mellitus(DM). In METHODS: The data from the LURIC study, a prospective cohort study of this study, we investigated the effects of diabetes mellitus and genetic back- Caucasian individuals scheduled for coronary angiography, were used. We ground, solely and together in the pathogenesis of PAD. identified 1208 type 2 diabetics, whereof 72 use metformin and 1135 are Materials and Methods: In our study we planned to evaluate the effects not on metformin therapy. Cardiovascular mortality was assessed in non- of Factor V LEIDEN, Factor V H1299R, Prothrombin G20210A, Factor XIII diabetics, type 2 diabetics and metformin and non-metformin users with V34L, B-Fibrinogen -455 G>A, PAI-1 4G/5G, HPA1 , MTHFR  C677
T, MTHFR different Oct1 rs2297374 genotypes using Cox proportional hazard models A1298C, ACE I/D, APO B R3500Q, and APO E polymorphisms using a Vien- and associations with cardiovascular biomarkers were investigated. naLab CVD StripAssay. Patients were placed into four groups: 50 patients RESULTS: Cardiovascular mortality risk was for each minor allele copy HR with DM and PAD, 50 patients with PAD and without DM, 30 patients with 0.83 95% CI 0.70, 0.98 in patients with T2DM and HR 0.82 CI 0.69-0.97 in DM and without PAD and 30 controls. non-metformin users. In these 2 patients groups the variants of rs2297374 Results: In the formation of PAD regardless of the presence of diabetes, were significantly associated with HDL and total cholesterol levels. No diffe- MTHFR A1298C and PAI 4G/5G homozygous mutation seems to be deter- rences in cardiovascular mortality and no associations with the investigated minant (p<0.05 for both). In the presence of DM, PAI 4G/5G homozygous biomarkers were seen in non-diabetics and type 2 diabetics on metformin mutation determined the formation of PAD (p<0.05). In regression analy- therapy. sis, PAI-1 4G/5G gene homozygous mutation was 17,1 times more risky, CONCLUSION: The minor C allele of rs2297374 in the Oct1 gene is asso- (p<0,008) 95% CI(2,113-138,660), MTHFR A1298C homozygous mutation ciated with decreased cardiovascular mortality in non-metformin users was 316,6 times more risky (p<0.001)95%CI(10,763-9315,342) the possi- eventually due to its influence on HDL and total cholesterol levels. bility of diabetes mellitus with peripheral artery diseases. This work was funded by the Austrian Government in the COMET K1 Center Conclusions: It seems to be that, in the presence of DM, PAI 4G/5G homozy- Programme of Styria and Vienna. gous mutation is powerfull predictor to determine the formation of PAD. In the regardless of DM, MTHFR A1298C and PAI 4G/5G homozygous mutation are also predictor in the formation of PAD. 130 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.63  P05
.65 New insights in Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II Novel SMAD2 mutations in two families with LDS-like syndromic G. J. Voortman, A. J. M. Verkerk, E. J. G. Sijbrands, J. Versmissen, A. H. van den Meiracker, presentations of aortic aneurysm E. C. H. Friesema; E. Cannaerts1, M. Kempers2, J. Richer3, L. Beauchesne4, A. Verstraeten1, N. Peeters1, B. Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Loeys1, L. Van Laer1; 1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of Human Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHAII), also known as Gordon’s syndro- Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, me or familial hyperkalemic hypertension (OMIM 145260), is a rare mono- Canada, 4Division of Cardiology, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, genetic disorder mainly characterized by arterial hypertension and hyper- Canada. kalemia. So far, 4 genes have been identified to be mutated in PHAII patients, either WNK1, WNK4, KLH L3
 or CU L3
. All patients can be effectively treated by thiazide diuretics, compatible with over-activity of the thiazide-sensitive Aortic aneurysms/dissections are common manifestations in hereditary Na+-Cl- cotransporter in the kidney. connective tissue disorders, including Marfan syndrome (MFS) and Loeys- A 60 years old female patient had been diagnosed with hyperkalemia e.c.i. Dietz syndrome (LDS). Exploration of underlying pathomechanisms has re- > 10 years. Metabolic acidosis and hypertension were not present. Plasma vealed prominent dysregulation of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β potassium level was 6.3 mmol/L (normal range 3.5-5.1 mmol/L) as well as a signaling pathway. Most recently, mutations in SMAD2, encoding a key tran- mild hyperchloremia with low plasma levels of aldosterone and low-normal scriptional regulator of TGF-β signaling, have been shown to cause aortic plasma levels of renin. aneurysmal disease. Here, we expand the phenotypical spectrum associated Sanger sequencing revealed a novel heterozygote G>A mutation in exon 11 with SMAD2 mutations in two families presenting with syndromic aorto- of KLH L3
, leading to an amino acid change (V434M). This mutation was pathy. adjacent to already known disease-causing mutations. Prediction models The application of a custom targeted resequencing panel, including SMAD2, indicate that this V434M has a deleterious effect on KLH L3
 function. No ad- led to the identification of two novel missense mutations, both affecting ditional mutations were found in WNK1, WNK4, and CU L3
. The patient was highly conserved amino acids in the functionally important DNA binding treated with hydrochlorothiazide, which resulted in normalization of potas- MH2 domain of SMAD2. sium plasma levels as well as in lowering of her normal blood pressure. The first mutation (p.Asn318Lys) was found in a 63-years old female pro- Genetic analysis of her two daughters, revealing the same hyperkalemia (6.3 band presenting with an LDS phenotype: facial features (high arched pa- and 5.9 mmol/L, respectively) without hypertension, showed that both car- late, broad uvula, downslanting palpebral fissures), skeletal abnormalities ry the same heterozygote mutation in KLH L3
. They were also treated with (arachnodactyly, pectus excavatum and scoliosis surgeries at ages 11 and hydrochlorothiazide. 36 years), aortic root replacement (age 53 years). Segregation analysis re- The genetic analysis of KLH L3
 in this family revealed that the diagnosis of vealed the presence of the SMAD2 mutation in the daughter who presents PHAII is not always the obligatory combination of hyperkalemia plus hy- with marfanoid features. The second mutation carrier (p.Ser397Tyr) was pertension. diagnosed with LDS. Cardiovascular symptoms include aortic root dilatati-  P05
.64 on and marked tortuosity of the neck vessels, no major skeletal abnormali- Whole genome sequencing and deep phenotyping identifies rare ties were noted. We confirmed presence of the mutation in a daughter with protein-coding and non-coding variants in a large cohort of unrelated hypertelorism and arterial tortuosity and mother with hypertelorism and idiopathic and heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension cases normal echocardiography. S. Gräf1, M. Bleda1, C. Hadinnapola1, M. Haimel1, H. J. Bogaard2, G. Coghlan3, P. A. Corris4, In conclusion, SMAD2 mutations are causal in patients with LDS and MFS S. Gibbs5, D. G. Kiely6, A. Lawrie7, R. D. Machado8, A. J. Peacock9, J. Pepke-Zaba10, M. features. This gene should be included in the expanding list of candidate Toshner10, R. C. Trembath11, A. Vonk Noordegraaf2, J. Wharton12, M. R. Wilkins12, S. J. genes causing these conditions. Wort13, N. W. Morrell1, on behalf of the NIHR BioResource Rare Diseases (BRIDGE) PAH Consortium, and the UK National PAH Cohort Study Consortium;  P05
.66 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2VU University Medical Centre Search for somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations in carotid Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom, atherosclerotic plaques by massive parallele sequencing 4Freeman Hospital, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 5Hammersmith Hospital, London, M. V. Golubenko1,2,3, N. P. Babushkina1, M. S. Nazarenko1,3, A. V. Markov1,3, S. V. Buikin1, A. United Kingdom, 6Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 7University A. Sleptsov1,3, O. L. Barbarash2, V. P. Puzyrev1,3; of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 8University of Lincoln, Lincoln, United Kingdom, 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute for complex issues 9Golden Jubilee National Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 10Papworth Hospital, of cardiovascular diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation, 3Tomsk State University, Papworth, United Kingdom, 11King‘s College, London, United Kingdom, 12Imperial Tomsk, Russian Federation. College, London, United Kingdom, 13Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Introduction: Atherosclerosis is accompanied by increased oxidative stress. Introduction: Despite the identification of rare causal variation in several MtDNA is exposed to oxidative damage, since it is located near the ROS pro- genes, most notably BMPR2, a large proportion of cases of heritable (~20%) duction sites. To describe possible somatic mtDNA mutations arising during and idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) (~80%) still remain atherogenesis, we have compared heteroplasmic mtDNA variations in the unexplained at the molecular level. carotid plaques and blood using massive parallel sequencing. Methods: As part of the UK 10,000 Genomes BRIDGE project the whole geno- Materials and methods: Ten paired samples of DNA extracted from the abla- mes of 1,250 unrelated individuals diagnosed with idiopathic and heritable ted carotid plaques and from the blood of the patients, were analyzed. MtD- PAH are being sequenced and extensively phenotyped. Stringent filtering NA was amplified in two overlapped PCR-products, sequenced and analyzed based on MAF < 1/10,000 in both BRIDGE and ExAC and deleteriousness on the MiSeq platform, using 1% threshold for variant calling. Single nu- and conservation scores are used to prioritise pathogenic variants, coupled cleotide indels were not considered if detected in more than two individuals. with phenotypic information. Results: The mean base coverage across the mitochondrial genome was Results: To date, 5844 whole genomes of rare disease patients have been about 8000. All individuals had heteroplasmic positions at the minimum 1% sequenced including 625 PAH cases. 107 PAH subjects (17%) possess clear- level (average 3.2 positions per plaque sample and 3.1 positions per blood ly or likely pathogenic mutations in one of the known PAH genes. The ma- sample). Altogether, 50 heteroplasmic positions were revealed, 12 of them jority of loss-of-function and likely pathogenic missense mutations have were common for the blood and plaque samples, and only 1 position was been identified in BMPR2 (73 PAH cases [12%]). A further 14 subjects had found to be heteroplasmic in two individuals. The heteroplasmic positions (micro-)deletions of 5kb to 3.8Mb affecting either the entire BMPR2 locus were concentrated in the control region (30%), and in protein-coding ge- or one or more exons within the gene. Additional variants in the promoter nes (54%). Transition to transversion ratio was elevated (9:1), as well as and other non-coding regions of BMPR2 are undergoing functional investi- nonsynonymous mutations (73% of all protein-coding heteroplasmies, in- gation. We also identified individuals with homozygous (n=6) and potential cluding 2 frameshifts), comparing to population polymorphisms. compound heterozygous (n=6) mutations in EIF2AK4 (2%). Conclusions: There is considerable heteroplasmic mtDNA variation in Conclusions: Of the known PAH genes, BMPR2 mutations are the most com- atherosclerosis, with no significant differences between blood and carotid mon. It is likely that non-coding variation around known PAH genes, in par- plaques. The somatic mtDNA variation characteristics differ from those of ticular BMPR2, will explain further PAH cases. The genetics underlying PAH inherited polymorphisms. appear complex and a large sample size is necessary to test for novel rare The study is supported by Russian Science Foundation, grant no. 14-15- sequence variation association. 00305. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 131ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.70  P05
.72 The involvement of ER-retention and quality control in the cellular Study of the contribution of copy number variation to the mechanisms underlying hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia and pathogenesis of bicuspid aortic valve associated aortopathy familial pulmonary arterial hypertension caused by mutations in I. Luyckx1, E. Reyniers1, E. Dekeyser1, K. Vanderstraeten1, G. Vandeweyer1, F. TGF-β growth factor receptors Wünnemann2, C. Preuss2, P. Eriksson3, S. A. Mohamed4, G. Andelfinger2, A. Verstraeten1, L. B. R. Ali, P. Kizhakkedath, A. John, L. Al-Gazali; Van Laer1, B. L. Loeys1,5, MIBAVA Leducq consortium; United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates. 1Center for Medical Genetics, Edegem, Belgium, 2Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Saint-Justine Research Centre, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Cardiac and Thoracic Vascular Surgery, Introduction: The transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) superfamily signa- University Clinic of Schleswig-Holstein, Luebeck, Germany, 5Department of Human ling plays critical roles in the regulation of cellular growth, differentiation Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. and development. Mutations in the plasma membrane components of the TGF-β signaling pathways including mutations in BMPR2, ENDOGLIN and ALK1 genes have been shown to cause pulmonary arterial hypertension Affecting 1–2% of the population, bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia types 1 (HHT1) and 2 (HHT2), common congenital heart malformation. Although it is usually asymptoma- respectively. However, the underlying cellular mechanisms of the majority tic, 10–20% of individuals with BAV develop life-threatening thoracic aortic of the reported mutations are unknown. aneurysms (TAA). Several studies have indicated that up to 10% of left-si- Materials and Methods: The C-terminally tagged cDNAs of BMPR2, ENDOG- ded heart defects are caused by deleterious copy number variations (CNVs). LIN and ALK1 in mammalian expression vectors were used as templates to Hence, we hypothesize that CNVs may also contribute to the pathogenesis generate the required missense disease-causing mutations by QuikChange of BAV/TAA. site-directed mutagenesis. The constructs were transfected into HeLa and CNV analysis was performed in 100 unrelated BAV/TAA patients using the HEK293 cells and the expressed proteins were analyzed biochemically and CytoSN P12
.2 array, followed by data analysis with the CNV-WebStore tool. by confocal microscopy. CNVs affecting protein-coding genes with a potential role in the cardiovas- Results: Ten of the examined eighteen missense mutants in BMPR2 have cular system and with a low frequency in healthy individuals (MAF<0.5%) shown aberrant subcellular trafficking with the extracellular domain mu- were manually prioritised for validation with MLPA/qPCR/MAQ. tants predominantly retained within the lumen of the ER. Similarly, the ma- Each BAV/TAA patient carried approximately 14 CNVs, which is comparable jority of the analyzed missense mutants in ALK1 and ENDOGLIN exhibited to what is observed in healthy individuals. After filtering based on gene con- aberrant trafficking and intracellular retention by the ER quality control ma- tent, 15 candidates remained, of which six could be validated. These CNVs chinery. In addition, we found that the plasma membrane trafficking of these did not encompass any known BAV/TAA genes and segregation analysis did mutants was amenable to correction by chemical chaperones. not support fully-penetrant pathogenicity. According to DECIPHER, CNVs Conclusions: ER retention of TGF-β mutant proteins is a major cellular me- overlapping with candidate CNVs were also identified in controls or in high- chanism underlying pulmonary arterial hypertension and hereditary he- ly dissimilar diseases without cardiovascular involvement, further demon- morrhagic telangiectasia. Manipulation of this ER retention is a potential strating the unlikeliness that these CNVs directly cause BAV/TAA. target for therapeutic intervention is these diseases. Our results show that this BAV/TAA cohort is not enriched for deleterious CNVs causing BAV/TAA. This finding is in contrast to prior studies of other  P05
.71 left-sided heart defects, which identified CNVs as a major causative factor. Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing Helps to Unravel the Genetic However, we cannot exclude the possibility that certain CNVs contribute as Heterogeneity of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy M. Cecconi1, M. I. Parodi1, F. Formisano2, P. Spirito2, C. Autore3, M. B. Musumeci3, modifiers, creating a sensitised background for BAV/TAA. S. Favale4, C. Forleo4, C. Rapezzi5, E. Biagini5, S. Davì1, E. Canepa1, L. Pennese1, M.  P05
.73 Castagnetta1, D. Degiorgio1,6, D. A. Coviello1; A common variant association study for type 2 diabetes mellitus in 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genoa, Italy, 2Cardiology Unit, E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genoa, Italy, 3Cardiology Unit, St. Andrea Hospital, Sapienza ethnic Saudi Arabs University, Rome, Italy, 4Cardiology Unit, Department of Emergency and Organ D. Bakheet1, N. P. Muiya1, S. M. Wakil1, R. Ram2, B. F. Meyer1, G. Morahan2, N. Dzimiri1; Transplantation, University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 5Cardiology Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola- 1King Faisal Spec. Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Western Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6Department of Experimental Medicine, Australian Institute for Medical Research, University of Western Australia, Australia, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy. Perth, Australia. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is caused mostly by mutations in Introduction: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) is a debilitating disease that MYH7 and MYBP C3
 genes; less frequently mutations in other genes have contributes to the manifestation of complex disease, such as coronary heart been reported. The aim of this study is to evaluate a target-Next Generati- disease, with a strong genetic component. However the genetic basis for the on Sequencing (NGS) panel, which includes sarcomeric genes not only en- disease is not fully understood yet. coding thick/intermediate and thin myofilament (TTm) proteins, but also Materials and Method: In the present study, we performed a genome-wide other sarcomeric genes and some causative genes of HCM-phenocopy. A Ion association study using the Affymetrix High Density Axiom platform for the AmpliSeq™ Custom Panel for the enrichment of 19 genes, 9 of which not disease in the ethnic Saudi Arab population (cases versus). encoding TTm proteins, was established. By using Ion Personal Genome Ma- Results: In all, in the discovery study, we identified nine variants that dis- chine, we studied: (i) a training set (n. 73 DNA-samples) already genotyped played significant (P≤10_7) or suggestive (P≤10_6) association with the di- to optimize the NGS strategy; (ii) a discovery set (n. 19 DNA-samples). In the sease. The lead variant was the rs4506565 [1.29(1.19-1.40); p=8.78E-10] training set we identified 71 out of 72 expected mutations and 15 additional on chr10 in the TCF7 L2
 gene. Another variant rs16976967 [1.22(1.12-1.33); mutations, 10 of which in genes not encoding TTm proteins; of them, 4 are p=4.17E-06] on chr15 in the MN S1
 gene showed suggestive association with identified in MYOM1 gene. In the discovery set we identified 20 mutations: disease. On the other hand seven other variants showed weak protective the diagnostic yield was increased of about 20% and, among the mutations properties against the disease. These included the rs10789192 [0.83[0.76- not belonging to genes encoding TTm proteins, we identified mutant alle- 0.9); p=4.52E-06] on chr1 in the PD E4
B gene, rs681828 [0.82(0.76-0.88); les of MYOZ2 (one), MYOM1 (two) and LAM P2
 (one) genes. Our combined p=5.44E-07] on chr1 in the KCNK1 gene, rs13411975 [0.84(0.77-0.92); targeted NGS-Sanger sequencing-based strategy allowed: a) the molecular p=8.76E-06] on chr2 in the SNTG2 gene, rs9824601 [0.82(0.76-0.88); diagnosis of HCM with greater efficiency than using the conventional (San- p=1.39E-07] on chr3 in the MRP L3
 gene, rs4352831 [0.88(0.82-0.95); ger) sequencing alone; b) the identification of less frequently mutant alleles p=6.48E-06] on chr8 in the ADCY8 gene, rs150524 [0.82(0.76-0.89); associated to HCM like MYOM1 and MYOZ2 genes (Siegert et al., 2011; Osio p=1.47E-06] on chr17 in the CC L1
 gene and the intergenic rs9948423 et al., 2007). Mutant alleles identification in genes not encoding sarcomeric [0.7(0.6-0.81); p=2.15E-06] on chr18. Interestingly, we were able to validate TTm proteins may better contribute to explain the genetic heterogeneity of the associations of these variant with disease in a separate cohort. HCM. Conclusions: The study revealed several variants throughout the genome that conferred risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Our validation experiment suggests a strong genetic link to the disease in ethnic Arabs. 132 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.74  P06
.02 Next generation sequencing to unravel the genetic architecture of Loss of function of the mitochondrial repressor RI P140
 halts KNG1 and F11 loci axonal degeneration in the peroxisomal disease X-linked L. Martin-Fernandez1, G. Gavidia1, I. Corrales2, H. Brunel1, L. Ramírez2, J. C. Souto3, F. adrenoleukodystrophy Vidal2, J. M. Soria1; P. Ranea-Robles1,2, M. Ruiz1,2, J. Galino1,2, A. Schlüter1,2, I. Ferrer3, A. Pujol1,2,4, S. 1Unit of Genomics of Complex Diseases, Biomedical Research Institute Sant Pau (IIB- Fourcade1,2; Sant Pau), Barcelona, Spain, 2Unit of Molecular Diagnosis and Therapy, Blood and 1IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat-Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER U759, Centro de Tissue Bank, Barcelona, Spain, 3Unit of Hemostasis and Thrombosis, Department of Investigación en Red sobre Enfermedades Raras, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institute of Hematology, Barcelona, Spain. Neuropathology, Pathologic Anatomy Service, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat-Barcelona, Spain, 4Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: Factor XI (FXI) level is an intermediate phenotype of venous thromboembolism -- a complex disease with a high heritability (~60%). The Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) KpNerGf1ormedF 1in1 the GAIT-1 (Genetic Analysis of Idiopathic ThrombophiliaK)N PGr1oject rFe1v1e aled significant associa- X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a rare disease, with fatal progno- tions between the FXI levels and SNPs in and genes. Our aim was sis and no satisfactory treatment, characterized by brain inflammatory de- to identify the genetic variabilKitNy Go1f F a1n1d that could explain such myelination and/or axonal degeneration of corticospinal association. tracts in the spinal cord. It is caused by loss-of-function of the peroxisomal Materials and Methods: The and were completely sequenced trAabncsdp1o-)rter ABCD1. As a result, very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) such (exons, introns and promoters) in 110 unrelated individuals from the GAIT- as  C26
:0 accumulate in tissues and plasma. The murine model of X-ALD 2 Project using Next generation sequencing (NGS) Illumiinn as iMliciSoeq Platform. ( exhibits a late-onset axonal degeneration in spinal cords. We have Association analyses were performed with FXI levels using the PLINK and previously reported that excess of  C26
:0 produced oxidative stress of mi- SKAT package. Also we identified by data filtering and predictions tochondrial origin, which compromisos energy metabolism and suppresses the putative causal mutations. the mitochondrial biogenesis pathway driven by the SIRT1/PGC-1α/PPARγ Results: A total of 762 geneticK vNaGr1iants wF1er1e detected. Seve.r al significant network, very early in the physiopathogenetic cascade. nominal associations were identified between common variants and cluste- In this study, we have identified RI P140
, a novel transcriptional regulator of red low frequency variants in and with FXI levels Among these energy metabolism that antagonizes PGC-v1i aactivation of mitochondria bio- associations, the missense rs710446 was significant after the permutation genesis, as being overexpressed in the X-ALD mouse spinal cords. We show test. In addition, two putative causal mutations were related with high aFn1d1 that RI P140
 is directly regulated by  C26
:0 an oxidative stress-dependent low KFXNIG l1evels. mechanism. Further, a double knockout mouse X-ALD/RI P140
 shows nor- Conclusions: Using NGS we investigated the genetic architecture of the malized mitochondrial respiration and bioenergetic failure, as well as axo- and loci. This information contributes to the identification of the “mis- nal degeneration and associated locomotor disabilities. sing heritability” of this key intermediate phenotype. Concretely, we identi- Altogether, these results highlight RI P140
 as a novel therapeutic target for fied putative rare mutations, common variants and clustered low frequency X-ALD, and suggest that its pharmacological inhibition may be a valuable variants associated with FXI levels that may contribute to the risk of venous strategy to treat this and other axonopathies in which energetic homeosta- thromboembolism. sis and mitochondria biogenesis may be impaired. Spanish Grants: RD12/0042/0032, RD12/0042/0053, FIS PI11/0184, This work was supported by grants from the Spanish Institute for Health PI15/00269 and PFIS FI12/00322. Carlos III and “Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER)” (FIS PI14/00410). P.R.R is a fellow of Spanish Institute for Health Carlos III (PFIS  P06
 Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders program: FI12/00457).  P06
.04 A BCAT2 mutation causes a novel inborn error of metabolism due to mitochondrial branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase  P06
.01 deficiency and results in developmental delay and autism Whole-exome sequencing as diagnostic tool in a quartet family with I. Knerr1, J. Urquhart2, J. Hughes1, Y. Rogers1, S. Jones2, S. Lynch1, E. P. Treacy1, P. Mayne1, S. Abetalipoproteinemia Banka3,2, S. Olpin4; A. Sanchis-Juan1, D. Perez-Gil1, C. Martinez-Costa2, V. Martínez-Barquero1, V. Gonzalez- 1Temple Street Children’s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 2St Mary‘s Hospital, Albert1, P. Marín-García1, F. J. Chaves1,3, A. García-García1,3; Manchester, United Kingdom, 3University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 1Genotyping and Genetic Diagnosis Unit, INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain, 2Pediatric Service, 4Sheffield Children‘s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom. Clinical Hospital of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 3CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Valencia, Spain. Introduction: Plasma amino acid profile in an adolescent boy with history of early onset developmental delay and autism revealed profoundly elevated Abetalipoproteinemia (ABL) is a rare lipid metabolism disease, where mu- levels of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) - leucine, valine and isoleuci- tations in causative known genes can only explain a low percentage of cases. ne, without an increase in their coressponding branched-chain 2-ketoacids. This disease is characterized by very low plasma concentrations of trigly- Notably, alloisoleucine was not detected and Maple Syrup Urine Disease was cerides and total cholesterol (under 30mg/dl), and undetectable levels of ruled out. The biochemical phenotype suggested a defect in the first step of LDL and ApoB. Later in life, ABL is associated with atypical development of BCAA catabolism. retinitis pigmentosa, coagulopathy, column neuropathy and myopathy. Results: Targeted Sanger sequencing of BCAT2 gene that encodes mitochon- We used whole-exome sequencing (WES) to study a family with two affec- drial BCAA aminotransferase revealed a novel homozygous inframe dele- ted children and their asymptomatic parents. Mutations in causative known tion (NM_001190; c136_147del; p.His46_Pro49del). Studies conducted on genes for ABL (MTTP) and for diseases with similar phenotype such as Fa- patient’s fibroblasts demonstrated a marked reduction in valine oxidation milial Hypobetalipoproteinemia (APOB, PCSK9 and ANGPT L3
) have been and somewhat impaired leucine oxidation supporting a deficiency of the previously discarded by Sanger sequencing. BCAT enzyme. Protein structural analysis and additional functional studies By examining homozygous and compound heterozygous inherited variants, are ongoing to elucidate the mechanism linking the mutation and enzyme we found that both children carried mutations in TM C6
 and SE C23
A genes. activity. Although TM C6
 does not show a consistent relationship with lipid metabo- Conclusion: Till date, there is only one reported case of BCAT2 deficiency lism, recent studies have demonstrated that SE C23
A, an essential compo- in the literature that resulted from two compound missense heterozygous nent of coat protein complex II (COPII)-coated vesicles, could be involved in BCAT2 mutations in a 25-year-old man with normal development and the apoB100-lipoproteins exit from the endoplasmic reticulum to de Golgi six-year history of headaches with mild memory impairment (Wang et al apparatus. 2015). Our findings lead to discovery of a novel inborn error of catabolism Besides, SE C23
A has been associated with Craniolenticulosutural dysplasia of BCAAs caused by an inframe BCAT2 deletion resulting in developmental (CLSD), disorder characterized by late-closing fontanels among other fea- delay and autism. tures. Since both children showed unexplained late-closing fontanels, our References study strongly indicate that SE C23
A could be a new ABL causative gene not 1. Wang XL et al. J Inherit Metab Dis 2015;38(5):855-61. previously described. Functional assays are currently being developed for both genes to confirm these results. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 133ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P06
.05  P06
.07 Unexpected findings from Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) panel Mutational spectrum of non-PMM2 Congenital Disorders of suggesting mitochondrial disorder in two patients. Glycosylation in the Spanish population K. Simenson1, S. Pajusalu1,2, T. Kahre1,3, R. Zordania1, R. Rein3, K. Õunap1,3; C. Medrano1, A. Vega1, M. Girós2, M. Serrano3, M. Ecay1, M. Ugarte1, B. Pérez1, C. Pérez- 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, Cerdá1; 2Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, 1Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares. CBM. Universidad Autónoma de University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Madrid. CIBERER. IDIPAZ., Madrid, Spain, 2Servicio BGM, Sección ECM, Hospital Clínico Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Barcelona, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3Dep. Neuropediatría, Hospital San Joan de Déu, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain. Mitochondrial diseases are clinically heterogeneous group of disorders af- fecting energy production. Due to clinical and genetic complexity it is diffi- Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a heterogeneous group of cult to recognize them in clinical practice. We present two cases which were disorders that entails defects on proteins of the glycosylation pathways. The clarified by targeted NGS panel. majority of them are involved in the N-glycosylation pathway of proteins Case 1: 14-year-old male who was born by Caesarian section due to fetal (N-CDGs), being PMM2-CDG the most frequent disease. Nevertheless, recent overgrowth. He has intellectual disability (ID), verbal dyspraxia, mildly studies have revealed that some glycosylation disorders occur with greater decreased muscle tone, bilateral moderate sensorineural hearing loss and frequency than current estimates. The aim of our work was to establish the seizures. MRI and EEG were normal. We found compound heterozygous mutational spectrum of CDG patients in the Spanish population, focusing mutations in BC S1
L gene (c.232A>G, p.Ser78Gly and c.245C>T, p.Ser82Leu; on non-PMM2-CDG. 83 suspected-CDG patients were selected based on NM_001257342.1). Mutations in BC S1
L gene are associated with mitochon- their clinical ground and/or abnormal serum transferrin isoforms. Sanger drial respiratory chain complex III deficiency which leads to reduced activi- sequencing and/or enzymatic analysis identified 45 PMM2-CDG patients ty of electron-transport chain and increased production of reactive oxygen (54%). The genetic analysis of the remaining 38 suspected non-PMM2-CDG species. was addressed by Sanger sequencing or targeted exome sequencing of 43 Case 2: 15-year-old female, who was born with microcephaly (occipito- CDG-genes or whole-exome sequencing or TruSightTM One sequencing frontal circumference 31cm, -3SD). She has dysmorphic features, severe panel (Illumina). 23 non-PMM2-CDG patients were genetically diagnosed ID, microcephaly, epilepsy and mitral valve prolapse. In infancy lactate and (60.5%), finding pathogenic mutations on 15 different CDG-genes (ALG1, alanine were mildly elevated. CT showed enlargement of lateral ventricle ALG6, AT P6
V0A2, B4GALT1, CCD C115
, COG7, DOLK, DPAGT1, DPM1, GFPT1, and brain atrophy. Muscle electronmicroscopical investigation was normal. MPI, PGM1, RFT1, SRD5A3, SSR4). All of them are involved in the synthesis We found a novel de novo heterozygous frameshift mutation in PDHA1 gene of the oligosaccharide linked to dolichol or its transfer onto the protein ex- (c.1014_1017dup, p.Arg340Leufs*13, NM_001173454.1). Mutations in cept AT P6
V0A2, B4GALT1, CCD C115
 and COG7 which are involved in the PDHA1 gene are associated with pyruvate dehydrogenase complex defici- processing of the glycan or Golgi homeostasis. Overall, 28 different muta- ency. This causes malfunction of citric acid cycle and deprives the body of tions were identified, 14 of them are novel mutations. In conclusion: next- energy. generation sequencing has improved the diagnosis of these heterogeneous We asked for ID and epilepsy associated genes for case 1, microcephaly and pathologies but reverse phenotyping of the CDG patients will lead an accu- ID associated genes for case 2 from NGS panel. These cases illustrate that rate molecular diagnosis because without phenotype information, genome NGS is a powerful tool which enables diagnosing patients with non-classical analysis would be of limited medical value. FIS PI11/1254  P06
.08 phenotypes and thus sometimes provides a new perspective to clinicians.  P06
.06 Development and delivery of an integrated biochemical and genetic Admixture Analysis between allelic effect and HDL-C concentration testing service for cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes related to metabolic syndrome (MetS) in Tehran cardio-metabolic R. E. Mitchell1, I. R. Berry1, R. Barski2, N. Camm1, K. Prescott1, C. M. Watson1, _. Deciphering Devolopmental Disorders Study3, R. Charlton1; genetic study (TCGS) 1Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, St James‘s University Hospital, Leeds, United B. Sedaghatikhayat1, M. Fallah1, K. Guity1, S. Masjoodi1, F. Azizi2, M. Daneshpour1; Kingdom, 2Special Laboratory Medicine, St James‘s University Hospital, Leeds, United 1Cellular and molecular endocrine research center, Research Institute for endocrine Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. sciences Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for endocrine sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. Cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes (CCDS) arGeA iMnbToGrnA TeMrrors oSfL m C6
eAta8- bolism involving defects in endogenous synthesis and transport of creatine Background: HLD-C variation is one of the main phenotypes in most non- resulting from pathogenic mutations in the genes , and . communicable disorders like metabolic syndrome. Genetics and environ- CCDS have a broad differential diagnosis; clinical features include intellectu- mental factors have undeniable effects on level of HDL-C; among them can al disability, speech delay and seizures. Although rare, CCDS are thought to be noted to body mass index (BMI) and FTO gene. The current study wants be under-diagnosed with defects in the creatine transporter, SL C6
A8, esti- to examine interaction between BMI and FTO and CETP SNPs and their ef- mated to account for 2% of X-linked intellectual disability and 1% of males fects on HDL-C level changes in metabolic syndrome. with intellectual disability of unknown aetiology. Here, a targeted CCDS se- Material and methods: 1142 subjects were selected from TCGS (%49 male). quencing panel was validated for diagnostic use in the LeSeLdCs6 AG8enetics La- 382 well defined MetS used as a case and the others used as control. Nine boratory, delivered as an integrated service involving first-line biochemical selected polymorphisms from FTO and CETP genes were genotyped by Te- testGinAgM. TThis service has thus far detected a pathogenic mutation tra ARMS-PCR. After adjustment for covariate like age, sex and smoking, the in one child with global developmental delay and a homozygous pathoge- association and interactions between studied alleles and HDL-C and meta- nic mutation in two children with severe speech and language delay, bolic syndrome in different BMI groups, was tested using plink software and with further familial testing where appropriate. Additionally, Whole Exome PASW Statistics 18. Sequencing data were obtained from 1133 trios in the Deciphering Deve- Results: Among all nine SNPs, in presence of BMI, lower serum HDL-C had lopmental Disorders Study, of which 42% of SpLrCo6bAa8nds were males with at the strongest association with 3 SNPs: rs3764261 (OR: 0.6281, CI95%; least one relevant clinical feature and 5% had an X-linked variant reported 0.6243-0.632, P=2.31*10-6), rs1800775 (OR: 1.517, CI95%; 1.508-1.526, by the DDD Study. No pathogenic variants in were identified in this P=7.15*10-6) and rs1864163 (OR: 1.062, CI95%; 1.018-1.108, P=5.08*10- cohort, consistent with the predicted rarity of CCDS. Nonetheless, this is the 3). Also other SNPs with other parameters of lipid profile showed signi- first CCDS genetic diagnostic testing offered in a United Kingdom accredited ficance association. laboratory, uniquely integrated alongside a biochemistry service. It remains Conclusion: In summary, there are some significance relationships between likely that CCDS is significantly under-diagnosed and it is therefore anticipa- HDL-C level and studied polymorphisms in the presence of BMI in metabolic ted that the service validated here will contribute to an increased diagnostic syndrome subjects. It seems that the effects of FTO variations on HDL-C le- rate in the UK. vel are affected by BMI, and BMI play a important role. 134 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P06
.09 Persistence of positive renal and cardiac effects of migalastat in patients with Fabry disease (FD)-amenable mutations following 30 on of New Born Screening (NBS) in Romania and, as well, the importance of months of treatment in ATTRACT (Study 012) early confirmation of the diagnosis for family counseling. D. G. Bichet1, D. P. Germain2, R. Giugliani3, D. Hughes4, R. Schiffmann5, W. R. Wilcox6, J. P.  P06
.11 Castelli7, E. S. Cantor7, J. Kirk7, N. Skuban7, J. A. Barth7, M. Bechter8; COQ2-associated primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency: functional 1Hôpital du Sacré Coeur, University of Montreal, Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Hôpital Raymond Poincaré (APHP), University of Versailles–St. Quentin en Yvelines (UVSQ), characterization of the human gene and establishment of genotype- Garches, France, 3Medical Genetics Service, Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, UFRGS, phenotype correlations Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4University College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Baylor E. Trevisson1, M. A. Desbats1, V. Morbidoni1, M. Silic-Benussi2, V. Ciminale2, F. Pierrel3, P. Research Institute, Dallas, TX, United States, 6Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United Navas4, L. Salviati1; States, 7Amicus Therapeutics, Cranbury, NJ, United States, 8Amicus Therapeutics UK 1Clinical Genetics, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Univeristy of Padova, Limited, Buckinghamshire, United Kingdom. Padova, Italy, 2Istituto Oncologico Veneto-IRCCS (IOV), Padova, Italy, Padova, Italy, 3Commissariat à l‘Energie Atomique (CEA), Institut de Recherches en Technologies et Sciences pour le Vivant, Laboratoire Chimie et Biologie des Métaux, Grenoble, France, 4Centro Andaluz de Biologìa del Desarrollo, University Pablo de Olavide, Sevilla, Spain. Introduction: FD, an X-linked lysosomal α-galactosidase A deficiency dis- order, leads to substrate accumulation and clinical sequelae. Migalastat, an oral pharmacological chaperone, stabilizes amenable mutant forms of Introduction: COQ2 encodes para-hydroxybenzoate polyprenyltransferase, α-galactosidase A in FD patients, increasing lysosomal activity. ATTRACT is that catalyzes the second step of the final reaction sequence of Coenzyme an 18-month, open-label study, comprising a randomized comparison stu- Q10 (CoQ) biosynthesis. A homozygous mutation in COQ2 was the first dy of ERT-experienced patients switching to 150 mg QOD migalastat HCl molecular defect reported in a family with primary CoQ deficiency in 2006, (n=36) or remaining on ERT (n=21) and a 12-month open-label extension followed by the identification of other 10 families. Their phenotypes vary (OLE) with migalastat. widely but genotype-phenotype correlations remain to be clarified. Materials and Methods: In the migalastat group, 31 patients with amenable The structure of human COQ2 has been inferred by sequentially cloning the mutations completed the 18-month period and entered 12-month OLE; 49 5’ region (amplified from genomic DNA) and the 3’ region obtained from with amenable mutations received ≥1 migalastat dose during the combined cDNA and the reported human sequence shows 4 in frame ATG initiation 30 months. codons. Results: In patients receiving migalastat for 30 months, the mean (95% CI) Methods: we employed in silico and experimental analyses to characterize annualized rate of change (mL/min/1.73m2) from baseline (cbl) in eGFR/ the 5’ region of COQ2, to analyze the topology and subcellular localization of CKD-Epi and mGFR/iohexol were −1.7 (−2.7, −0.8) and −2.7 (−4.8, −0.6); Coq2p and set up a yeast model to validate COQ2 mutations. rates were comparable to those reported in patients receiving ERT for 18 Results: We provided experimental evidence showing that the functional months. In patients receiving migalastat for 30 months, the mean (95% CI) human COQ2 transcript is shorter than what was previously thought and cbl in LVMi (g/m2) were −3.8 (−8.9, 1.3) for all patients and −10.0 (−16.6, that Coq2 is a mitochondrial protein with the C terminus facing the inter- −3.3) for those with LVH. For ERT-treated patients, previously reported membrane space. We engineered all the known COQ2 missense alleles into 18-month changes in LVMi were −2.0 (−11.0, 7.0) for all patients and +4.5 the S.cerevisiase orthologue to analyze the respiratory phenotype in the de- (−20.9, 29.9) for patients with LVH. LVMi reduction from baseline to month leted strain. Our model proved to be simple and reproducible and demon- 30 in patients with baseline LVH treated with migalastat was statistically strated the hypomorphic nature of all mutations. We also showed that the significant. residual activity (measured by CoQ content in yeast) clearly correlates with Conclusion: In patients switched from ERT, the renal and cardiac effects of patients’ clinical phenotype. migalastat persist over 30 months, making migalastat a promising first-in- Conclusions: Our data support the hypothesis that the affected tissues dis- class oral chaperone treatment for male/female patients with amenable play a specific sensitivity to different levels of CoQ10 deficiency. mutations. This study was supported by Ministry of Health Grant GR-2009-1578914  P06
.12  P06
.10 Unusual phenotype with a novel homozygous SL C25
A1 mutation Biochemical peculiarities and clinical aspects in three Romanian O. Wormser1, I. Cohen1, Y. Yogev1, O. Staretz-Chacham2, O. S. Birk3,1; patients with classic galactosemia 1Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for Biotechnology in A. A. Chis1, A. Nicolescu2, C. Deleanu3, S. Tatar1, R. Pop4, R. Vulturar1; the Negev (NIBN), Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Pediatric Metabolic Unit, 1Univ. of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2‘P.Poni‘ Institute of Soroka Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, Beer-Sheva, Israel, Macromolecular Chemistry of the Romanian Academy, Iasi, Romania, “C.D. Nenitescu” 3Genetics institute, Soroka Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, Institute of Organic Chemistry of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania,, Iasi, Beer-Sheva, Israel. Romania, 3‘P. Poni‘ Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry of the Romanian Academy, Iasi, Romania, “C.D. Nenitescu” Institute of Organic Chemistry of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania,, Iasi, Romania, 4IIIrd Pediatric Clinic, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. Five infants of two related consanguineous Bedouin families presented with a syndrome of neonatal-onset encephalopathy with severe muscular wea- kness, intractable seizures, respiratory distress and delayed psychomotor Classic galactosemia is a hereditary disorder of galactose metabolism development, culminating in early death. Muscle biopsy showed evidence of caused by a deficiency in GALT (galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase). complex V mitochondrial disease, and brain imaging demonstrated ventri- Patients diagnosed with this disorder show a potentially fatal phenotype culomegaly with thinning of corpus callosum. Homozygosity at loci of genes after galactose intake in the first days of life. A galactose-restricted diet known to be associated with mitochondrial complex V deficiency was ruled quickly resolves this acute symptoms. The exact mechanism(s) causing the out using polymorphic markers. Whole exome sequencing data of an affec- complications (cognitive impairment and in females - ovarian insufficiency) ted individual were filtered for known benign variants using open access and the time window in which the damage occur remain uncertain. databases (ClinVar, HapMap, EVS and 1000 genomes) and our in-house data The national newborn screening in our country is limited to PKU and Con- of over 100 ethnically matched exomes. Segregation SaLnCa2ly5sAi1s ruled out all genital hypothyroidism, and this is why a fast analysis for urinary biomar- the putatively deleterious homozygous mutations found, except for a sin- kers in patients suspected for genetic metabolic disease is an emergency. We gle homozygous variant: NM_005. 984: c.713A>GSL iCn25A1 , resulting in present the biochemical abnormalities, the clinical pictures and evolution in a p.N238S missense mutation. The mutation fully segregated in the family three newborn patients diagnosed with classic galactosemia after the first as expected in recessive heredity Mutations in have been shown days of life; concentration of urinary galactose (between 9.890 and 11.897 to be associated with a rare neuro-metabolic disorder of ScLoCm2b5iAn1ed D,L-2- mmol/molCreatinine) and galactitol (between 4.380 and 9.832 mmol/mol- hydroxyglutaric aciduria (DL-2HGA; OMIM #615182). To the best of our Creatinine) were measured using an Bruker-Avance-400 MHz Spectrome- knowledge this is the first study showing a mutation in causing ter; the 1H-NMR spectrum of urine helped in a fast diagnosis but also in documented mitochondrial complex V deficiency. comparing the biochemical peculiarities with clinical pictures in our pati- ents. Metabolic profiling is an essential component that along with genetics, tran- scriptomics and proteomics data will permit a detailed description of the interactions between metabolites, proteins, transcripts and genes in the disease continuum. Our cases will contribute to a better understanding of biochemical pheno- ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 135 type and clinical effects. This report highlight the importance of an extensi-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P06
.13 Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of Genetics, School of Congenital disorder of glycosylation type Iq: Report of a patient with Medicine, MuglaUniversity, Mugla, Turkey, Mugla, Turkey, 5Department of Pneumology, an SRD5A3 mutation identified on whole exome sequencing and Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey. review of the literature A. Hanson-Kahn1, K. Liker1, L. Slattery2, M. Manning1; 1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 2Lucile Packard Children‘s Hospital, Introduction: In this study we looked at smokers with and without chronic Palo Alto, CA, United States. obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients in order to evaluate the in- cidence of 4977 bp mtDNA (mtDNA4977) deletion and mtDNA copy number in sputum cells and in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) in relation to mi- Congenital disorders of glycosylation are multisystem disorders caused by tochondrial function and oxidative stress status. abnormal glycosylation of proteins. Many subtypes have been described. Materials and Methods: Twenty-five COPD patients who were current smo- Patients with type Iq, caused by mutations in the SRD5A3 gene, have oph- kers, 22 smokers and 23 healthy nonsmokers (for only PBLs studies) parti- thalmologic abnormalities, ataxia, intellectual disability, speech delay and cipated in this study. The 4977-bp deletion was detected using a quantita- hypotonia. We report the first patient with type Iq who was diagnosed by tive real time PCR. clinical whole exome sequencing. Results: The frequency of the mtDNA4977 was significantly higher in the The patient was referred for evaluation of nystagmus noted at 3 months, sputum cells of patients with COPD compared to smokers without COPD optic nerve atrophy, hypotonia and global developmental delay. Pregnancy (p<0.0001). This difference was not observed in PBLs. Levels of cellular and delivery were uncomplicated. The patient rolled over at 8 months, sat oxidative stress were significantly higher in the sputum cells of subjects at 10 months and walked at 24 months. She has no words at 2 years. ERG, with COPD than in the smoker group. However, mtDNA copy number, mito- brain MRI and EEG are normal. She is an only child, and her parents are first chondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) and cellular ATP levels in PBLs and cousins. sputum cells were not significantly different between the studied groups. Whole exome sequencing identified a c.57G>A (p.W19X) variant in SRD5A3, The Pearson analysis revealed no correlations between the accumulation which has thusfar only been described in 5 patients. Our patient’s features of mtDNA4977, and intracellular ATP content and ΔΨm values of the spu- are similar to the other individuals described, although she does not have tum cells, although there was a positive correlation between increased mtD- ataxia. Transferrin isoelectric focusing was consistent with a type I profile. NA4977 and the levels of cellular oxidative stress in COPD patients (r:0.80, Ophthalmologic findings in patients with c.57G>A seem to be restricted to p<0.0001). optic nerve atrophy, nystagmus and strabismus. Ataxia is less common, and Conclusions: Our studies may suggest that the accumulation of mtDNA4977 cerebellar malformation may be absent. Intellectual disability is described in the sputum cells of smokers with COPD does not seem to have an impor- as being mild. tant impact on mitochondrial dysfunction in relation to ATP production and We review the literature about the Iq subtype, further delineate the clinical ΔΨm when compared to those of healthy smokers. phenotype of the c.57A>G mutation, and propose that testing for congeni-  P06
.16 tal disorders of glycosylation type 1q be considered in any patient with ny- Treatment of the CTNS W138X nonsense mutation with nonsense stagmus, strabismus or optic nerve atrophy, hypotonia and mild intellectual suppressor drugs disability. E. J. Brasell1, L. Chu2, D. Iglesias3, Y. Yamanaka1, P. Goodyer2;  P06
.14 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Gene defects underlying the congenital lactic acidosis Canada, 3Genome Quebec, Montreal, QC, Canada. I. Bravo-Alonso, R. Navarrete, A. Vega, B. Merinero, C. Pérez-Cerdá, M. Ugarte, B. Pérez, P. Rodríguez-Pombo; CTNS) Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares (CEDEM), Centro de Biología Introduction: Cystinosis is caused by biallelic mutations of the cystinosin molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), CIBERER-ISCIII, IDIPAZ, Universidad Autónoma de ( gene, encoding a lysosomal cystine transporter. Intralysosomal cy- Madrid, Madrid, Spain. stine accumulation drives progressive organ dysfunction. In Quebec, about 50% of cystinosis patients harbor the W138X nonsense mutation causing a stop codon in exon 7. Nonsense mutations trigger nonsense-mediated decay Congenital Lactic Acidosis (CLA) is the biochemical hallmark of a hetero- (NMD) of mutant transcripts and inhibit protein translation. geneous number of non-genetic and genetic conditions. A large number of Materials and Methods: Aminoglycosides, such as geneticin (G418), have defects related to the disruption of normal pyruvate metabolism and/or mi- nonsense suCpTpNrSeWs1s3o8Xr/ Wa1c38tXivity, which permits translational read-through of tochondrial function, with a growing list of mitochondrial diseases caused premature stop codons. To test the effect of G418 on the W138X mutation, by different nuclear gene defects, makes the molecular diagnosis a labor- we treated Ctns human fibroblasts for 24h in culture and exami- intensive work that requires a systematic multidisciplinary approach. ned CTNS expression and intracellular cystine levels. Using ZFN technology, Herein, we present data relative to the massive-parallel sequencing, using we also generated a nonsense mutantC TmNoSuse (Y226X) for in vivo stu- the Illumina® clinical-exome TruSightTM One Sequencing panel, of a cohort dCTieNs SoWf1 a38mX/Win13o8gXlycoside-like compounds. of 29 patients, all selected for having neonatal/infantile encephalopathy Results: After 24h treatment with G418, mRNA transcript levels in with CLA. The clinically significant deemed variants found were confir- fibCrToNbSlaWs13t8sX /Win13c8rXeased to normal levels. Furthermore, G418 med by subsequent Sanger sequencing. In thirteen out of the 29 patients, reduced intracellular cystine levels by 60%C.t TnshYe22s6eX/ rY2e2s6Xults suggest that G418 we yield the molecular diagnosis, with mutations in PDHA1 (3), PDHX (1), reduces NCMtnDs of transcript and allows production of functio- PHKA2 (1), ACAD9 (1), TK2 (1), NDUF S4
 (1), FOXRED1 (1), GFM1 (1), TSFM nal CTNS. In addition, we confirmed that mice have decreased (1), PDS S1
 (1) and COQ2 (1) genes. In silico predictions supported a patho- levels of transcript and intracellular cystine accumulation, as well as genic role in each case. Segregation analysis in parents’ DNA confirmed their glucosuria and early swan-neck lesions of the proxiCmTaNl Stubule by 6 months carrier condition. The overall rate of positive diagnosis was 45%. In absence of age. of previous diagnostic work-up, an impaired real-time oxygen consumption Conclusions: G418 promotes read-through of the W138X mutation, rate in cultured intact patients’ fibroblasts is been used as standard method producing sufficient CTNS protein for cystine efflux from lysosomCetsn.s TY2h26iXs/ to evaluate the mitochondrial functionality when samples were available. Ys2u26gXgests that nonsense suppressor compounds may offer an effective the- Underscoring the genetic heterogeneity of congenital lactic acidosis, our rapeutic strategy for cystinosis involving nonsense mutations. Our findings implicate 11 different genes in 29 patients. We conclude that targe- mice provide a pre-clinical model for screening next-generation non- ted exome sequencing enhances the ability to identify the underlying gene sense suppressor drugs. mutation when a well-sustained clinical suspicion has been previously esta- Fellowship: Cystinosis Research Foundation. blished. ISCII PI12/02078; Fundación Ramón Areces CIV P16
A1853  P06
.17 Association of ENP P1
 polymorphism K121Q with type 2 diabetes  P06
.15 mellitus and stroke in Ukrainian population Lack of association between increased mitochondrial DNA4977 O. Obukhova, V. Harbuzova, I. Marchenko; deletion and ATP levels of sputum cells from chronic obstructive Sumy State University, Sumy, Ukraine. pulmonary disease patients vs healthy smokers Y. Müşteri Oltulu1, A. Karimova2, D. Ustek3, M. Kara4, B. Tutluoglu5, H. Azaklı3, I. Onaran2; 1Health Sciences Faculty, Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Biruni University, Introduction: T2DM is a complex polygenic disorder in which common ge- Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, netic variants interact with environmental factors to unmask the disease. Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul Medipol University, Department of Medical Genetics, School of ENP P1
 is an II transmembrane glycoprotein that inhibits insulin signaling by direct interaction with the insulin receptor beta subunit. This inhibition 136 ESHG 2016 | BARCELON iA s e, nS hP aA ncI eN d b| yW thW e mW in. oE rS QH aG lle. lO e oR f G the K121Q polymorphism (rs1044498)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ENP P1
 in the gene , and causes insulin resistance and diabetes. A stroke is a for numerous genes regulating insulin sensitivity including ADIPOQ, LPL or medical condition that can affect diabetes. Patients with diabetes who suffer PPARγ. Present study showed the association between promoters methyla- a stroke are at greater risk of both disability and death. tion of main insulin pathway genes and insulin resistance. MENaPtePr1ials and Methods: Venous blood of 163 patients with T2DM and 110  P06
.21 healthy individuals (control group) was used for genotyping. Analysis of Elucidation of the molecular process underlying mutant alpha- polymorphism K121Q (rs1044498) was examined by PCR-RFLP galactosidase A degradation in Fabry disease with the following restriction fragment length analysis of the allocation of A. Pockrandt1, C. Zheng1,2, C. Bohl1, J. Lukas1, A. Rolfs1,3; them by electrophoresis in agarose gel. Statistical analysis was performed 1Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Rostock, Germany, 2Leibniz Institute by using the software package SPSS-17. The value of P<0.05 was considered for Catalysis, Rostock, Germany, 3Centogene AG, The Rare Disease Company, Rostock, as significant. ENP P1
 Germany. Results: Using the Pearson criterion was reveal association between the K121Q polymorphism of gene and the development of T2DM in stroke and non-stroke patients. It was shown that in patients with stroke Lysosomal storage disorders (LSD) are a group of variant inherited meta- value homozygotes for the major allele (K/K) and minor allele carriers (K/ bolic diseases caused by protein deficiencies. Lysosomal proteins undergo Q+Q/Q) is 48.8% and 51.2%, while in the non-stroke patients –70.5 % and intracellular processing and trafficking. Mutant proteins in Gaucher and 29.5% respectively (P = 0.012). Niemann-Pick Typ  C1
 disease are exposed to the ER-associated degrada- Conclusions: In diabetic patients with genotype K/Q+Q/Q risk of stroke was tion (ERAD). In the present study we intend to investigate on the mole- significantly higher than in those with K/K genotype in Ukrainian popula- cular process underlying inadvertent pre-mature degradation of mutant tion. α-galactosidase A enzyme (α-gal A, OMIM * 300644) in Fabry disease (OMIM # 301500).  P06
.18 We used MALDI TOF mass spectrometry to identify ubiquitinated lysine Variants Across Multiple Candidate Genes Confer Susceptibility to moieties 130, 240 and 426 of α-gal A that would lead to proteasomal targe- Diabetic Retinopathy in a North Indian Population R. Sikka1, J. Chhablani2, A. J. S. Bhanwer3, S. Chakrabarti4; ting. Substitution of these three lysines reduced ubiquitination of the enzy- 1Department of Human Genetics, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjab, India, me. Furthermore, we over-expressed mutant α-gal A in HEK293H cells and 2Smt Kanuri Santhamma Centre for Vitreo Retinal Diseases, Hyderabad, Telangana, applied inhibitors of cellular ubiquitination and the proteasome, summa- India, 3Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjab, India, 4LV Prasad Eye Research rised as Ubiquitin/Proteasome System inhibitors (UPSi) in order to prevent Institute,, Hyderabad, Telangana, India. the degradation process. Usage of two UPSi, MG132 and Rosiglitazone, led to an twofold increased enzyme level suggesting a potential clinical relevance for this compound class. In search of intracellular binding partners via im- Over the last two decades, there have been tremendous efforts in charac- munoprecipitation the direct physical interaction of α-gal A to different ER terizing the molecular mechanisms underlying complex disorders like dia- resident chaperones (e.g. Calnexin and BiP/GR P78
) was confirmed. Further betes along with its associated variant, diabetic retinopathy (DR). These studies will be performed to identify  E3
 ubiquitin ligase outfit involved in approaches were largely based on Genome W ide Associatio n Studies and mutant α-gal A ubiquitination and degradation in disease state. candidate gene screenings for identifying the associated biomarkers. These  P06
.23 studies were limited largely due to populationsubstructuringalong with the Use of next generation sequencing for the diagnosis of familial vagaries of small sample size. In the present study, we performed targeted hypercholesterolemia (FH) genome screening of 97 SNPs across in 48 candidate genes involved in the S. Martínez-Figueroa, R. Roig, L. Garrido, A. Beteta, À. García-Osuna, F. Blanco-Vaca; metabolic pathways leading to DR. We analyzed these variants in a cohort Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. of 848 subjects (414 DR cases along with gender andT eCthFn7Lic2ity matched 434 controls abovAeD tIhPeO aQg e of T5 L0
R y-e4a rps) using Sequenome MassARRAY techno- logy. Strong genetic associations were observed in ; three interge- Introduction: More than 1500 mutations causing FH are known. Their detec- nic variants; and ( <0.05) with DR. Further, the clinical and tion is classically performed by Sanger sequencing and MLPA of the LDLR. anthropometric data revealed that the history of hypertension [p<0.001; Between 2008 and 2012, we used a microarray (LIPOchip®) for detecting OR=13.64 (9.15=20.34)], male gender [p=0.003; OR=1.86 (1.22-2.81)] and the (around 250) most frequent mutations in the Spanish population. Be- BMI [p<0.001; OR=1.31 (1.17-1.46)] were the main risk factors for DR. The- cause of the high potential mutation heterogeneity, during 2013 we tested se results provide strong evidence of association of variants in these genes the Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Roche 454 based SEQPRO LIPO RS®. with susceptibility to DR. Material and Methods: The SEQPRO LIPO RS kit amplifies 48 amplicons cov-  P06
.19 ering the coding regions of the LDLR, PCSK9 and LDLRA P1
 and 2 regions of Increased DNA methylation caused by obesity as a key factor for APOB. The SEQPRO LIPO RS software automatically generates variants lists insulin resistance development that were compared to a Mutation Database to provide pathogenic signifi- M. Malodobra-Mazur, D. Bednarska-Chabowska, R. Adamiec, T. Dobosz; cance. 160 samples of FH patients from Catalonia were screened with this Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. kit. Results: DNA was obtained from patients diagnosed used the Dutch MedPed criteria. 27 samples were diagnosed as possible FH (values between 3 and Introduction: Insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes are leading problems 5), 55 as probable FH (values of 6 and 7), 55 as definite FH (values ≥ 8). No of modern civilization. In pathogenesis of both disorders key role is played values were indicated for 23 patients. Mutations were found in 66 samples, by obesity. Numerous data implicate obesity with DNA hypermethylation representing 41% of all samples. Forty-five different mutations were found, including genes regulating insulin sensitivity, however there are only a few 32 of them being unique, all in the LDLR gene except one mutation in APOB reports concerning promoter’s methylation of insulin pathway genes. The (p.R3527Q). Most mutations were amino acid changes or lead to null al- aim of our work was to assess the rate of global and site-specific DNA me- leles. Carriers of mutations whose pathogenicity was already demonstrated thylation of main insulin pathway genes in obese insulin resistant patients. showed a higher Dutch Medped than carriers of variants of unknown signifi- Methods: Global and site-specific DNA methylation was analyzed in lym- cance (9.34 vs 6.44). phocytes and adipose tissue of insulin resistant subjects and controls using Conclusion: This NGS-based kit was proven adequate for FH mutation detec- EpiJet DNA Methylation Analysis Kit. Site-specific DNA methylation was ana- tion. lyzed within promoters of INSR, PIK3R1 and SL C2
A4 using Real-Time PCR. Results: Strong positive correlation between global DNA methylation and BMI was displayed in both types of investigated tissues. Simultaneously, DNA methylation positively correlated with glucose level and insulin resi- stance ratios (HOMA-IR, QUICKI) in both tissues. Furthermore, increased promoter methylation of analyzed genes was noticed in visceral adipose tissue of insulin resistant patients comparing to controls. What’s more, the promoter methylation rate of INSR and SL C2
A4 positively correlated with glucose level and insulin resistance and negatively with gene expression. Promoters’ methylation status of all genes correlated positively with BMI. Conclusions: Obtained results indicate the role of DNA hipermethylation in insulin resistance. Aberrant profile oEf SprHomGo 2te0rs1 m6 e|t hByAlaRtioCnE wLaOs NshAow, Sn PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 137ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P06
.24  P06
.26 High dietary folate during pregnancy leads to pseudo-MTHFR Glycogen Storage Disease type IXa: a new variant in PHKA2 detected deficiency, changes in choline metabolites and short-term memory by Next Generation Sequencing impairment in offspring C. Rodríguez Jiménez1, F. Santos1, Á. Campos1, C. Camarena2, D. LLedín2, E. Sevilla1, A. R. H. Bahous1, N. M. Jadavji2, M. Cosín-Tomás3, L. Deng4, J. Lu5, O. Malysheva6, M. Pallàs3, Carazo1, E. Vallespín1, Á. Del Pozo1, R. Mena1, P. Lapunzina1, S. Rodríguez Nóvoa1; P. Kaliman7,8, M. Caudill6, R. Rozen1,4; 1INGEMM, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain. 1Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Department of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 3Pharmacology Unit, Faculty of Pharmacy, Institut de Neurociència Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Nucli INTRODUCTION: Glycogen storage disease (GSD) type IX (MIM: 30600) re- Universitari de Pedralbes, Barcelona, Spain, 4Department of Pediatrics, McGill University sults from a deficiency in hepatic phosphorylase kinase (PHK) activity, ac- Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 6Division of Nutritional Sciences and Genomics, Cornell University, counting for ~1/100000 births. PHK is a decahexameric enzyme composed Ithaca, NY, United States, 7Institute of Biomedical Investigation of Barcelona, Spanish of four subunits, α, β, γ and δ encoded by four different genes: PHKA2, PHKB, National Research Council, Barcelona, Spain, 8Center for Mind and Brain, University of PHKG and CALM, respectively. Mutations in PHKA2 (MIM 300798) cause the California Davis, Davis, CA, United States. most common subtype, X-linked recessive GSD IXa (75% of all GSD IX). Her- ein, we report a patient with clinical symptoms compatible with GSD VI or IX. Introduction: Severe deficiency of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase PATIENT AND METHODS: A four-year old patient with hepatomegaly, (MTHFR) in mice is associated with short-term memory impairment and growth retardation, elevation of liver enzymes, hyperlipidaemia and mild disturbed choline metabolism. Folate intake has increased in the general fasting hypoglycaemia with hyperketosis was remitted to our service. PYGL, population, particularly in women of childbearing age, due to food fortifica- PHKA1, PHKA2, PHKB and PHKG2 were analyzed by Next Generation Se- tion and use of high dosage vitamin supplements. The goal of this study was quencing (NGS). to determine whether high dietary folate during pregnancy and lactation RESULTS: We identified the previously undescribed hemizygous variant would affect brain function in offspring. PHKA2:exon18: c.1963G>A. In silico analyses showed two possible conse- Materials and Methods: Female mice were placed on control diets or folic quences: 1st -missense variant, p.Glu655Lys, affecting a highly conserved acid-supplemented diets prior to mating, which were maintained during amino acid and predicted to be likely pathogenic; 2nd - Splicing variant: Ma- pregnancy and lactation. Embryos were collected at  E17
.5 or pregnancy was xEnt, NNSPLICE, GeneSplicer, SliceSiteFinder-like predict that this variant carried to term. Male offspring were evaluated for memory impairment at 3 disrupt the ex18 canonical splice donor site, probably resulting in an aber- weeks of age using the novel object recognition test. rant protein. The variant was absent in the mother, thus, it is likely to have Results: Pups born to mothers on supplemented diet showed visual short- arisen as “de novo” event. term memory impairment. In the livers of mothers and pups, MTHFR pro- CONCLUSIONS: NGS helped us to improve GSD clinical diagnosis, allowing tein levels were significantly decreased and the ratio of the phosphorylated the simultaneous analysis of several genes. The novel hemizygous variant (less active): non-phosphorylated isoform was increased. Phosphocholine PHKA2:c.1963G>A, could explain the GSD IXa phenotype observed in our was decreased in livers of pups and glycerophosphocholine was decreased patient. Functional studies should be performed to determine and confirm in offspring hippocampus. In the embryos of females on the supplemented the pathogenic mechanism, in order to provide genetic counselling to the diet, we observed growth delay, decreased MTHFR protein in livers and a family. decrease in some choline metabolites (choline, betaine and phosphocholi-  P06
.27 ne). Identification of two new variants at the codon 281 of HFE-1 gene Conclusions: We suggest that high folate intake during pregnancy leads V. Geromel, N. Couprie, P. Mouty, D. Martinez, L. Raymond, G. Egea; to pseudo-MTHFR deficiency, disturbs choline metabolism and results in BIOMNIS, Lyon, France. memory impairment in offspring. These findings contribute to increased awareness of the unintended negative consequences of folic acid oversup- plementation. In France, HFE hereditary hemochromatosis counts for 95 % of hereditary Grants: Fellowship (Faculty of Medicine-McGill) to RB and CIHR grant to RR. iron overload. The homozygosity for the p.Cys282Tyr mutation in the HFE  P06
.25 gene leads to hepcidin deficiency, enhanced body iron storage and clinical Evaluation of neopterin as a potential biomarker of Gaucher disease impact. In Biomnis, the detection of the p.Cys282Tyr allele is based on real- C. Drugan, T. Drugan, N. Miron, C. Cătană; time PCR using Taqman® probes. Iuliu Haţieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. Two compound heterozygous states for the p.Cys282Tyr mutant and either the p.His63Asp or the p.Ser65Cys variant alleles are commonly screened although they are associated with mild iron level increase. In recent years Introduction: Gaucher disease, one of the mGoBstA p1revalent lysosomal storage several new mutations in HFE gene have been described: for instance a no- disorders, is caused by a recessively inherited deficiency of the lysosomal vel  C282
Y/R226G compound heterozygous state has been found displaying enzyme glucorebrosidase, encoded by the gene. We investigated the the biochemical hemochromatosis phenotype. usefulness of neopterin, as a potential biomarker in Gaucher disease and In the course of our genotyping technique for p.Cys282Tyr allele, we have analysed its evolution in response to enzyme replacement therapy. detected abnormal profiles for two patients. A Sanger sequencing has been Materials and methods: We measured plasma neopterin levels in 31 pati- performed and two new variants have been identified at the 281 codon. For ents with non-neuronopathic Gaucher disease, before and after the onset patient 1, the p.Thr281Lys has been found associated with the p.Cys282Tyr of enzyme replacement therapy and compared the results with those of 18 and p.His63Asp at the heterozygous states, and for patient 2, the variant healthy controls. Plasma chitotriosidase activity served as a reference bio- p.Thr281Met turned out to be linked to the p.His63Asp allele at the hete- marker, against which we evaluated the evolution of neopterin. rozygous state. Results: In treatment-naïve patients, neopterin levels were significantly in- Both new mutations do not affect the normal Cys225S- S282
Cys disulfide creased (mean 11.90±5.82 nM), compared with controls (6.63±5.59 nM), bridge in the HFE protein. However while the p.Thr281Lys allele in patient and returned to normal levels (6.92±4.66 nM) after average interval of 3.8 1 could show the same specificities as a neutral and hypomorphic variant, years of macrophage-targeted recombinant enzyme substitution. Receiver the p.Thr281Met allele, related to a marked hemochromatosis phenotype in operating characteristic analysis of the diagnostic value of neopterin indi- patient 2, could be consistent with a deleterious character. Further investi- cated a cut-off value of 7.613 nM, corresponding to an area under the curve gations of that mutant protein will be required. of 0.780 and indicating a good discrimination capacity, with a sensitivity of 0.774 and a specificity of 0.778.  P06
.28 Conclusions: Plasma neopterin levels reflect the global accumulation of Gau- Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency in southern Italy: genotype- cher cells and the extent of chronic immune activation in this disorder. Cir- phenotype correlations, BH4 responsiveness and identification of a culating neopterin may be considered an alternative storage cell biomarker novel mutant PAH allele in Gaucher disease, especially in chitotriosidase-deficient patients. R. Trunzo, R. Santacroce, A. Leccese, G. De Girolamo, M. Margaglione; Laboratory of Human Genetics, Foggia, Italy. Hyperphenylalaninemias (HPAs), the most common inborn error of me- tabolism (1:10.000), are recessively inherited and caused by mutations in the gene encoding phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). PAH converts L- Phe- 138 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONnAy,l aSlaPnAinIeN in |t oW LW-TyWros.EinSe.H PAGH.O blRocGk results in accumulation of L-Phe andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index toxic metabolites. The mutational spectrum of PAH gene in Southern Italy low activity ( L212
P, R270K, R261P) also presented with reduced amounts have been documented elsewhere, but in particular from Campania and of protein. Instead,  L249
P,  S196
Y, T380M with low activity showed substan- Sicily. We sequenced the PAH gene and genotype-phenotype correlations tial amount of protein. In particular,  L249
P showed a clear contrast between and genotype-based prediction of BH4 responsiveness in 37 PKU patients strong reduction of activity (7±0,11) and high protein expression. from Puglia were done. The mutational spectrum included 30 variants with Results from the experimental modulation of mutant residual activity have c.1066-11G>A being the most frequent (12,16%). One new variant, c.870 major implications, both for our understanding of genotype-phenotype cor- T>G was found. The genotype-phenotype correlation was concordant in relations and for the discussion of molecular basis of BH4 responsiveness, 90%. The genotype-based prediction to BH4-responsiveness was around useful for the development of novel therapeutic approaches.  P06
.32 40% in our patients; thus, this information could be useful for the selection Targeted next generation sequencing in patients with inborn errors of candidates for BH4 therapy. The present study enlarges the molecular of metabolism epidemiology of PAH mutations, particularly with respect to Southern Italy. D. Yubero1, J. Armstrong2, A. García-Cazorla2, B. Perez-Dueñas2, F. Palau2, R. Artuch2, Our data reinforce the wide heterogeneity of PAH mutations in PKU patients Inborn Errors of Metabolism working group; and moreover, reveal a good correlation, with patients carrying null mutati- 1Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, ons in both alleles showing the highest degree of concordance with the most Spain. severe phenotypes as previously reported. Finally, the increasing information obtained in this and other studies will improve the prediction of the evolution of the disease and the diagnostic Introduction: Next generation sequencing technologies (NGS) have allowed applicability of mutational analysis. The genotyping of patients became im- to promote a cheaper and faster genetic diagnosis. However, due to the un- portant, not only because of the definitive diagnosis and prediction of the certainties of NGS, the need of a holistic approach to inborn errors of meta- optimal diet, but also to point out those patients that could benefit from new bolism (IEM) diagnosis is still unambiguous. To evaluate the NGS utility on therapeutic approach. the clinical field, targeted genic panel approach was designed for the dia-  P06
.29 gnosis of a set of IEM. The aim of the work was to compare the diagnostic Molecular diagnosis of familial hypobetalipoproteinemia yield of NGS in patients presenting consistent clinical and biochemical sous- R. Roig, S. Martínez, A. Beteta, F. Blanco; Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. picion of IEM with those with no specific biomarkers. Materials and methods: Subjects studied (n=146) were classified in 2 cate- gories: Group 1 (n=81), patients with consistent clinical and biochemical Introduction: Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHBL) is a rare autoso- suspicion of IEM; Group 2 (n=65), cases with clinical suspicion of IEM but mal codominant disease characterized by < 5th pe rcentile of the age-and with unspecific or negative biomarkers. 175 genes (defects in amino acids, sex-specific levels of LDL-cholesterol. Most cases are caused by mutations organic acids, free fatty acid oxidation, neurometabolic and complex mole- in the APOB gen and, less frequently, by ANGPT L3
mutations. Some FCHL cules metabolism) were studied through HaloPlex Target Enrichment Sy- patients with APOB mutations, but not with ANGPT L3
 mutations, present stem and Illumina sequencing. with hepatic steatosis and intestinal lipid malabsortion. The molecular cha- Results: Definitive genetic diagnosis was achieved in 73 out of the 146 pati- racter ization of these entities is thus often needed for clinical diagnosis and ents (50 %); in 12/146 (8.2 %) only one mutation or variants with uncertain genetic counseling. significance were detected in candidate genes; and in 61/146 (41.8%), no Aims:To perform molecular diagnosis of FHBL in 20 suspected cases. mutations were found. For group 1, the diagnostic yield was 78% (63 out of Materials and Methods:DNA was extracted from whole blood samples of 20 81). This rate went down to 15.4% (10 out of 65) in group 2 (X2 = 76.171; probands and subjected to PCR. and Sanger sequencing of exons and flan- p < 0.0001). king exo n-intron of the APOB gene. Probands without APOB mutation were Conclusions: Genetic diagnosis in our cohort was fast and effective, espe- subjected to ANGPT L3
 screening. cially in the group having both clinical and biochemical indication for the Results: From the 20 probands with the suspected disorder, 10 of them d Pi 0a 6g .n 3o 3sis. presented APOB mutations. Of these, 9 were in exons and 1 in a splicing Second tier next-generation sequencing for inborn errors of zone. A prematurely stop codon was generated in all these probands thus metabolism after positive newborn screening results. encoding truncated apoB-100 proteins. Two of the 10 probands without E. Lundman1, A. Stray-Pedersen1, J. Strand1, J. Gaup1, T. Tangeraas1, J. Jørgensen1, T. APOB mutations presented mutations in ANGPT L3
. One was a 5pb delection Rootwelt1,2, R. D. Pettersen1; (c.363_367de lCTCAA) generating a prematurely stop codon that impairs 1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. ANGPTL 3 function. Conclusions:APOB gene mutations were found in the half of the analyzed probands while ANGPT L3
 gene mutations were found in the 20% of pro- Introduction: Newborn screening (NBS) in Norway is mandated for 20 In- bands without APOB gene mutation. The identification of unresolved cases born Errors of Metabolism (IEM). Rapid genotyping after a positive NBS could be improved by studying other genes potentially causing inherited result may have a major impact on follow-up and treatment. Using NBS hypolipidemia. screening samples we evaluated next generation sequencing using a large  P06
.31 gene panel as 2nd tier tests for IEM. In vitro expression analysis of eight phenylalanine hydroxylase Materials and Methods: Six samples with known diagnoses (1 PKU+TFP, variants: correlation with metabolic phenotypes and structural 1 CPT2, 2 PA and 2 MMA) were included, 5 with known genotype. DNA properties (~1.8ng) extracted from the NBS dried blood spots was amplified with the R. Trunzo1, R. Santacroce1, G. De Girolamo1, A. Leccese1, M. Margaglione1, N. Blau2; 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, Foggia, Italy, 2Dietmar-Hopp Metabolic Center, IonAmpliSeq IEM panel (570 genes) and sequenced on IonTorrent PGM. Us- Heidelberg, Germany. ing Ion Reporter software, the detected variants were filtered to only show variants within the 32 relevant NBS-IEM genes, in exonic or splice regions, with 5000Exomes Global MAF<0.01. Hyperphenylalaninemias are genetic diseases prevalently caused by a wide Results: In total 1740-2122 variants were detected in each sample, with range of mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. In vitro ex- 2-12 variants remaining after initial filtering. In the 5 previously geno- pression analysis of mutations offers the opportunity to elucidate the mole- typed samples, all disease-causing variants were confirmed. In one MMA cular mechanisms involved, investigating the severity of biochemical phe- sample with unknown genotype, only three potential variants remained notype, and how a mutation exerts its deleterious effects on the enzyme. after filtering, including the two which likely account for the phenotype: To study the effects of mutations on PAH activity, we used an in vitro ex- NM_052845.3(MMAB):[c.291-1G>A(;)c.571C>T]. The results were available pression system in combination with liquid chromatography applied with within 3 days after DNA extraction. ESI-MSMS for the quantification of tyrosine produced from phenylalanine to Conclusion: The tested workflow may reduce turn-around-time for geno- assess the residual activities of 8 missense variants (Y204C,  L212
P,  L249
P, typing substantially, and show the possibility of quickly confirming positive  L249
F, R270K, R261P,  S196
Y and T380M) associated with PAH deficiency. metabolic screening even with large genes and multiple disease-genes in- The assays showed a decreased activity ranging from 7% to 51% that of volved. Bioinformatic filtering before variant evaluation avoids incidental the wild-type protein, with the exception of Y204C, which revealed no signi- findings outside the screening mandate genes and drastically shortens anal- ficant impact on enzyme function (94±6%). Three mutations ( L249
F,  S196
Y, ysis time. A smaller gene panel may reduce costs and allow higher coverage and T380M) were associated with low-intermediate levels of activity (21- of the gene variants of interest. 51%). Mutations  L212
P,  L249
P, R270K, and R261P showed very low resi- dual activity (7-17%). Moreover, in western blot analysis, aE ll S oH f tG he 2 m0 u1 ta6 n t| pB roA teR inC sE wL iO thN raA th, eS r PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 139ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P06
.34 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United A newly identified mitochondrial tRNA modification due to QRS L1
 Kingdom, 3University of Michigan School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, mutations causes infantile mitochondrial disease. 4University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los N. Akiyama1, K. Murayama2, M. Shimura2, T. Fushimi2, K. Ichimoto1, M. Mori3, Y. Kishita4, Angeles, CA, United States, 6University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 7University Y. Tokuzawa4, M. Kohda4, T. Suzuki5, Y. Okazaki4, A. Ohtake6; of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland, 8Newcastle 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Chiba Children’s Hospital, Chiba, Japan, 2Department University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 9The National Institute of Diabetes of Metabolism, Chiba Children’s Hospital, Chiba, Japan, 3Department of Pediatrics, and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Phoenix, AZ, United States. Matsudo City Hospital, Chiba, Japan, 4Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan, 5Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 6Department of Introduction: The mechanism underlying deterioration of insulin secretory Pediatrics, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan. capacity which plays an important role in the development of type 2 dia- betes (T2D) is not fully understood. To identify genetic factors involved we meta-analyzed all studies where first phase insulin secretion has been in- Background: Defects of tRNA modification (tRNA modopathy) are known as vestigated through intravenous glucose tolerance tests (IVGTT) and where a cause of a variety of diseases. We present two cases of infantile mitochon- GWAS (n=4834) or metabochip (n=741) data was available. drial disease with pathogenic mutations in QRS L1
 (hGatA) involved in Glu- Methods: The traits Acute Insulin Response to glucose (AIR), Peak Insulin tRNAGln amidotransferase (Glu-Adt), which is composed of three subunits, (PI) and Disposition Index (DI) were defined. Variants were imputed using hGatC, hGatA and hGatB. the 1000G reference panel and tested foMr aTsNsRoc1iBation using linear regression Patients and methods: A girl (Pt250) suddenly suffered from hypoglycemia adjusted for age and sex and in an additional analysis also for BMI. and lactic acidosis on day 1. Subsequently tachypnea, hypertrophic cardio- Results: A common T2D variant CinD KA L1
 was ass-o26ciated with the- myopathy, adrenal insufficiency and hearing loss appeared. She died of car- I19VGTT traits at -1g7enome wide significance (PI p=2.5×10 , AIR p=4-15.3×10 diac failure at 5 months. Another girl (Pt860) developed cyanosis and lactic , DI p=3.3×1-013 ) and variants in with both PI(p=4.9×10 ) and acidosis on day 3. She died of interstitial pneumonia at 2 months. We perfor- AIR(p=9.5×10 ), these variants also influenced oral glucose stimulated med enzyme analysis, whole exome sequencing and their validation tests. insIuGlFin2 BsPe2cretioAnD C(OY5GTT). Other common T2D variants were associated Results: The enzyme analysis showed combined respiratory chain defici- at p<0.01 revealing potential mechanisms for these variants. Variants encies (I, III, and IV) in both cases. The whole exome sequencing revealed in and influenced the IVGTT but had little effect on the OGTT Pt250 harbored a homozygous mutation c.398G>T (p.G133V) and Pt860 suggesting they exert direct effects on the pancreas rather than systemic harbored a compound heterozygous mutation c.398G>T (p.G133V) and effects. Put-a8tive novel associations were observed on chromosome 7, 11 and c.350G>A (p.G117E) in QRS L1
. In vitro reconstitution of Gln-tRNAGln for- 2 (p<5×10 ) but these variants need further validation. MT- mation using recombinant hGatCAB showed strongly decreased transami- CNoRn1cBlusionC: DOKuAr Lg1enome wide analysis on the largest dataset for intrave- dation activity. nously measured insulin secretion showed that T2D risk alleles at the Conclusions: Our study is the first to demonstrate that QRS L1
 mutations and loci were strongly associated with our measures and it lead to a defect in the human mitochondrial translation and are a cause of provides new insight into physiological mechanisms of other diabetes risk severe infantile mitochondrial disease. variants. Grant reference: This work was supported by a grant of the Innovative Cell  P06
.37 Biology by Innovative Technology (Cell Innovation Program) from MEXT. The importance of both galactocerebrosidase enzyme analysis and This work was supported in part by the Practical Research Project for Rare/ GALC gene testing for diagnosis of Krabbe leucodystrophy Intractable Diseases from AMED. D. Cregeen, E. Green, O. Chiu, M. Jackson;  P06
.35 Viapath, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. ISCA2 mutation causes hereditary spastic paraplegia I. Dorboz1, F. Renaldo2, A. Slama3, J. Benoist2, M. Elmaleh2, V. Desportes4, O. Boespflug- Tanguy2; Krabbe disease is a very rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage dis- 1INSERM, Paris, France, 2Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 3Bicetre Hospital, AP-HP, order caused by deficiency of the enzyme galactocerebrosidase (galacto- Le Kremlin Bicetre, Paris, France, 4CHU Lyon, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Bron, Lyon, sylceramidase). Traditionally diagnosis relied on measurement of enzyme France. deficiency using a radiolabelled natural substrate; a method in use at our laboratory for well over 30 years. Subsequently a more convenient fluo- rimetric substrate has been implemented in some laboratories, however Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are ubiquitous cofactors composed of iron and there are known (albeit infrequent) issues with this methodology including inorganic sulfur. [Fe-S] clusters participate in electron transfer, substrate false positive and negative results. Most laboratories are now using GALC binding, iron, sulfur storage, regulation of gene expression, and enzyme gene analysis as a first or second line test for Krabbe disease. A recurrent activity. Various biogenesis componenItSsC aAr2e functionally impaired leading 30kb GALC deletion has been identified in some populations however many to human disease. An early onset lethal encephalopathy has been recently GALC variants are family specific and therefore definitive enzyme analysis describISeCdA i2n relation to mutations of . This protein is essential with (either pre- or post- DNA testing) can be invaluable for confirmation of a ISCA1 and IBA57 for protein assembly required for [4Fe-4S]. We describe diagnosis. Sanger sequencing of the GALC coding region has been carried a new mutation in a 12-year-old boy from a consanguineous Turkish out in 32 families at our centre to date. We present several patients with family. He presented with a slowly progressive spastic paraplegia. At the age novel pathogenic variants and also several patients winit hvi tar ofalse positive en- of 15 months he developed pyramidal signs in the lower limbs, however zyme deficiency caused by a non-pathogenic sequence variant (c.550C>T) there was no dystonia or cerebellar signs. Brain MRI showed diffuse white which is thought to confer reduced enzyme activity (possibly more matter abnormality, with areas of cavitation. Examination at the age of 8 frequently observed with the fluorimetric enzyme methodology). The possi- years shows improvement in clinical signs but not in MRI with an extension bility of pseudodeficiency and the preponderance of novel variants in Krab- of white matter abnormalities. Activities of the respiratory chain complexes be patients highlights the importance of both galactocerebrosidase enzyme were normal in fibIrSoCbAl2asts whereas PDH activity was in the low range analysis and GALC gene testing for diagnosis of this disorder. Exome sequencing combined to homozygosity mapping revealed a homozy- gous mutation in c.154C>T/p.Leu52Phe, parents were heterozygous for the variant. The mutation was predicted to be deleterious and was not  P06
.39 found in the public databases. The reason for the clinical and biological dif- Pharmacological intervention in Fabry disease and the role of ferences between our patient and those previously described is not clear. proteostasis However a variable phenotype expression was already describe in other S. Seemann1, M. Ernst2, L. R. Trenkner1, G. Fuellen2, J. Lukas1, A. Rolfs1,3; Iron-sulfer clusters proteins such as IBA57 and NFU1, suggesting that other 1Albrecht Kossel Institute, Medical University Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 2Institute potential factors that might contribute variability in modulating phenotype for Biostatistics and Informatics in Medicine and Ageing Research, Medical University Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 3Centogene AG, The Rare Disease Company, Rostock,  P06
.36 Germany. A GWAS of first phase glucose stimulated insulin secretion during an intravenous glucose tolerance test reveals new physiology of genetic GLA variants associated with type 2 diabetes Fabry disease is a lysosomal storage disorder resulting from a mutation in N. van Leeuwen1, A. R. Wood2, A. Jackson3, A. Jonsson4, N. Wang5, U. Smith6, L. Boquete the gene encoding for the lysosomal enzyme α-galactosidase A ( ). These Vilarino2, A. Stancakova7, M. Walker8, R. Hanson9, T. M. Frayling2, Genome Utilisation for mutations result in a lack or a reduction of enzyme activity. Missense muta- INtraveNEous glucose stimulated insulin Secretion Studies GUINNESS consortium; tions often lead to a destabilized but still catalytically active enzyme. Small 140 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONmAo, lSecPuAleIsN ha |v We bWeenW sh.EowSHn tGo .sOupRpGort protein folding and to reduce the re-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index jection of the enzyme by the ER associated degradation, which consequently Results: Dual luciferase assay results showed that both p.T10M and p. S345
K leads to enhanced transport to the lysosomes. mutant proteins have similar transactivation activity as the wild type HN- We identified small molecules that showed the capability to elevate the ac- F1A. Immunostaining studies revealed that p.T10M mutant protein localize tivity of mutant α-galactosidase A in human fibroblasts from Fabry patients in the nucleus as the wild type HNF1A while p. S345
K mutant protein is in carrying the p.R301Q mutation. Also, synergistic effects of compounds could the cytoplasm. DNA binding ability of p.T10M mutant protein was reduced, be shown arguing for a differential mode of action. In order to investiga- but p. S345
Y mutant similar compared to wild type. te more closely the specific mode of action of the proteostasis regulators Conclusion: Preliminary results showed that both mutant HNF1A proteins we found to be effective, HTA-2.0 microarrays will be performed to com- have reduced activities and malfunctions compared to wild type. Future stu- pare transcriptomics data of treated and untreated p.R301Q fibroblasts. dies will show whether they also effect the insulin secretion from pancreatic Resulting transcriptional fingerprints of the effective small molecules will cells. This project (113 S218
) was supported by TÜBİTAK (The Scientific and be integrated and visualised on a proteostasis network based on biologi- Technical Research Council of Turkey).  P06
.43 cal function or physical interaction. To establish this network we reviewed Reprogramming of patients-derived fibroblasts to pluripotency for several hundred proteostasis components with the help of commercial and modeling inherited disorders of propionate metabolism non-commercial databases like Selventa and String. E. Richard, S. Brasil, M. Ugarte, L. R. Desviat, B. Pérez; We will finally identify sub-networks and single protein molecules within Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. the proteostasis network as effective modulators of gene function and, per- spectively, as potential targets for a specific therapeutical intervention. The methodology is a generalizable tool to be transferred also to other lysoso- Recent advances in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technologies have mal disorders and to identify new targets for treatment approaches. transformed our ability to elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms of disease  P06
.41 development and to test new therapeutic strategies. iPSCs are capable of Identification of the functional miRNA/miRNAs in the pathogenesis of self-renewal and have the potential to differentiate into any cell type which MODY3 can now help to overcome the limitations of fibroblasts as cellular model O. F. Baltaci1, S. Colakoglu2, G. Gullu2, A. Karabay Korkmaz1, E. Berber3; for inherited metabolic disorders. This work has focused on the generati- 1Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey, on and characterization of iPSCs from two patients-derived fibroblasts with 3Istanbul Arel University, Istanbul, Turkey. methylmalonic aciduria cblB type (MIM #251110) and one with propionic acidemia PCCA type (MIM #606054) using CytoTune Sendai vectors which include the four Yamanaka factors (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc). The iPSCs Introduction: MODY3 is a progressive hyperglycemia, associated with HN- generated have been characterized and presented the hallmarks for the- F1A gene. The HNF1A gene encoded transcription factor HNF1A regulates se cells: (1) typical iPSC-like morphology and growth characteristics, (2) expression of genes including glucose metabolism and glucose transportati- conservation of the mutations identified in the three patients, (3) positive on genes, insulin gene. MODY3 is misdiagnosed as Type1 Diabetes due to the staining for alkaline phosphatase activity, (4) expression of pluripotency- similar clinical features. miRNAs are involved in the development of diabe- associated markers (OCT4, NANOG and SOX2) and surface markers (SSEA3, tes, diabetic complications, insulin expression. The present study explores SSEA4, TRA1-60, and TRA1-81), (5) demethylation of the OCT4 and NANOG the functional miRNAs in the pathogenesis of MODY3 by determining the promoters, (6) normal karyotype and (7) differentiation potential into all HNF1A regulated miRNA/miRNAs in MIN6 cells. three primary germ cell layers in vitro. Our next step will be the iPSC diffe- Materials and Methods: Glucose stimulated MIN6 cells, expressing HNF1A rentiation into neurons, hepatocytes and cardiomyocytes serving as an in endogenously, were transfected with the human HNF1A cDNA expression vivo platform for modeling these two disorders of propionate metabolism. vector for overexpression and with siRNA binding to HNF1A mRNA to si- Grants: PI13/01239 and SAF2013-43005  P06
.44 lence HNF1A expression. Overexpression and silencing were confirmed Functional characterization of four novel genetic variants causing with RT-qPCR and Western Blotting. The HNF1A regulated miRNA/miRNAs methylmalonic aciduria and propionic academia in Serbian patients was determined by RNA-Seq of the total RNA extract in the HNF1A overex- M. Stojiljkovic1, K. Klaassen1, M. Djordjevic2, A. Sarajlija2, S. Brasil3, B. Kecman2, S. pressed and silenced cells. Grkovic2, J. Kostic1, P. Rodriguez-Pombo3, L. R. Desviat3, S. Pavlovic1, B. Perez3; Results: 238 known and 91 novel miRNAs showed significantly differential 1IMGGE, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Mother and Child Health Care expression when total RNA extract expression from HNF1A overexpressed Institute of Serbia „Dr Vukan Cupic“, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Centro de Diagnóstico de and silenced cells were compared. Previously known miR-129-1-3p, miR- Enfermedades Moleculares, CBMSO, UAM, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. 129-2-3p, miR-200b-3p, miR-296-3p, and miR-378a-5p, associated with diabetes in the literature, showed the most significant differential expres- sion. Methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) and propionic acidemia (PA), inborn meta- Conclusion: This study revealed presence of HNF1A regulated known and bolic diseases inherited in an autosomal-recessive manner, are the most fre- novel miRNAs in MIN6 cells. The most significantly differentially expressed quent organic acidurias. However, each of them is classified as rare disease 5 miRNAs are selected as candidate miRNA molecules in the pathogenesis since their incidences are estimated at ~ 1:50 000 for MMA and ~ 1:100 of MODY3. Validation of the candidate miRNAs and their effect on insulin 000 -150 000 for PA. Specific mitochondrial enzymatic deficiencies in the secretion in MIN6 cells are in progress. Further studies in the serum samp- catabolism of branched-chain amino acids cause MMA and PA. les of MODY3 patients will reveal their role as a biomarker in the diagnosis. FouMrU MTMA and one PA patienMtsM frAoAm Serbia were analyzed. WPeC CdBetected five previously described variants: p.Asn219Tyr, p.Arg369His p.Val553GlyfMs*U1T7  P06
.42 in , p.Thr198SePrCfsC*B6 in , p.Ile144_Leu181del in gene and Functional Characterization of p.T10M and p. S345
K mutations in fIonu sril incoovel genetic variants: p.Leu549Pro, p.Glu564*, p.Leu641Pro in HNF1A Gene in MODY patients O. Yalcin Capan1, O. F. Baltacı1, E. Selcuk2, E. Berber1; and p.Tyr206Cys in gene. 1Istanbul Arel University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, and eukaryotic expression studies confirmed pathogenic effect of all Turkey. novel variants. Aberrant enzymes p.Leu549Pro MUT, p.Leu641Pro MUT and p.Tyr206Cys PCinC Bvi tdriod not show residual activity in activity assays. In addi- tion, activity of MUT enzymes was not rescued in the presence of vitamin Introduction: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic B12 precursor which was in accordance with non-responsiveness or form of diabetes mellitus characterized by abnormal beta cell function, auto- partial responsiveness of patients to vitamin B12 therapy. somal dominant inheritance, hyperglycemia, lack of auto-immunity in non- Our study brings the first molecular genetic data and phenotypic characte- obese young patients. MODY3 associated with HNF1A gene mutations is the ristics for MMA and PA patients for Serbia and the whole South-Eastern Eu- most common form of MODY. HNF1A is a transcription factor that regulates ropean region. Therefore, our study contributes to the better understanding a number of liver-specific genes and genes involved in glucose metabolism. of molecular landscape of MMA and PA in Europe and to general knowledge Materials and Methods: The functional properties of HNF1A gene variations on genotype-phenotype correlation for these rare diseases. (p.T10M, p. S345
K) which were identified in Turkish MODY patients were Acknowledgments: This work has been funded by grants from MESTD, Ser- analyzed. The effects of the candidate mutations on HNF1A transactivation bia (III 41004 and 451-03-02635/2011-14/14), Ministry of Economy and function were determined by dual luciferase reporter assay. The effects of Competitiveness, Spain (PI13/01239 and PRIAIBSE-2011-1126) and Euro- mutations on the nuclear localization of HNF1A were analyzed by immu- pean Commission (EU-F P7
-REGPOT-316088). nofluorescence confocal microscopy. DNA binding activity of mutant HNF1A and wild type proteins were also compared by colorimetric DNA-protein binding assay. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 141ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P06
.45  P06
.47 Mutations in the complex I assembly factor TMEM126B result in New genes and pathomechanisms in mitochondrial disorders muscle weakness associated with complex I deficiency unraveled by NGS technologies B. Ruzzenente1, L. M. Sanchez2, L. Bianchi1, Z. Assouline3, M. D. Metodiev1, M. Rio3, B. A. Legati1, A. Reyes2, A. Nasca1, F. Invernizzi1, E. Lamantea1, B. Garavaglia1, C. Lamperti1, Funalot4, A. M. Mariël2, M. Van den Brand2, S. Guerrero–Castillo2, J. Molenaar5, D. Koolen6, A. Ardissone3, I. Moroni3, A. Robinson2, D. Ghezzi1, M. Zeviani4; U. Brandt2, R. J. Rodenburg2, L. G. Nijtmans2, A. Rötig1; 1Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics - Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico ‘Carlo Besta’, 1INSERM U1163, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Milan, Italy, 2Mitochondrial Biology Unit - Medical Research Council, Cambridge, United Paris, France, 2Nijmegen Centre Mitochondrial Disorders, Dept Pediatrics, Radboud Kingdom, 3Unit of Child Neurology - Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico ‘Carlo Univ Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Departments of Pediatric, Neurology Besta’, Milan, Italy, 4Mitochondrial Biology Unit - Medical Research Council, Milan, Italy. and Genetics, Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 4Department of Genetics, Henri Mondor Hospital, Créteil, France, 5Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Department of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies are revolutionizing the Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein Zuid, Nijmegen, diagnostic and research screening for rare diseases, particularly for those Netherlands. genetically and clinically heterogeneous like primary mitochondrial disor- ders. NGS approaches are particularly suitable for investigating the causati- ve mutations in small families and even in single individuals, for which the Mitochondria are the powerhouses of all eukaryotic cells which produce traditional linkage analysis is limited. These technologies, in fact, are con- energy in a process called oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Complex tributing to deepen the knowledge on the heterogeneous genetic causes of I (CI), the first and the biggest of five multi-protein complexes that compo- mitochondrial diseases and to significantly reduce the percentage of cases se the mitochondrial OXPHOS system, consists of both mitochondrially and lacking a molecular diagnosis, with several new disease genes discovered. nucleus-encoded subunits. Because of its size and its dual genetic origin, In this study we analyzed a cohort of 125 patients, that failed to show mu- biogenesis of CI is a complex event that requires a set of not yet completely tations in mtDNA and in specific nuclear genes after traditional Sanger’s characterized assembly factors. Mutations in genes encoding either CI struc- sequencing, performing a combined, two-step strategy, based on targeted tural subunits or assembly factors result in isolated CI deficiency, which re- genes panel as a first NGS screening, followed by whole exome sequencing preseTnMtsE Mth1e2 m6Bost common cause of OXPHOS dysfunction. (WES) in still unsolved cases. This approach has allowed us to reach a mole- Using whole exome sequencing and targeted exome sequencing, we identi- cular diagnosis in the 20% of these difficult cases, but it has also revealed fied as a disease-causing gene in three unrelated patients pre- unexpected and conceptually new findings. These include the possibility senting with exercise intolerance and muscle weakness due to isolated CI of marked variable penetrance of recessive mutations, the identification of deficiency. TMEM126B is a putative CI assembly factor that is not well cha- large-scale DNA rearrangements, which explain spuriously heterozygous racterized and its mutations led to the accumulation of CI assembly interme- cases, and the association of mutations in known genes with clinical pheno- diates in patient fibroblasts. Lentiviral TcMomEMpl1e2m6eBntation with the wild-type types never described before. Importantly, WES on selected cases allowed cDNA restored the assembly of CI confirming the pathogenic nature of the us to discover pathogenic mutations in genes encoding non-mitochondrial identified mutations and establishing as a novel mitochondrial proteins, an observation that widens the complex genetic heterogeneity of disease gene.  P06
.46 mitochondrial disease and suggests a new area of investigation in mitochon- Mitochondrial dysfunction and aberrant methylation in nuclear genes drial medicine. L. Mayorga1, S. Laurito1, E. Campoy1, H. Eiroa2, M. Roqué1; 1Institute of Histology and Embryology CONICET National University of Cuyo,  P06
.48 MENDOZA, Argentina, 2J.P Garrahan Children´s Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Exome sequencing in infants with monogenic diabetes mellitus in Russia O. S. Glotov1,2,3, A. S. Glotov1,2, E. A. Zukova1,2, E. B. Bashnina4, O. S. Beresneva4, M. E. Introduction: It is known that environment has an impact on epigenomes, Turkunova4, I. V. Polyakova1,5, T. E. Ivaschenko2, S. V. Apalko5, M. A. Fedyakov5, N. Y. Shwed1,2,5, E. S. Shabanova2, D. Polev1, T. A. Dubinina6, L. V. Tyrtova4, M. A. Polyanskaya4, especially of cancer cells. It is, however, not clear how this occurs. A hall- N. N. Lobanova4, A. S. Olenev4, V. V. Platonov6, T. E. Korytko4, A. V. Karpushkina7, V. S. mark of cancer cells is energy reprogramming whereby glycolysis is prefer- Baranov1,2; red over OXPHOS. We propose that mitochondrias might play a role in epi- 1Saint Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2FSBSI „The genome modifications. The aim of this study was therefore to investigate the Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductology named after “DO. role of mitochondrial dysfunction in aberrant methylation of nuclear genes. Ott”, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3City Hospital №40, St.Petersburg, Russian Methods: Methylation analyses of 26 nuclear genes were performed by MS- Federation, 4North-Western State Medical University named after I.I.Mechnikov, St- MLPA on: -leucocytes and muscle samples from 23 mitochondrial disease Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5City Hospital №40, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 6Children’s Municipal Hospital №19 after K.A. Rauhfus, St-Petersburg, Russian patients; -human skeletal muscle (HSkM) cell line treated with Rotenone, an Federation, 7CAF Foundation, Moscow, Russian Federation. OXPHOS inhibitor. OXPHOS function was determined by Trimethylrodamine esther stain and quantifications on confocal microscopy were performed using ImageJ. Methylation was analyzed by GeneMarker v1.95. Improvement of medical care by implementation of new molecular techno- Results: muscle samples from patients presented higher frequency of aber- logies is one of the major challenges of healthcare in the Russia. This ap- rantly methylated genes than leucocytes (p=0,02). Caspase8 was the most proach is of special importance for molecular-genetic analysis of children frequently methylated gene in muscle (76,9% vs 0% in leucocytes). Unex- with monogenic endocrine pathology as well as members of their families. pectedly, experiments in OXPHOS inhibited HSkM cells revealed changes in NGS diagnostic panel of exon amplification of candidate genes involved in the methylation of a single gene: Caspase8. The methylation status of this pathogenesis of hyperinsulinism and MODY was developed. It included the gene was augmented when the mitochondrial membrane potential came following candidate - genes: HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A, HNF1B, PDX1, NEUROD1, down due to Rotenone action and reverted when Rotenone was removed. KLF11, CEL, PAX4, INS, BLK, EIF2AK3, RFX6, WF S1
, ZF P57
, FОХР3, KCNJ11, Conclusions: Our observations indicate that mitochondria’s dysfunction is ABC C8
, GLUD1, HADH (SHAD), SL C16
A1, UC P2
, INSR, AKT2, GCG, GCGR, related to methylation alterations in nuclear genes. These epigenetic fin- PPARG, PTF1A. NGS was carried out for 21 patients by „HiSeq 2500“ („Il- dings could contribute in the practice, to explain the wide phenotypic spec- lumina“, USA). The results of DNA sequencing were used for bioinformatic trum of mitochondrial diseases. In addition, this suggests that mitochon- filtering with the following available programs: „GeneTalk“, „destroyed“, „re- drias have a potential role in the link between environment and epigenome. porter ion“, „to sift“, „PolyPhen2“, „PAPI“. Verification of the final results was Grant: National University of Cuyo, Argentina. done by direct Sanger sequencing with ABI3130 genetic analyzer. Pathoge- nic mutations and thus molecular-genetic diagnosis were so far confirmed only in 3 families. The mutations identified so far were in heterozygous state of GCK gene and included: с.772C>A; с. 199С>А; с.754A>G. According to our data MODY mutations distribution in Russian population seems to be rather similar to this one for other population. Identified mutations proved mole- cular basis of the disease, and might be useful for understanding the mecha- nism of disease and its potentially more efficient treatment. The study was done in Biobank of the Research Park of SPbSU and uimple- mented under the Alfa-Endo Charity Program and the Russian Science Foun- dation grant №14-50-00069 142 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P06
.49  P06
.53 Novel variants in BCKDHA and BCKDHB genes cause maple syrup Exome analysis in consanguineous families with neonatal diabetes urine disease syndrome in Serbian patients suggests novel aetiological genes and new insights into beta-cell K. Klaassen1, M. Stojiljkovic1, M. Djordjevic2, A. Sarajlija2, S. Brasil3, B. Kecman2, S. function Grkovic2, J. Kostic1, P. Rodriguez-Pombo3, L. R. Desviat3, B. Perez3, S. Pavlovic1; E. De Franco, J. A. L. Houghton, H. Lango Allen, S. E. Flanagan, C. Shaw-Smith, M. 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, Wakeling, T. Laver, A. T. Hattersley, S. Ellard; Belgrade, Serbia, 2Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia „Dr Vukan Cupic“, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom. Belgrade, Serbia, 3Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Centro de Biologia Molecular, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, CBMSO, UAM, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. A genetic diagnosis of neonatal diabetes (NDM) guides clinical management and can lead to improved treatment. Approximately 15% of patients born to consanguineous parents don’t have mutations in known genes. The aim Maple syrup urine disease syndrome (MSUD) is a rare metabolic disease of this study was to identify novel recessive causes of NDM to gain insights resulting from deficient function of the branched-chain alpha-ketoacid de- into mechanisms underlying pancreatic beta-cell development and function. hydrogenase complex (BCKD), responsible for degradation of branched- We performed exome sequencing and autozygosity mapping in 10 patients cBhCaiKnD aHmAino acidBs CleKuDcHinBe, isoleucinDeB aTnd valine. BCKD is composed of four with NDM born to consanguineous parents in whom the known causes had components,  E1
a,  E1
b,  E2
, and  E3
, whereas variants in genes coding for  E1
a been exTcMluEdMed1.67A CD274 ( ),  E1
b ( ) and  E2
 ( ) lead to MSUD (MIM# 248600). We ideTnMtifEieMd1 h6o7mAozygous likely pathogenic variants in 5/10 patients. Two In this study, we analyzBedC K4D SHeArbBiaCnK pDaHtBie nts dDiaBgTnosed withB MCKSDUHDA accor- genes, and , have not previouslyI bEeRe3nIP li1nkeCdD 2to7 4human di- ding to biochemical data and clinical symptoms. We used Sanger sequencing sease. encodes a protein important for vesicular transport and for targeted analysis of , and genes. In gene, interacts with the product of a known NDM gene ( ). is essen- we detected two previously described variants, c.1312T>A (p.Tyr438Asn) tial for imEmPuGn5e regulation and the knoScPkAoTuAt5 mousCeO pQh9enotype supports an aBnCdK DcH.8B6 1_868delAGGCCCCG (p.Gly288Valfs*11), and also two novel mis- aetiological role. Three patients had mutations in previously reported dCiOseQa9- sense variants, c.581A>G (p.His194Arg) and c.892G>A (p.Val298Met). In se genes: (regulates autophagy), and (both important for gene, we detected one previously described variant, c.410C>T mitochondrial function). Importantly for our patient, individuals with (p.Ala137Val), and a novel deletion, c.857_871del15 (p.Glu286_Met290del). mutations can be successfully treated with oral CoQ10 therapy. In addition All novel missense variants were predicted to be damaging by PolyPhen2, to NDM, these three patients had clinical features overlapping previously SIFT, PROVEAN and MutPred algorithms, and the protein sequence align- reported cases. Although the possibility of a dual aetiology cannot be exclu- mBCeKnDt HuAsi ng Clustal Omega pointed out to evolutionary conservation of af- ded, these genes encode proteins in pathways known to be affected in the fected residues. Protein modeling using I-TASSER showed that both novel pathophysiology of diabetes, supporting their role in NDM. Identification of variants lead to improper folding of the protein and thus result in further patients is required to confirm these findings. an unstable protein. In conclusion, our approach was highly successful finding the likely genetic This study provided the first data about molecular genetics of Serbian pati- diagnosis in 5/10 patients and highlighting the possible role of five genes in ents presenting with MSUD clinical symptoms, thus enabling molecular ge- beta-cell function/development. netic diagnostics and genetic counseling of this disease in the country. Acknowledgments: This work has been funded by grants from MESTD, Ser-  P06
.54 bia (III 41004 and 451-03-02635/2011-14/14), Ministry of Economy and Production of induced Pluripotent Stem cells (iPSc) from patients Competitiveness, Spain (PI13/01239 and PRIAIBSE-2011-1126) and Euro- with „neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy“: perspectives for a pean Commission (EU-F P7
-REGPOT-316088). model of disease in vitro. D. Degiorgio1,2, S. Missaglia3, M. Castagnetta1, E. M. Pennisi4, M. Mogni1, D. A. Coviello1, D.  P06
.52 Tavian3,5; Massive parallel sequencing-based genetic confirmation of metabolic 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genoa, Italy, 2Department disorders detected by the neonatal screeening program of Experimental Medicine, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 3Laboratory of Cellular R. Navarrete, F. Leal, A. Vega, C. Medrano, I. Bravo-Alonso, L. R. Desviat, P. Rodriguez- Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, CRIBENS,Catholic University of the Sacred Pombo, B. Merinero, M. Ugarte, C. Pérez-Cerdá, B. Pérez; Heart, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Neurology, San Filippo Neri Hospital, Rome, Italy, Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Centro de Biología Molecular, 5Psychology Department , Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy. Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, CIBERER, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain. Mutations in PNPLA2 gene causes the „Neutral Lipid Storage Disease with The main purpose of expanded newborn screening (NBS) is to diagnose ge- Myopathy”, a very rare disorder characterized by a defect in the degradation netic disorders at an earlier step to start treatment before the appearance of cytoplasmic triglycerides and accumulation as lipid droplets (LDs). This of clinical symptoms. In metabolic disorders, quantification of amino acids lipid dysmetabolism may determine progressive myopathy (100%), cardio- and acylcarnitines in dried blood spots by tandem mass spectrometry al- myopathy (44%), diabetes (24%), hepatomegaly (20%), chronic pancrea- lows the detection of more than 30 different pathologies. The entire dia- titis (14%) and short stature (15%). No specific therapy is available today. gnosis process requires further sample collection for a second-tier test and The fibroblasts from 2 patients and 1 healthy subject have been reprogram- genetic confirmation. In this work, we present our experience with the use med into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), through infection using the of massive parallel sequencing (MPS) for genetic analysis of 84 consecutive Sendai viral reprogramming kit. Both patients have a homozygous PNPLA2 DNA samples from newborns referred to confirm the results of the Spanish mutation: in the first one the c.541_542delAC causes a prematurely trunca- NBS program. The analysis was done by a customized panel to capture the ted protein, whereas in the second one the c.662G>C determines the amino- sequence of the more frequent actionable metabolic disorders. Additionally, acid change p.(R221P). The iPSC were initially selected by their morphology Illumina clinical-exome TruSightOne® combined with a gene virtual captu- and the expression of the enzyme alkaline phosphatase. We demonstrated re was used. Biallelic pathogenic mutations were found in 53 patients while their pluripotency properties evaluating by immuno-staining the expressi- only one mutation was detected in 24, in PAH, ACADM, ACADVL, GCDH, on of markers TRA-1-81, SSEA4 and OCT4, and their in vitro differentiation MCC C1
, MCC C2
, and SL C22
A5. No mutations were found in some newborns into three-germ layers (β-III tubulin, ectoderm; SMA, mesoderm; FOXA2, en- with hyperphenylalaninemia or biochemical suspicion of VLCADD or GCDH doderm). The comparative gene expression profiles (by qRT-PCR) of SOX2 deficiency. Pathogenic mutations (loss-of-function or previously described and NANOG in iPSC and their corresponding fibroblasts, shows the prefe- mutations) were found in 128 alleles while variants of unknown clinical si- rential gene expression in iPSC clones. The evaluation of additional genes gnificance were detected in 18 alleles. In two newborns suspected to have a (ZF P42
, OCT4, hTERT, LIN28, DPPA2 and TDGF1) is ongoing. The immuno- variant condition of MSUD and argininemia, pathogenic mutations were de- histochemical evaluation showed the presence of LDs in fibroblasts and also tected for the first time in BCAT2 and SL C7
A1 respectively. The results show in iPSC of the patients. The perspective to differentiate iPSCs into striatum/ the usefulness of MPS as second-tier test for diseases confirmation and for cardiac muscle lineages, will allow us to define a disease model to investi- differential diagnosis of metabolic disorder. Grant: PI13/01239 gate the pathogenetic mechanisms and to evaluate specific approaches for new pharmacological treatments. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 143ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P06
.55 NGS - promises and obstacles in study of patients with inborn errors of metabolism 13889 and 12634. The most interesting data concerned a sample which, R. V. Vazharova1,2, L. Balabanski2, S. Ivanov2, S. Andonova3, M. B. Ivanova3,4, I. with the restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) methodology, Sinigerska3, I. Bradinova3, S. Josifovska5, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella6, S. Hadjidekova7, A. Savov3, did not show the presence of the 3243R mutation which, on the other hand, M. Malinov2, D. Toncheva7,2; was observed at 13.6% with NGS technology. 1Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridski, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2GARH Malinov, Genomic Discussion: Our results confirmed that NGS was more sensitive and speci- Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3UHOG Maichin dom, National genetic laboratory, Medical fic respect to other methods to study mtDNA. The use of deep sequencing University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Sofia University „St. Kl. Ohridski“, Department of allowed to identify both low-level of heteroplasmy and the presence of rare Analitical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Faculty of Natural Sciences, Ss. Cyril & Methodius University- Skopje, Skopje, Macedonia, The mutations. Former Yugoslav Republic of, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatric  P06
.57 Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Descriptive report of the adult only-visceral phenotype of Νiemann- Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. Ρick disease type C. L. López de Frutos1,2, P. Alfonso1,2,3, J. J. Cebolla1,2, P. Irún1,2,3, P. Giraldo1,2,3; 1Spanish Foundation of Gaucher Disease and Other Lisosomal Disorders (FEETEG), Introduction: Inborn errors of metabolism (IEM) constitute a large group of Zaragoza, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Aragón (IIS Aragón), Zaragoza, monogenic disorders disrupting metabolic pathways. Clinical presentation Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), varies widely - from early onset (and sometimes fatal) disease in the new- Zaragoza, Spain. born to progressive chronic form with onset in adult life. Massive parallel se- quencing technology has the potential to uncover causative genetic variants in affected individuals and gives clues for their proper therapy. Niemann-Pick C disease (NPC) is a rare autosomal recessive lipid storage Materials and methods: NGS targeted resequencing of large gene panels was disorder with a heterogeneous presentation. It is characterized by visceral, used for genetic profiling of 13 probands with suspected IEM and healthy neurological and psychiatric manifestations. Most of patients develop sym- parents in a family where the proband was not available for DNA analysis. ptoms in early childhood; however, several phenotypes were identified in Nine patients presented typical symptoms and / or specific metabolic profi- adults. The adult only-visceral phenotype is uncommon nevertheless is re- le; others were with unclear or insufficient clinical data. ferred in some publications. Results: In 7 affected probands causative gene mutations were found (data This study reports adult probands state NPC only-visceral phenotype and shown in table). Sanger sequencing was performed for confirmation of the its characterization. Firstly, plasma biomarkers as Chitotriosidase activity results. (NCPhCT1), CCLN1 P8
C/2PARC and 7-Ketocholesterol (7-KC) concentrations were as- Conclusion: NGS of focused gene panels gives high diagnostic yield when sessed trough biochemistry approaches. Lastly, genetic characterization of applied to well-defined patient groups. Identification of causative mutations and were carried out. is possible even in families with missing probands and may help for their ap- In the last two years, 146 probands were recruited. 36 of them were iden- propriate genetic counseling and medical management. Despite this, about tified at least one genetic variation reported as pathogenic or unknown si- 40% of patients may need WES/WGS to reveal a diagnosis. gnificance (VUS) in NPC, 8/36 showed only-visceral symptoms; 3 of them were children who were excluded from the study. Focused in this 5 adult Results from NGS genotyping Patient Gene Mutation 1 Mutation 2 Clinical observation Inheritance visceral cases, they were 38(27-47) [mean(min-max)] years old. ChT was 119N( P1
C31 -653) nmol/mL/hour. CC
L18 /PARC and 7-KC concentrations were 1 HADHA p.Glu510Gln p.Arg291Ter cardn ie ow mb yo or pn w thi yth A ru et co es so sm iveal 157(65-178) and 210.5(>2-333)ng/mL reNspPeCc2tively. Variants identified a a nd suspected Pompe in , reported as pathogenic or VUS, were: p.
C177 T, c.463+19A>G, disease p.Q775P, p.N916S, p.I1061T and p.A1151T. gene does not show any variations. All genetic variations were found in heterozygosity and only one 2 HSD17B4 p.Gly16Ser p.Gly16Ser newborn with Autosomal Zellweger spectrum recessive subject presented two variants. disease Those results underline the need to perform complementary studies to eva- 3 NDUFAF6 p.Leu186_ p.His269Tyr patient with Leigh Autosomal luate the possible penetrance of some variations inherited in heterozygosis. Tyr187delinsHis syndrome recessive 4 NP
C1  p.Gln991Argfs p.Thr1043Ala child with Niemann- Autosomal It is necessary to analyze more patients with this only-visceral phenotype to 5 BCKDHA p.Glu327Lys p.Glu327Lys patiP ei nc tk wdi is the a Mse SUD Ar ue tc oe ss os mive al establish some relationship between this form and some genetic variants. 6 PCCA c.1209+3A>G c.1209+3A>G patient with Ar ue tc oe ss os mive al Work financed by a grant from Actelion Pharmaceuticals and FEETEG. Propionic acidemia recessive 7 PHKG2 p.Asp153Val p.Leu160del child with Autosomal 
P06 .58 Glycogenosis recessive 8 ABCB11 p.Leu1126Ter - parents tested; child Autosomal Microarray expression profile analysis in Niemann-Pick type C with Progressive recessive intrahepatic fibroblasts: preliminary results of a pilot study cholestasis was K. Hetmańczyk1, R. Iwanicka-Nowicka2,3, A. Fogtman2, M. Koblowska2,3, M. Filocamo4, S. unavailable for DNA analysis Lualdi4, B. Żyżyńska-Granica5, P. Włodarski6, A. Ługowska1; 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry and NeurologyInstitute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Laboratory of Microarray Analysis, Institute of 
P06 .56 Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, 3Laboratory of Systems Biology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 4Centro Next Generation Sequencing: a good standard for mitochondrial di Diagnostica Genetica e Biochimica delle Malattie Metaboliche, Istituto G. Gaslini, disorders diagnosis Genova, Italy, 5Department of Pharmacodynamics, Medical University of Warsaw, G. Grieco1, M. Valente1, S. Brandini2, V. Battaglia2, A. Olivieri2, S. Gagliardi1, I. Ricca1, S. Warsaw, Poland, 6Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Zucca1, A. Torroni2, C. Cereda1; Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. 1Center of Genomics and post-Genomics, C. Mondino National Institute of Neurology Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Biology and Biotechnology, „L. Spallanzani“ University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. NP
C1  NP
C2  Introduction: Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is a rare lysosomal disor- der due to mutations in the genes or . Proteins NP
C1  and NP
C2  Background: Mitochondrial diseases are a group of clinically and geneti- are essential for intracellular transport of free cholesterol. Affected indivi- cally heterogeneous disorders with variable penetrance, expressivity, and duals accumulate free cholesterol and glycosphingolipids in late endosomes different age of onset. Most disease-causing mtDNA mutations are hetero- and early lysosomes. So far, the pathomechanism of NPC is not fully under- plasmic and the degree of heteroplasmy varies in different tissues. Thus, the stood. determination of mutant loads in affected tissues is important in making Aim of our study was to examine the expression levels of genes engaged the diagnosis and correlating clinical phenotype. Next Generation System in cellular metabolic pathways in cell lines obtained of NPC patients and (NGS) approach also allows simultaneous analyses of a group of genes or of controls. the whole exome, thus, the mutations in causative gene(s) can be identified Materials and Methods: Total RNA was isolated from 10 NP
C1  patients cell in one-step. lines and 9 cell lines from control persons. Biotin-labeled cRNA samples Objective: Aim of this study was to make genetic analysis in a much faster were hybridized to HumanHT-12 v4.0 Expression Bead Chip. Row data ob- and more efficient way; and to identify the specific degree of heteroplasmy. tained after microarray experiments were then analyzed with the Partek Methods: Nextera XT Illumina platform was used and NGS analysis has been Genomic SuiteS OvD6.16 and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis program. performed on 52 DNA blood samples. Results: StaCtTisStKically significant alterations in expressionC TwSeBre observed for Results: Data analysis confirmed the classical mutation 8344R in a sample three genes: coding for superoxide dismutase 1 (mean fold change, u1s4ed4 as a positive control and showed the presE eS nH ceG of 2 ri0 sk1 f6 ac | t oB rsA aR s C 70E 8L 0O , NMAF, CS, 
P2 A.5)I,N | W cWodWing.E foSrH caGth.OepRsiGn K (MFC 2.5), and coding for ca-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index thepsin B (MFC 1.5). We have found that in NPC cells the up-regulated genes deletion of exon 2 was also observed in liver mRNA (r.78_216del, predicted were related to oxidative stress, autophagy, and apoptosis. p.Cys27Ilefs*10). In addition, an unexpected splicing variant with deletion Conclusions: These preliminary results indicate that in humans activation of of exons 2-4 (r.78_386del, p.Cys27_Arg129del) was observed indicating pos- autophagy may enhance cell stress and eventually trigger the apoptotic pa- sibly the presence of distant acting splicing regulatory elements in the 2,325 thway. This was already reported in NP
C1  deficient mice as well as impaired bp genomic DNA deletion. proteolysis, which underlies autophagic dysfunction. Conclusions: TOhTisC study demonstrates the important role of mRNA analysis Our further work will include the validation of obtained data by qRT-PCR in for interpretation of genetic variants observed in genomic DNA and indi- human NPC fibroblasts. cates that the gene may carry splicing regulatory elements within the Financial support: Narodowe Centrum Nauki project no. 2012/07/B/ region spanning 2,325 bp between intron 1 and intron 2. Support: MH-CZ- NZ1/02615. DRO-VFN64165, PRVOUK-
P24 /LF1/3 
P06 .61 
P06 .59 New mutations of the Twinkle mitochondrial helicase resulting in Allelic variants associated with obesity and obesity related disorders Perrault syndrome in a Romanian cohort of overweight and obese elder males B. A. Fekete, K. Pentelényi, A. Domokos, P. Balicza, A. Kékesi, A. Gál, M. J. Molnár; R. Ursu1,2, P. Iordache1, N. Cucu3, C. Bohiltea1, V. Radoi1,2, C. Arsene2, G. Ursu4, I. Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Craciunescu4, G. Chelu2, R. Bohiltea1, C. Staicu5, V. Calota5, A. Voinoiu5, D. Mates1,5, A. Hungary. Manolescu6, V. Jinga1,7; 1”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Synevo Romania, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Bucharest, Perrault syndrome is a rare disease characterized by sensorineural hearing Genetics Department of the Faculty of Biology, Bucharest, Romania, 4”Agrippa Ionescu” loss, ovarian dysfunction in females and neurological symptoms. The phe- Emergency Military Hospital, Clinic of Cardiovascular Disorders, Bucharest, Romania, 5National Institute for Public Health, Bucharest, Romania, 6University of Reykjavik, notypic heterogeneity is accompanied with genetic heterogeneity with the School of Science and Engineering, Reykjavik, Iceland, 7“Prof. Dr. Th. Burghele“ Clinical most commonly affected genes being HAR
S2 , HSD17B4, LAR
S2  and CLPP. Hospital, Department of Urology, Bucharest, Romania. In one single report mutations in 
C10 orf2 have been associated with the disease as well. Hereby we present the case of a 20-year-old female with early onset pro- Background. Obesity is one of the world`s pandemics. This research wishes gressive hypacusis and primer hypogonadism, which are the hallmarks to determin high-risk polymorphisms associated with obesity for the Roma- of the Perrault syndrome phenotype. Additional clinical features are dys- nian population. It is the first large obesity-related genome-wide associati- arthria, severe weakness in the limb muscles, truncal and limb ataxia, po- on study in Romania. lyneuropathy and psychiatric symptoms. Serum lactate was elevated. MRI Materials. Methods. A GWAS was performed on a Romanian cohort of 2024 found: medulla oblongata and spinal cord atrophy. Genetic analysis of the males aged over 50 y.o. (408 obese, 894 overweight, 647 normalweight). HSD17B4 gene did not find pathogenic mutations. In her muscle tissue The research included 700000 SNPs. Genotyping results were analyzed in multiple mtDNA deletions were present. NGS analysis of the genes respon- correlation with obesity, obesity parameters (weight, BMI) and complicati- sible for intergenomial communication detected compound heterozygous ons (diabetes, flebitis, hypertension, prostate cancer). Lifestyle risk-factors c.1196A>G and c.1358G>A mutations in the 
C10 orf2 gene. The segregation were considered (environment, smoking, alcohol, coffee). Allele frequencies analysis by Sanger sequencing found these mutations in her parents in he- were calculated and compared with literature. terozygous status. Results. Intron 1 of the FTO gene (16q12.2) had the strongest signal (10- Our observation confirms that Twinkle protein dysfunction is associated 4 - 10-5 p values) when associated with weight, BMI and obesity level (18 with Perrault syndrome. The severe neurological and psychiatric symptoms highly correlated SNPs). A locus on chromosome 7 (7q31.1) showed lower of our patient and the presence of medulla oblongata and spinal cord atro- associations (3 SNPs). FTO SNPs also revealed strong correlations with phy expand the phenotypic spectrum of the disorders caused by Twinkle diabetes, especially in obese. Hypertension was found associated with po- mutations. 
P06 .62 lymorphisms on chromosomes 4, 12 and 13 (BANK1, PP
P3 CA, AT2B, FRY therapeutical approaches in lysosomal storage diseases - genes) but not obesity-mediated. Lifestyle risk-factors associated-SNPs also identification of novel small molecule drugs in Fabry, Gaucher, Pompe showed correlations with obesity, diabetes and hypertension. One variant in and Niemann-Pick type C disease the FRY gene (13q13.1) yielded associations with both smoking and hyper- J. Lukas1, S. Seemann1, A. Pockrandt1, C. Zheng1, M. Sharif2, A. Pews-Davtyan2, M. Beller2, tension. Over 50 SNPs were correlated with prostate cancer, 28 reavealing A. Rolfs1,3; the strongest results (chromosomes 4,8,13,16,2,6). 1Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Rostock, Germany, 2Leibniz Institute Conclusions. The results revealed several gene clusters correlated with obe- for Catalysis, Rostock, Germany, 3Centogene AG, The Rare Disease Company, Rostock, sity and comorbidities. The implications of these variants for the Romanian Germany. population need to be further analyzed, replication studies having to be un- dertaken for confirmation. The research is part of EU F
P7  ProMark project. Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) form a group of rare, inherited, progres- sive disorders of lysosomal catabolism. The diseases are based on mutations 
P06 .60 in genes mainly encoding for soluble (or membrane-associated) lysosomal A 2.3 kbp deletion in the OTC gene resulting in distant splicing hydrolases as is the case for Fabry (FD), Gaucher (GD) and Pompe (PD) di- abnormality and lethal hyperammonemia seases. Integral membrane proteins and transporters can also be affected as G. Storkanova1, J. Sokolova1, H. Vlaskova1, M. Hnizdova Bouckova1, L. Stolnaja1, H. in Niemann-Pick Type C (NPC) disease. Treslova1, L. Dvorakova1, O. Martincova1, J. Krijt1, M. Magner2, P. Jesina1, V. Kozich1; 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, General University Hospital in Prague Several therapeutic interventions have been developed within the last two and First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic, Prague 2, decades. Among the clinically approved therapies are namely bone mar- Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, General University row transplantation and enzyme replacement therapy. However, alternati- Hospital in Prague and First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Czech ve treatment strategies need to be elaborated, because these conventional Republic, Prague 2, Czech Republic. methods are limited by several means, e.g. non-responsivity of the central nervous system, the unavailability of ERT for certain diseases, etc. OTC We developed distinct cell culture models to test for candidate small mole- Introduction: X-linked ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency (OTCD) is cule drugs for a clinical application in LSDs. Generally, the aim of our re- the most common urea cycle defect. Human gene is expressed almost search was the identification and mechanistical examination of different exclusively in the liver. We present the results of molecular genetic analyses compounds to act on a preferably broad range of distinct genotypes in LSDs in a newborn male with typical biochemical markers of OTCD who died due and, consequently, attenuate disease course. Using a HEK293 cell-based to severe hyperammonemia and multiorgan failure seven days after birth. system for the expression of mutant forms of α-galactosidase A (FD) and Methods: Genomic DNA from blood and cDNA from postmortem liver were α-glucosidase (PD) enzymes we identified novel compounds and compound amplified by PCR, and respective PCR products were analyzed by Sanger se- combinations from various structural and functional molecule classes being quencing. The extent of the genomic deletion was determined by sequencing able to increase cellular activity of the mutant protein. PCR products containing the deletion boundaries, and confirmed by MLPA. A compound derivatisation and testing program has been initiated for Results: Amplification of genomic DNA did not yield any PCR product of known pharmacological chaperones in GD and NPC using patient fibroblast exon 2, Sanger sequencing did not reveal any other changes in the remai- cells aiming at (1) optimising their activities and (2) getting insights into ning exons. A 2,325 bp large deletion starting 2,113 bp upstream of exon 2 structure/function relationship of the compounds. and ending 73 bp in intron 2 was ideEntSifHieGd i n2 0ge1n6om | iBc ADNRAC. ECoLnOgrNueAn,t lSy, PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 145ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .63 Effect of sepiapterin on three novel missense mutation forms of phenylalanine hydroxylase in hepatoma cells analysed the miRNA profile in plasma samples from patients with the rare M. Pecimonova1, A. Soltysova1,2,3, E. Polak1, M. Stojiljkovic4, Z. Levarski1, J. Krahulec1, L. metabolic disorder propionic acidemia (PA) and in different tissues from Kadasi1,2,3; the hypomorphic murine model. PA is characterized by the toxic intracellu- 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular Biology, Comenius University, lar accumulation of propionyl-CoA due to propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCC) Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Biomedical enzyme deficiency and usually presents as a neonatal form with patients Research Centre, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Institute of Virology, developing Pncecau-r/-o logical deficits and cardiomyopathy in the long-term. Biomedical Research Centre, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Institute We have used a qRT-PCR miRnome panel to analyse the expression of 752 of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engeneering, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. miRNAs in (A138T) mouse liver and in plasma samples from PA pa- tients and controls. In mouse, we have found 14 significantly dysregulated miRNAs from which three also exhibited altered plasma levels in PA pati- Phenylketonuria and its milder form, hyperphenylalaninemia, are metabo- ents. In mouse tissues we selected miR-34a-5p, miR-338-3p and miR-350 to lic, autosomal recessive genetic disorders, associated with the deficiency of investigate their potential targets in relation to PA pathology. The levels of enzymatic activity of enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). This enzy- the three miRNAs were found increased in brain and heart of the hypomor- me catalyzes the essential conversion of L-phenylalanine to L-tyrosine in phic mice at different ages, correlating in some cases with a decrease in spe- the presence of molecular oxygen, iron, and 6(R)-L-erythro-5,6,7,8-tetrahy- cific predicted targets such as BC
L2 , MEK1, p38, JNK and AT
P5 G1, involved drobiopterin (BH4) which functions as a natural cofactor of PAH. BH4 has in apoptosis, stress-signalling and mitochondrial function. Taken together, chaperone-like effect on PAH enzyme, which is functional only in tetrameric our results point out to the role of miRNAs in PA pathophysiology and un- form and may also have a potential effect on PAH mRNA expression in he- derscore their potential use as biomarkers of the disease. patoma cells. Until now, more than 950 variants were identified in the PAH gene. Novel 
P06 .66 missense mutations p.F233I, p.R270I and p.F331S in this gene were found New insights into renal amino acid reabsorption in the Slovak population. Previously, we performed PAH functional assays C. Vilches1, M. López de Heredia1, S. Bodoy2, M. Espino1,2, E. Boiadjieva3, E. Prat1,4, L. for testing the impact of these mutations on the functionality of PAH protein Gónzalez1, R. Artuch5, F. Verrey*3, M. Palacín*2,6, V. Nunes*1,4, *authors sharing leadership; using prokaryotic expression system. 1Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, IDIBELL, U730 CIBERER, L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona). In this work, we focused on the expression of PAH mutated proteins in eu- U731 CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institute of Physiology and Zurich Center for karyotic cell line HepG2 in the presence of sepiapterin which acts as the Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Genetics precursor of BH4. However some authors report that BH4 has no effect on Unit, Physiological Sciences II Department, Medicine Faculty, University of Barcelona, PAH mRNA expression and has only effect on proper protein folding, other L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 5Clinical Biochemistry Department and research papers report that PAH mRNA expression is increased in presence Institute of Research Pediatrics. U703 CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 6Biochemistry and of BH4. Therefore we performed Real Time PCR and Western blot analyses Molecular Biology Department, Biology Faculty, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, to investigate the impact of sepiapterin on the level of mRNA and mutated Spain. PAH proteins. This project was sponsored by grant APVV-0240-12. Introduction: The generation of mouse models for heteromeric amino acid 
P06 .64 transporters has been proved to be a powerful tool to understand the renal Phenylketonuria, clinical and molecular aspects in a group of amino acid transport in mammals and subsequently our knowledge about Romanian patients aminoacidurias. R. C. Vulturar1, M. Mager2; Materials and Methods: We have generated and characterized a double-loss- 1Univ. of Medicine and Pharmacy, Dept. of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cluj-Napoca, of function mouse model for the two basolateral amino acid transporters Romania, 2Univ. of Medicine and Pharmacy, Dept. of Neurology, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. LAT2 and TAT1 (hereafter, dKO). Animals were treated with a high protein content diet, amino acids were quantified in urine and plasma samples to assess renal function, and expression of amino acid transporters was analy- Phenylketonuria is an autosomal recessive disease that, if is untreated, will zed by RT-qPCR in the dKO, the single KOs and control mice. impaire cognitive development resulting from a neurotoxic effect of hyper- Results: We found a decreased reabsorption of aromatic and neutral amino phenylalaninemia (HPA); the associated clinical phenotype varies and the acids and to a lesser extent, of basic ones and proline, which is exacerbated potential genotype-phenotype correlations would help in understanding under rich protein diet. A strong renal phenotype in the dKO versus single the pathophysiology of this disease. Its metabolic phenotype is accountab- ones supports a coordinated function of LAT2/4F2hc and TAT1 on the baso- le to multifactorial origins both in nurture [where the normal nutrition in- lateral transport in renal reabsorption. The expression analyses demonstra- troduces L-phenylalanilne] and in nature, where mutations (>520 alleles) te the upregulation of one particular isoform of the basolateral transporter occur in the PAH gene. The allelic variation at the PAH locus yield greater y+LA T1, and in a lesser extend of SNAT3. or lesser risk of impaired cognitive development according to the degree Conclusion: There is cooperation between LAT2/4F2hc and TAT1 in the of HPA. The clinical evaluation of a group of 20 PKU patients (with different renal reabsorption, where TAT1 supplies neutral amino acids for LAT2 ex- stage of treatment) from neurology section of Cluj Children Hospital, Roma- changer. The dKO model presents a significant remaining tubular reabsorp- nia, was done according to The Műnchen development scale for the children tion of neutral amino acids suggesting the existence of compensation by with mental age below 3 years, with The Simon-Binet test for children with other basolateral transporters. y+LAT1 and SNAT3 seem to be two of them. mental age 3-7 years and with The Raven‘s Progressive Matrices for those Altogether, our results provide new insights into the in vivo mechanisms of above 7 years. Biochemical phenotypes associated were included in severe amino acid resabsorption in the kidney. PKU when the level of Phe is above 1200 μmol/l, moderate PKU (Phe: 600- 1200 μmol/l) or mild HPA for Phe: 120-600 μmol/l. The leukocyte DNA was 
P06 .67 isolated and using polymerase chain reaction with subsequent restriction Use of shRNAs on patients’ cells as a long-term substrate reduction analysis, we identified patients homozygous for mutation R408W (more therapy approach for Sanfilippo C disease than 50%), patients compound heterozygotes for R408W/
L48 S, R408W/ N. Benetó1, I. Canals1,2, L. Vilageliu1, D. Grinberg1; R413P, R261Q/IV
S12 +1>a, Y268C/ IV
S12 +1>a, or R408W/R261Q mutati- 1Dept. Genetics, Fac. Biology, University of Barcelona, CIBERER, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, ons. Our data provide that the highest degree of concordance genotype-phe- 2Stem Cells, Aging and Neurodegeneration Group, Lund Stem Cell Center, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. notype was found in patients with null/null genotypes and evidence that a simple genotype-phenotype correlation does exist in this group of patients. 
P06 .65 Sanfilippo C syndrome is a rare lysosomal storage disorder caused by mu- Plasma and tissue miRNA signatures to understand the tations in the HGSNAT gene, which encodes an enzyme involved in hepa- pathophysiology in propionic acidemia ran sulphate (HS) degradation. The enzyme deficiency causes the storage A. Rivera-Barahona1, A. Fulgencio-Covián1, B. Pérez1,2, C. Pérez-Cerdá2, M. Ugarte2, E. of partially degraded HS molecules inside the lysosome. The disease has an Richard1,2, L. R. Desviat1,2; autosomal recessive inheritance pattern and is characterized by a severe 1Centro de Biología Molecular, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades and progressive neurodegeneration for which no effective treatment exists. Moleculares, Madrid, Spain. Previously, we demonstrated, on Sanfilippo C patients’ fibroblasts, that the use of siRNAs targeting EXT
L2  and EXT
L3 , genes involved in HS synthesis, could be effective as a short-term substrate reduction therapy (SRT). miRNAs are regulatory short non-coding RNAs involved in many cellular Here, we have used five different lentiviruses encoding shRNAs targeting processes and pathological conditions, thus they have emerged as potential 146 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONEAX,T SL
P2 ,A toI Nan a| lWyseW thWe e.fEfeScHt oGf a. OlonRgG-term treatment. All the shRNAs caused biomarkers and therapeutic targets in human diseases. In this work we haveABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index a notable reduction in the mRNA levels (around 90%) of the EXT
L2  gene six- EOO cases/480 controls). Additionally, mutation analysis of the genes al- ty days post-infection. Moreover, immunocytochemistry analyses showed a tered by CNVs (n=16) was completed in both cohorts by NGS using a pooled clear decrease of the HS amounts after treatment. DNA strategy. Due to the good results obtained on patients’ fibroblasts, now we are using Results: A higher burden of duplication-type CNVs was detected in EOO the most effective shRNAs on induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells) de- cases versus controls (OR=1.85, p-value=0.008). Likely pathogenic CNVs in- rived from patients’ fibroblasts. We have set up the conditions for the dif- cluded duplications of glutamate receptor (GRIK1, GRM7), the X-linked gas- ferentiation of those iPS cells to neurons, the most affected cell type in this trin-peptide receptor (GRPR) and the NPY genes, all inherited from obese disease, and we are going to perform the same assays on them. parents. Results were replicated by MLPA in the extended cohort. By NGS Our results confirm the usefulness of shRNAs as a long-term SRT, becoming focusing the analysis on rare variants, we identified a missense mutation in a promising approach for a future therapeutic option for Sanfilippo C syn- NPY, a nonsense mutation in GRIK1, and 5 missense mutations in GRPR in drome. EOO cases, but no mutations in controls. Fundings: Catalan Government (2014SGR 932), Spanish Government Conclusions: Our data reveal a higher burden of rare CNVs and point mu- (SAF2014-56562-R), Asoc. Stop Sanfilippo (Spain), MPS España. tations in patients with EOO compared to controls. Genes altered by CNVs are candidates for contributing to the pathogenesis of morbid EOO. Among 
P06 .68 these, NPY, GRPR and two glutamate receptors are likely involved in highly Identification of rare genetic variants in patients with non-syndromic penetrant, monogenic and familial obesity. early-onset obesity using a pooled DNA sequencing approach Grants: FIS-PI1302481/PI1302195-FEDER, 2014SGR1468 F. Bou1, C. Serra-Juhé1,2,3, G. Martos-Moreno4,5,6, B. Rodríguez-Santiago7, R. Flores1,2,3, J. Argente4,5,6, L. Pérez-Jurado1,2,3; 
P06 .70 1Genetics Unit, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital del Mar Vitamin E treatment in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome patients - Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en experiences of follow up Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, K. Koczok1, L. Horváth2, G. P. Szabó3, Z. Korade4, N. A. Porter5, I. Balogh1; 4Departments of Pediatrics & Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Universitario 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Genetics, University of Niño Jesús, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 5La Princesa Research Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Department of Pharmaceutical Surveillance and Institute, Madrid, Spain, 6Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Fisiopatología Economy, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 3Department of Pediatrics, de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 4Department of Psychiatry, Vanderbilt 7Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories (qGenomics), Barcelona, Spain. University, Nashville, TN, United States, 5Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States. Studies trying to elucidate the pathophysiology of obesity consistently de- scribe a highly heterogeneous disorder at the clinical and molecular level, Introduction: Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a multiple malformati- with high heritability. At least 10 genes, mostly with recessive inheritance, on syndrome caused by 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase enzyme deficiency. have been reported to cause monogenic severe obesity, and there are a few Decreased cholesterol, elevated 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) and oxida- more candidates of strong effect in association studies. tive derivatives of 7-DHC are putative pathophysiological factors of SLOS. The aim of this study was to establish the contribution of rare genetic va- According to literature vitamin E is effective in reducing 7-DHC-derived riants in candidate genes to early-onset obesity (BMI>3SDS, <3y). Using a oxysterols in cultured SLOS fibroblasts. We have started a study on clinical pooled DNA sequencing approach, which allows analyzing many samples effects of vitamin E in SLOS in 2014. with reduced costs, we screened 15 candidate genes for obesity in a cohort Materials and Methods: Seven SLOS patients were enrolled in the study re- of 480 patients and 480B cDoNntFroFlsT O(BMMCI<3PR50M).C W4Re fNoEcuGsRe1d PonPA vReGry rareS IvMar1i- ceiving 230 mg (age: 4-10 years) or 2x230 mg (above 10 years) RRR-alpha- ants found in single or few individuals per cohort. tocopheryl acetate beside cholesterol supplementation. Plasma vitamin A Seven of the 15 genes ( , , , , , and ) and E concentrations were monitored regularly by HPLC. Behavioral effects were differentially represented between patients and controls; we identi- of the therapy were determined using the Aberrant Behavior Checklist fied 30 rare variants in patients and 5 in controls (p=0.0001). The difference (ABC) at baseline, after 6 and 12 months. During follow-up, upon anecdotal of probably pathogenic variants (15 in patients vs 1 in controls) was also reports of the parents, we created another questionnaire focusing on slee- significant (p=0.0005); all were single allele changes and none of the indivi- ping habits and photosensitivity as well in addition to behavior. duals carried more than one variant. Results: Patients were vitamin E deficient prior to therapy, while vitamin A Our data reveal a higher burden of rare and probably pathogenic heterozy- concentrations were normal in all but one patient. Absorption of the vitamin gous variants in several candidate genes in patients with severe early-onset was satisfactory, plasma vitamin E concentrations showed normalization in obesity compared to controls. Our results rFeTinOfoPrPcAe RthGe roleB oDfN tFhe melano- all patients. According to ABC improvement in irritability and stereotypic cortin pathway and bring to light other genes that may carry highly pene- behavior was detected in one patient. Using our questionnaire positive ef- trant obesogenic single allele variants, like , and . fects on self-injurious and stereotypic behavior, improvement of sleeping Grants: FIS-PI1302481/PI1302195-FEDER, 2014SGR1468 habits and photosensitivity were observed in four patients. 
P06 .69 Conclusions: Vitamin E deficiency is likely to be the consequence of higher Rare copy number variants reveal novel genes and pathways involved utilization and not inadequate absorption and can be normalized using high in early-onset obesity treatment doses. Our results suggest potential benefit of vitamin E treat- C. Serra-Juhé1,2,3, G. Martos-Moreno4,5,6, F. Bou1, B. Rodríguez-Santiago7, R. Flores1,2,3, J. ment in SLOS. González8,9, J. Argente4,5,6, L. Pérez-Jurado1,2,3; 1Genetics Unit, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital del Mar 
P06 .71 Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Sandhoff disease : a case report with new mutation Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, S. Seyhan, H. Önder Yılmaz, A. Cansu, A. H. Çebi, M. İkbal; 4Departments of Pediatrics & Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Karadeniz Technical University Medicine Faculty, Trabzon, Turkey. Niño Jesús, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 5Hospital de la Princesa Research Institute, Madrid, Spain, 6Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Sphingolipidoses are inherited lysosomal storage diseases which are result Madrid, Spain, 7Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories (qGenomics), Barcelona, of the accumulation of sphingolipids therefore progressive neurodegenera- Spain, 8Centre de Recerca en Epidemiologia Ambiental (CREAL-ISGlobal), Barcelona, Spain, 9Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Epidemiología y Salud Pública tive findings revealed.In Sandoff disease there are lack of activities of total (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain. hexosaminidase(A and B components) with beta subunit gene mutation and it lead to the accumulation of GM2 gangliosides in neural tissue.It is divided into three types acute(infantile),juvenile(late infantile) and adult(chronic). Introduction: Obesity is a multifactorial disorder with high heritability (50- The incidance of sphingolipidoses in Turkish Society is 4,1/100.000 in live 75%), probably higher in early-onset and severe cases. Although rare mono- birth.In Sandoff disease the accumulation of sphingolipids in macular reti- genic forms and several genes and regions of susceptibility, including CNVs, nal ganglion cell causes typical „Japanese flag“ formation of the image. have been defined, the genetic causes underlying the disease still remain In this study, we present a 3-years-old-male who was brought to our ped- largely unknown. iatric neurology clinic because of fatigue, slow movement, inactivity since Methods: We studied a cohort of Spanish children with severe (BMI>3SDS) his birth On physical examination we determine decreased deep tendon non-syndromic early-onset (<3y) obesity (EOO). We obtained molecular reflexes,mild coarse facies and cherry spot on ocular fundus.Delays in all karyotypes of 157 cases. Large (>100kb) and rare (<1/2,000 controls) CNVs developmental stages were detected in Denver-2 test.Parents are relative. were validated, segregated in the famiElyS, aHndG s t2ud0i1ed6 i n| aB lAarRgeCr EsaLmOpNle A(3,2 
S3  PADINue | tWo dWiagWno.EsiSs Hof GLy.OsoRsoGmal enzyme levels in white blood plasma1 c4el7lsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index hexosaminidase A and B levels were determined as 20% lower limit we done by Next Generation SequAeTnPc7inBg (NGS). Multiplex Ligation-dependent made HEXB gene whole exom sequence analysis. As a result we determi- Probe Amplification (MLPA) was performed in all patients in order to detect ne the patient p.
S210 P(c.628T>C)(homozygous). The analysis of known deletions/duplications in the gene. mutations that are sent from the patient’s parent were determined as Results: Twenty unrelated patients were analyzed. Four of them carried pa- p.
S210 P(c.628T>C)(heterozygous). We present this case because it is a new thogenic variants at AT
P7 B. Table shows their biochemical characteristics mutation in the HEXB gene. and genotypes. Three patients were simple heterozygous foAr TkPn7oBwn mutati- ons in AT
P7 B. One patient was compound heterozygous. 
P06 .72 Conclusions: Most of the patients with mutations in the gene are Characterization of HEK293 cell lines stably expressing mutated simple heterozygous. This data can suggest the importance of conducting a hSRD5A3 variants to mimick SRD5A3-CDG thorough analysis of gene promoter AT
P7 B as well as finding new targets for A. Buczkowska1, P. Link-Lenczowski2, L. Borowski1, A. Fogtman1, M. Koblowska1, D. J. Lefeber3, A. Dziembowski1, E. Swiezewska1; m 
P0 o 6le .7cu 5lar diagnosis of EW. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, Diagnostic tests for hereditary xanthinuria 2Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland, 33. Department of Neurology, I. Sebesta1,2, B. Stiburkova2,3, J. Krijt4; Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Radboud University Medical center, Nijmegen, 1Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics,First Faculty of Netherlands. Medicine,Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Rheumatology, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine,Charles University, Attachment of carbohydrate chains to proteins is a common post-transla- Prague, Czech Republic. tional modification occurring ubiquitously in mammalian cells. N-Glycosyla- tion pathways use the lipid carrier dolichol (Dol) as an obligate precursor. Mutations in the genes encoding enzymes involved in the synthesis of Dol Introduction: Hereditary xanthinuria is an autosomal recessive inherited cause deficiencies in cellular function and lead to a variety of debilitating metabolic disorder due to deficiency of the xanthine dehydrogenase/ oxida- diseases called congenSiRtaDl 5dAis3orders of glycosylation type I. One of the vari- se (XDH/XO - type I), and is characterized by low concentration of uric acid ants, SRD5A3-CDG, is caused by nonsense mutations in the gene encoding (UA) in blood and urine and high concentration of urinary xanthine. Type polyprenol reductase, , which plays a crucial role in the dolichol cyc- II results from a combined deficiency of XDH/XO and aldehyde oxidase. Pa- le by catalyzing conversion of polyprenol to dolichol. Decreased content of tients present with hematuria, renal colic, urolithiasis or even acute renal dolichyl phosphate affects the assembly of the Dol linked Glc3Man9GlcNAc2 failure. Molybdenum cofactor deficiency (type III) is characterized by the glycan and its transfer to proteiSnRsD u5pAo3n N-glycosylation. lack of sulfite oxidase as well as XDH/XO and aldehyde oxidase activities. Flp-In technology was used to obtain several HEK293T cell lines expressing About 150 cases have been described so far. miRNA silencing endogenous andS RsiDm5uAl3ta neously complemented Materials and Methods: Hypouricemic patients were found from 3 800 with mutated variants of SRD5A3. Biochemical analysis of model cell lines blood and urine samples. Following tests were set up: a) evaluation of UA demonstrated that expression of mutated led to aberrations in li- in serum and urine with exclusion of secondary causes of hypouricemia b) pid metabolism and in protein glycosylation. SARdDd5itAio3nally, using microarray estimation of urinary xanthine, c) allopurinol loading test and finally XDH/ analysis, we investigated the differences in gene expression profiles bet- XO activity assay in plasma with molecular genetic analysis. ween HEK293 cell lines expressing mutated and control. This ana- Results: Nine Czech cases were detected, which is one of the largest group lysis revealed more than 100 genes with modulated expression (up/down- worldwide, in the terms of the number of patients. All individuals had pro- regulated) compared to the mock transfected cells. Functional identification found hypouricemia as the first sign. Urinary concentrations of xanthine of these genes is in progress. were in the range of 170-598 mmol/mol creatinine (ref.range: < 30 mmol/ Results of these analyses will help to understand the variability of the clini- mol creatinine) . XDH/XO activities in plasma in two cases were 0 and 0.37 cal symptoms observed for SRD5A3-CDG patients. pmol/h/mL of plasma (ref.range:3.2-9.2 pmol/h/mL of plasma ). The non- This work was partially supported by grant [UMO-2012/06/M/NZ3/00155] sense heterozygous mutation p.R825X was found in two patients. funded by the National Sciences Center of Poland. Conclusions: Hereditary xanthinuria is probably not so rare as previously thought. Patients with unexplained hypouricemia need detailed purine me- 
P06 .74 tabolic investigation. Molecular diagnosis of Wilson disease by Next Generation Sequencing 
P06 .76 V. Parrillas, E. Sevilla, C. Rodríguez, C. Camarena, E. Vallespín, A. Carazo, V. Montaño, R. Lethal Zellweger spectrum syndrome due to a novel mutation in the Mena, J. Silla, P. Lapunzina, S. Rodríguez Novoa; PEX3 gene Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. E. M. Honey1, M. Dercksen2, L. J. Mienie2, B. C. Vorster2; 1University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa, 2North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa. Introduction: Wilson´s disease (WD, OMIM #277900) is an autosomal rece- sive disorder of copper metabolism that produces intracellular copper accu- mulation in liveArT, bPr7aBin, kidney and cornea and may lead to hepatic cirrhosis Background: Zellweger spectrum syndromes (ZSSs) are a heterogeneous and neurological damage. WD affects from 1/30000 to 1/100000 individu- group of autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorders that affect mul- als worldwide. gene (MIM #606882), responsible for WD, is a copper tiple organ systems. A high incidence of ZSSs in the South African population transporter P-ATPase that plays a keyA rToPle7 Bin incorporating copper into ce- has been observed in the last 20 years. Most of these patients were diag- ruloplasmin and moving excess copper out of the liver. Over 200 different nosed in the first 8-10 weeks after birth and lived an average of 2 years. mutations have been identified in the gene. AT
P7 B Three cases however presented with a severe phenotype and these patients Materials and Methods: Patients with clinical evidence of Wilson‘s disease died soon after birth. were remitted to our service for genetic testing. Analysis of the was Patient: A neonate, presenting with facial and finger dysmorphia as well as Genotype of AT
P7 B (NM_000053.3.4) Biochemical parameters Probands DNA Sequence Protein Type Exon Intron Serum Urine Serum Ceruloplasmin Sequence Localization Localization Copper Copper (mg/dL) (mg/ (mg/24h) dL) Father: c.122 A>G c.122 A>G p.N41S Missense 2 13 29 No data 9.23 Mother:c.3060+5G>T c.3060+5G>T Splicing Brother 1: c.122 A>G 1 c.3060+5G>T Brother 2: c.122 A>G c.3060+5G>T c.879G>C c.879G>C p.
E293 D Missense 2 No No data No data 2 data 3 c.1934T>G c.1934T>G p.M645R Missense 6 77 Undetectable 17.7 4 c.1934T>G c.1934T>G p.M645R Missense 6 14 44 4.6 148 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index lactic acidosis after birth, was recently referred to the Potchefstroom labora- determined as: 45,XY,-7,t(9;11)(p21;q23)[19/20K]M/ T426A,-XMYL[1LT/230]. 90% of tory for inborn errors of metabolism, South Africa for a metabolic work-up. evaluated metaphases presented monosomy of chromosome 7 and translo- The patient unfortunately died a day after birth. cation t(9;11)(p21;q23) resulting in fusion gene . Both aber- Results: Initial metabolic investigations on plasma indicated an elevated rations were confirmed by FISH. level of 
C26  as well as 
C24 /
C22  and 
C26 /
C22  ratios. In addition, increased Monosomy of chromosome 7 occurring with translocation t(9;11)(p21;q23) pipecolic acid was also observed. A ZSS was suspected after plasma bile is extremely rare in AML, with only few cases ever described. As both cell acids analysis revealed elevated dihydroxycholestanoic acid, trihydroxy- clones were assessed to be in a similar percentage, it was difficult to decide cholestanoic acid and 
C29 -dicarboxylic bile acid. Complementation studies, which one of them was the primary abnoKrmMaTl2itAy-. MIt LisL Tp3roblematic to predict for accessing peroxisomal biogenesis disorders on fibroblasts, were done the course of disease in our patient as monosomy ofK cMhrTo2mAosome 7 is linked and revealed PEX3 gene as a probable candidate. The sequenced mutation with adverse prognosis and this specific fusion gene is a fac- analysis of the PEX3 gene showed that the patient had a novel homozygote tor of moderate prognosis, contrary to majority of rearrangements, frameshift mutation namely c.203_204dup (p.Val69GInfs*9). correlated with poor outcome. Conclusions: It was concluded that this pathogenic mutation results in the The concurrence of these two aberrations, differently affecting prognosis, expression of a non-functional truncated protein and consequently a severe poses a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge and requires further clinical and fatal phenotype. Our findings on and experience in ZSSs gives merit to and cytogenetic follow-up. 
P07 .03 the investigation of peroxisomal biogenesis disorders in neonates present- A comprehensive next generation sequencing gene panel focused on ing with dysmorphia and metabolic decompensation. unexplained anemia F. E. Smith1, D. Brawand1, L. Steedman1, M. W. Oakley1, C. Wall1, P. Rushton1, M. 
P07  Immunology and hematopoietic system Allchurch2, K. Sibson3, C. Hemmaway2, D. Rees4, S. Thein5, B. Clark1; 1Viapath at King‘s College Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Haematology, Queen‘s 
P07 .01 Hospital, Romford, United Kingdom, 3Haematology Department, Great Ormond Street Somatic mutation in the HLA genes in a patient with acute myeloid Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4King‘s College Hospital, London, United Kingdom, leukemia (AML) prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 5National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States. (HSCT): a case report V. V. Zakharova, O. A. Shragina, M. A. Maschan, E. V. Orehova, M. A. Kournikova, E. V. Raikina; Congenital anemia is difficult to diagnose once common causes have been Dmitry Rogachev Federal Research Centre of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and excluded; for example 80% cases of congenital non-spherocytic hemolytic Immunology, Moscow, Russian Federation. anemia are undiagnosed once pyruvate kinase and G6PD deficiencies have been excluded using phenotypic analysis. We describe a next generation se- quencing strategy, targeting 147 genes, to facilitate the diagnosis of these Introduction:The most important factor that can influence HSCT outcome conditions. The coding regions, splice sites and 200 bp into the untranslated is HLA matching. Recent publications have pointed somatic mutations re- regions were examined in each gene. All clinically significant variants were sulting in copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity(CN-LOH) for part or full HLA confirmed by Sanger sequencing, including confirmation in any appropriate haplotype. family members. Patient:A 15-year old female previously diagnosed with AML-M5 was re- Illumina MiSeq data was analysed using a bespoke bioinformatics pipeline, ferred to clinic with leukemia relapse. Bone marrow showed 97% of blasts. which has been validated to a UK certified standard. The pipeline imple- Cytogenetic analysis detected CALM-AF10 fusion gene. FLT3, NPM1 muta- ments detection of genetic variants using multiple base callers and discove- tions were negative. Unrelated donor search was initiated. But, after two ry of copy number variants based on sequencing depth. Variants are anno- blocks of re-induction chemotherapy she didn‘t achieve remission and tated with information from ClinVar, and population frequency data (ExAC developed sepsis, pneumonia. So, haploidentical HSCT was a treatment of and 1000 genomes project). All genes are sequenced in every individual but choice. Unfortunately, the evidence of disease progression made it impos- data analysis can easily be restricted to virtual subpanels, excluding analysis sible. Patient had to choose palliative care. of genes not requested. We present three cases; one hereditary pyropoikilo- Result:HLA-typing by SBT and NGS indicated that the patient was homo- cytosis, one congenital dyserythropoetic anaemia and one haemoglobinopa- zygous: A*02:01-B*18:01-Cw*07:01-DRB1*11:04-DQB1*03:01. Con- thy due to a beta globin locus control region deletion; highlighting the dia- firming result was obtained in registry of unrelated stem cell donors. gnostic utility of the panel as well as the underlying bioinformatics analysis. Mother‘s typing by SBT: A*03:01,26:01-B*35:03,56:01,-Cw*12:03,01:02- Identifying pathogenic variants in unexplained anaemia cases is important DRB1*11:01,07:01-DQB1*03:01,03:03. There was no common haplotype as it facilitates prognosis and treatment, and allows prenatal diagnosis to between mother and daughter. The maternity was confirmed by STR. Test- be offered in future. To date the panel has assessed 35 cases of anemia with ing of patient by SSP revealed a second haplotype(Bw6): A*03:01-B*35:03- unknown cause and has made a definitive diagnosis in 29 (83%). Cw*12:03-DRB1*11:01-DQB1*03:01. 
P07 .04 Conclusion:We found HLA-diploid normal cells in minority and malignant MVK, NLR
P3 , TNFRSF1A and MEFV gene mutation profile of patients cells with acquired uniparental disomy. SSP unlike sequencing doesn‘t de- with autoinflammatory diseases: report of 286 pediatric patients pend on balanced PCR amplification of the two alleles present at a locus and from Northern Anatolia might detect the two haplotypes. Bw6 loss confirms the hypothesis from E. Altundag1, G. Ogur1, U. Abur1, H. Mutlu Albayrak1, M. Celiksoy2, A. Paul1, M. Karadag1, A. Yildiran2; previous cases where Bw6 alleles have been found to the target of HLA ma- 1Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty Department of Genetics, Samsun, Turkey, lignant eradication. This case shows that LOH may lead to erroneous typing 2Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty Department Of Pediatric Allergy And results. Homozygotes should be confirmed by SSP, typing of buccal swabs, Immunology, Samsun, Turkey. blood samples in remission or creating a family tree by typing the parents. 
P07 .02 Unique concurrence of monosomy of chromosome 7 and KMT2A gene rearrangement in a patient with AML INTRODUCTION: The spectrum of MEFV, TNFRSF1A, MVK and NLR
P3  gene Z. Litwinska1, A. Pietrzyk2, E. Studniak2, R. Guzicka-Kazimierczak3, B. Zdziarska3; mutations of autoinlammatory diseases in different ethnical groups is yet 1Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, not fully studied. Here we present results from 286 pediatric patients from 2Cytogenetic Unit, Pathology Department, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Northern Turkey. Poland, 3Department of Hematology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland. MATERIAL-METHOD: MEFV (exons 2,3,5,10), TNFRSF1A (exon 2-7), MVK (exon 2-11) and NLR
P3  (exon 3) were sequenced in 286 pediatric patients. Two groups were studied:one included 194 patients with AID and the other, Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of myeloid lineage malignancy, hete- 92 FMF patients without MEFV gene mutations (FMF-WT). rogeneous in terms of morphology, immunophenotype as well as cytogene- RESULTS: In AID group, 10% NLR
P3 , 6% TNFRF
S1 A, 21% MVK and 32% tic, molecular genetics and clinical features. Chromosomal rearrangements, MEFV mutations were detected. Overall mutation rate was %38; the rate detected in classical cytogenetic analyses and FISH have a signifKicManTt2 iAmpact was 3% for pathological mutations. on detecting and classifying type of AML as well as choice of treatment and In FMF-WT group, 20% NLR
P3  and 29% MVK mutations were detected. determining prognosis. Both monosomy of chromosome 7 and gene When Tell-Hashomer criteria was included, 36% patients yielded NLR
P3  rearrangements are aberrations of remarkable prognostic value. mutations (no mutation for TNFRSF1A). Overall mutation rate was %41 and We present a case of 38-year-old male patient referred to Hematology De- pathological mutation, was %3. partment with suspicion of AML. The bone marrow sample was aspired with MEFV sequencing in AID yielded mutations in %32 patents (34% M694V, white blood cell count measuring 30x103/μL. Classical cytogenetic analysis 17% 
E148 Q, 13% V726A, 9% M680I, 7% 
P369 S, 20% others). ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 149 was performed according to the standard protocol. Patient’s karyotype was Breifly, 118 out of 286 patients (41%) yielded mutations including low pe-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P07 .08 Molecular analysis of 29 prevalent translocations and agent of acute netrance variants. 9 (3%) showed pathological mutations (five V377I hete- leukemia in patients with blood cancer rozygous, one heterozygous N205S c.614A>G novel mutation for MVK; two F. Ghasemian Sorbeni1, E. Sakhinia2, A. Esfahani3, S. Montazersaheb4, N. Karimi ansari5, I313V mutations for NLR
P3  and one N116S mutation for TNFRF
S1 A). A. Ansarin5; DISCUSSION: This is the first study relevant to MEFV, NLR
P3 , MVK and 1Department of Genetics Ahar branch, Islamic Azad university, Ahar, Iran, Islamic TNFRF
S1 A gene mutation profile in pediatric AID from Turkey. The results Republic of, 2Connective Tissue Disease Research Center, Department of Medical Genetics, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, are similar to studies in literature in terms of distribution of all variants. 3Hematology and Oncology Research Center, Shahid Ghazi Hospital, Tabriz University However lower rates were observed for pathological mutations. Mutation of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Stem Cell Research Center, Tabriz spectrum was also limited in our study. University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 5Tabriz Genetic Analysis Center (TGAC), Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of. 
P07 .05 Effects of gliadin and genetic background in tight junction structure integrity A. Jauregi-Miguel1, I. Santin2, K. Garcia-Etxebarria1, I. Romero-Garmendia1, L. Plaza- Introduction: Chromosomal translocations are major portion of molecular Izurieta1, J. Bilbao1; rearrangement that detected on leukemic subtypes and depending on type 1University of Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 2BioCruces Research Institute, Barakaldo, of fusion genes, involved in the leukemogenesis. Therefore, accurate scree- Spain. ning of this rearrangements is very important in leukemia type identificati- on and appropriate therapeutic approaches. Materials and Methods: To identify chromosomal rearrangements in pati- Tight junction structures (TJ) are crucial for intestinal epithelium homeo- ents with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia stasis as they control the paracellular flux and maintain the apico-basal po- (ALL), we used a multiplex RT-PCR protocol in which more than 80 chromo- larity of intestinal cells. In celiac disease (CD), disrupted barrier function somal breakpoint containing different variants of 29 prevalent translocati- and increased paracellular permeability are observed, and these could be ons were monitored. Of note, a deletion and one duplication, in 8 parallel ne- due to TJ disassembly caused by gliadin-induced innate and adaptive immu- sted-PCR reactions, in the presence of optimized primers was also assessed. ne responses. Gene expression analysis showed a deregulation of TJ-related Results: In a retrospective analysis on pooled samples from 20 afflicted AML pathways in small intestinal mucosa in CD and interestingly, altered expres- and ALL patients, at least one chromosomal rearrangement was detected sion of several genes including TJ
P1  (TJ assembly), INADL (apico-basal po- by multiplex RT-PCR in 50% of AML and 45% of ALL cases. The efficiency larity) and PP
P2 R3A (negative control of cell growth and division) were not of multiplex RT-PCR method used here was investigated by analysis of avai- reversed after >2 years on gluten free diet, suggesting genetic involvement. lable cell lines as positive control for translocations and sequencing of PCR To determine the effect of gliadin and the genetic background on epitheli- products. al barrier integrity, we performed functional and expression studies in an Conclusions: Here, we notified that the use of multiplex RT-PCR method intestinal epithelium model, the Caco-2 subclone 
C2 BBe1. Incubation with could promisingly identify the molecular abnormalities involved during pepsin-trypsin digested gliadin (PTG) for 4 hours was able to inhibit the for- translocation of either AML or ALL patients. Another prominent of this me- mation of cell monolayers but not to disrupt the integrity of those previously thod is that even in low amount of sample can be considered as a potential formed. When genes crucial for TJ formation were silenced by siRNA, PTG diagnostic method. stimulation resulted in the alteration of the TJ pathway and other connected 
P07 .09 networks, specially Toll-like receptor signaling. Downregulation of central Identification of congenital blood chimerism in one of the Chinese genes in the TJ pathway (TJ
P1 , TJ
P2  or TJ
P3 ) resulted in increased expres- fraternal twins with mix-filed agglutination in ABO blood grouping sion of several chemokines. Constitutive altered expression of TJ genes in X. Ye, G. You, J. Wang, Q. Fu; CD might result in an immature gut barrier that could in turn enhance CD- Shanghai Children‘s Medical Center, Shanghai, China. related gliadin toxicity and result in the activation of proinflammatory cyto- kine response. 
P07 .06 Introduction: Chimeras are defined as individuals whose cells are derived Ancestry-based stratified analysis of Immunochip data identifies from two or more zygotes. Here we report a case of congenital blood chi- novel associations with celiac disease merism identified by implementing various genotyping technologies in a K. Garcia-Etxebarria1, A. Jauregi-Miguel1, I. Romero-Garmendia1, L. Plaza-Izurieta1, M. Chinese patient. Legarda2, I. Irastorza2, J. Bilbao1; Materials and Methods: The patient with ventricular septal defect from 1University of Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 2Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo, Shanghai Children’s Medical Center was one of fraternal twins and had no Spain. history of transfusion and transplantation. Blood grouping was performed with standard gel centrifugation test cards. ABO genotyping was determi- ned with polymerase chain reaction followed with direct sequencing and Celiac disease (CD), an autoimmune disorder affecting 1% of the population, clone sequencing. Short tandem repeats analysis was further performed on is triggered by gluten in genetically susceptible individuals. At least half of the blood sample. the genetic component of CD remains unknown and the functional conse- Results: The patient’s red cells were mix-filed agglutination with anti-A quences of associated SNPs are still unclear. To identify candidate genes in antibody , which showed a double populations of O and A red blood cells, CD, we reanalyzed the whole Immunochip CD cohort (139,553 SNPs; 12,041 whereas his parents were normal type B and type A respectively. Molecu- cases and 12,228 controls) using a new approach that clusters individuals lar typing showed that normal B101/O02 and A102/O01 genotypes were based on immunoancestry prior to disease association analysis, corrected identified in his parents respectively, however, the patient exhibited the by stratification of those 30 immunogroups. We detected 636 new asso- A102,O01,O02 three alleles. Moreover, short tandem repeats analysis of the ciated SNPs (p<7.02E-07) located in 5 novel genomic regions. To test whe- patient revealed three alleles for D5
S818 ,D2
S1338 ,D19
S433 ,vWA,D12
S391  ther we could identify putative candidate genes, we performed expression and D18
S51  loci.We hypothesized that an exchange of blood cells between analyses of genes from the top novel region (chr2:134533564-136169524), the fetuses occurred in utero and the additional alleles were contributed by an extended locus and a gene marked by an isolated SNP, in duodenum bi- his twin sibling. opsies of active and treated CD patients and non-celiac controls. In the novel Conclusions: Using various molecular methods, we identified the blood chi- region, CCNT2 and R3HDM1 were constitutively underexpressed in disease, merism in a Chinese patient and provided a basis for further study of this even after gluten removal. Moreover, several genes within this region were case. Our research also implicated that performing genotyping techniques coexpressed in patients, but not in controls. Other novel genes, like KIF21B, could reveal the genetic backgroud of blood chimerism and take a deep un- REL and SORD showed altered expression in active disease. Apart from the derstanding of the rare case of tetragametic chimerism. identification of novel CD loci, these results suggest that ancestry-based stratified analysis is a useful approach for association studies in complex diseases. 150 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P07 .11 
P07 .13 Cytokine Genes Polymorphisms and Susceptibility to Upper Clinical, genetic and biological characteristics of HbS_Oman: a severe Respiratory Tract Infections and Otitis Media in childhood unrevealed form of sickel cell disease O. Miljanovic1, S. Teofilov1, D. Likic2, Z. Magic3, B. Cikota-Aleksić4; M. Al Awadi; 1Centre for medical genetic and immunology, Clinical centre of Montenegro, Podgorica, Genetics and Developmental Medicine Department,Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Montenegro, 2Institute for Public Health of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro, Muscat, Oman. 3Institute of Medical Research – Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia, Belgrade, Background: Serbia, 4Institute of medical research – Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia, Beograd, Serbia. Hemoglobin SOman results from double mutations in the β globin chain; the classic βS mutation (β6 Glu→Val), and a second mutation in the same chain (β121 Glu→Lys) identical to that of HbOArab. In the literatu- Introduction: Frequent upper respiratory tract infections (URI) and deve- rOeb ojenclyti 6ve c:arriers have been described. HbS-Oman carriers can have severe lopment of susceptibility to URI in childhood, results from complex interac- clinical presentation matching sickle cell disease. tions among host genetic factors, exposure to pathogens, and environmental Design/Me Stthuoddy the clinical pheno-genotype, and cell biology of both carri- influences. The goal of this study was to investigate the association of single- ers of HbSOman and compound heterozygotes HbS-SOman. nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in cytokine genes and susceptibility to : A cross sectional study that includes all identified carriers URI in childhood. of HbSOman and compound heterozygotes. Demographic and clinical phe- Materials and Methods: The study enrolled 82 children susceptible to URI notype data were collected, including family pedigrees that were tracked to and OM and 61 children not susceptible to URI, as a control group, who were tRhees usaltmse grandmother indicating a founder effect. Hematological parame- exposed to similar environmental/host risk factors (atopic manifestations, ters and HPLC were performed. day-care attendance, passive smoking, breastfeeding). DNA of all child- : We identified 53 carriers, 27 males and 26 females and 6 HbS- ren was studied for specific SNPs in cytokine genes. Genotyping for I
L10  SOman patients, 4 males and 2 females, age range between 2-75 years. 1082A→G, I
L10  -3575T→A, TNFA -308G→A, I
L2  -330T→G and I
L6  -597G→A Hemoglobin range was 7.5-14.7 g/dl (11.9+1.6), and SOman 9.5-25.3% were performed on 7500 Real Time PCR System, using TaqMan pre-desi- (15.9+3.7) for carriers, while Hb ranged from 3.2-7.8 g/dl (5.2+2.4) and gned assays, while genotyping for CD14 -159C→T was performed by using SOman 6-24.6% (11.6+6.6) for compound heterozygotes. Clinical severity PCR and restriction enzyme digestion with Hae III. index correlated with the SOman percent in the carriers with a cut-off va- Results: The incidence of I
L10  -1082 polymorphic genotypes (GA/GG) was lue of 14% and with decreased production of α-chains due to deletional or significantly higher in children susceptible to URI and OM, than in control non-deletional mutations; however, there were no such correlations in the group (RR 1.145, 95 % CI 1.011-1.298; p=0.047). Children with high-produ- cCoomncplouusniodn h eterozygotes who presented in early infancy with severe trans- cing I
L10  -1082 (GA/GG) genotypes, exposed to passive smoking, day-care fusion-dependence. Other genetic modifiers seem to have no effect. attendance, lack of breastfeeding and with allergic manifestations, were HbSOman is a severe form of SCD; carriers can be severely sym- more likely to develop susceptibility to URI and OM. ptomatic and compound heterozygotes present as thalassemia major with Conclusion: This study pointed out that I
L10  -1082 polymorphic genotypes early transfusion dependence. HSOman cells have increased sickling and (GA/GG) are associated with increased risk for susceptibility to URI and OM hemolytic characteristics. in childhood. Avoidance of environmental risk factors may modify the risk for URI and OM susceptibility children with I
L10  -1082 polymorphic geno- 
P07 .14 types. New Insights into the HLA-G Non-Coding Polymorphisms Affecting Expression Pattern and Clinical Outcome 
P07 .12 C. Ribeyre1, C. Picard1,2, C. René3, L. Abi-Rached4, P. Gouret5, J. Paganini5, J. Di Cristofaro1; Next generation sequencing identifies new candidate genes and 1UMR7268 CNRS-AMU-EFS, Marseille, France, 2Immuno-genetics laboratory, variants for idiopathic erythrocytosis and improves diagnostic Etablissement Français du Sang Alpes Méditerranée, Marsdeille, France, 3Department of accuracy Immunology, CHRU de Montpellier, University Hospital Saint-Eloi, Montpellier, France, C. Camps1,2, N. Petousi3, C. Bento4, H. Cario5, R. R. Copley1, M. McMullin6, R. vanWijk7, 4Aix Marseille Université, URMITE, UM63, CNRS 7278, IRD 198, INSERM 1095, Marseille, WG
S500  consortium, P. J. Ratcliffe3, P. A. Robbins8, J. C. Taylor1,2; France, 5Xegen, Gémenos, France. 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford university, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Comprehensive Biomedical Research Centre, National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Nuffield Department of Medicine, Oxford university, HLA-G is an immunotolerogenic molecule whose expression is modulated Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Hematology Department, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário in pathological situations (cancers, infectious, inflammatory and autoim- de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center, Ulm, Germany, 6Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, mune diseases). Higher HLA-G expression correlates with a reduction in Queen’s University, Belfast, United Kingdom, 7Department of Clinical Chemistry and transplant rejection. HLA-G displays a high level of polymorphism in its 5’ Hematology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Department of and 3’untranslated regions, we previously showed that haplotypes formed Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, Oxford university, Oxford, United Kingdom. by these SNPs can predict sHLA-G levels and lung transplantation outcome. Yet, the mechanisms modulating HLA-G expression or clinical outcome are not fully understood. The aim of this study is to predict transcription factor Erythrocytosis is a rare disorder characterised by increased red cell mass binding sites each haplotype. To fully characterize HLA-G variation in co- and elevated haemoglobin concentration and haematocrit. Several causative ding and untranslated regions, we typed 500 healthy individuals by NGS. genes have been identified in pathways including oxygen sensing, erythro- Data were analyzed by the Xegen Company. Using all SNPs, including 19 poiesis and oxygen transport. Despite screening for such genes, in many pa- SNPs in transcription factor-binding sites, we could define 35 haplotypes, tients no causative variant is identified. In this study, we combined whole 24 with estimated frequencies below 0.3%, and 11 with estimated frequen- genome sequencing (WGS) and targeted next generation (NGS) sequencing cies above 1%, the latter representing 96% of the 1,000 haplotypes inve- approaches to identify novel genes for idiopathic erythrocytosis. stigated and their structure was similar to previously observed. Analysis of WGS was performed on samples from 10 idiopathic erythrocytosis patients transcription factor-binding site content revealed that all haplotypes carry as part of the WG
S500  project resulting in 4 novel candidate genes for ery- multiple sites for S
P1 . Similarly, while all haplotypes display a progesterone throcytosis, EPO, GFIb, KDM6A and BHLH
E41  being proposed. receptor-binding site, a mutation in this region characterizes the haplotype In order to evaluate the likely pathogenicity of these, we sought to replicate associated with poor lung transplantation outcome. Other haplotypes dis- these variants by screening a cohort of 125 patients using a custom targeted played specific binding sites for Oct-1, C/EBPα, TEF-1, Elk or STAT. These NGS panel comprising the exonic regions of 21 genes, including the 4 novel results support that NGS technology offers a pertinent solution for complete genes arising from WG
S500 , 8 known erythrocytosis genes and 9 others as- HLA analysis in clinical context and that nucleotide variations in transcripti- sociated with relevant biological pathways. on factor-binding sites can account for the modulation of HLA-G expression As a result, 32 exonic rare variants across 36 patients (29%) were detec- and clinical outcomes. ted, of which 10 were known erythrocytosis-causing variants and 22 were novel variants, some with high likelihood of functionality, for which familial segregation, replication and functional studies are underway to further evi- dence of causality. Of particular interest is the discovery of an additional rare variant in EPO suggesting that this gene should be actively surveyed in idiopathic erythrocytosis patients. Finally we propose that the NGS panel could be used as a clinical tool, to improve accuracy of diagnosis of idiopa- thic erythrocytosis. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 151ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P07 .15 Whole Exome Sequencing in a large cohort of patients affected with Inherited Thrombocytopenia they play in coordinating the innate immune response to infection and di- C. Marconi1, R. Bottega2, B. Serena3, F. Palombo1, V. Bozzi3, M. Faleschini4, D. DeRocco2, C. sease. Resolution of the complete KIR repertoire remains challenging as the Cagioni3, C. Gnan2, P. Noris5, A. Savoia4,2, C. L. Balduini3, A. Pecci3, T. Pippucci1, M. Seri1; region is repetitive and extremely polymorphic, both on the population and 1University of Bologna -Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Bologna, sequence level. All together, the KIR genes cluster spans ~150 kb of chro- Italy, 2Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, mosome 19q13.4. 3Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pavia-IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Highly accurate, contiguous, long reads, like those generated by SMRT Se- Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 4Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, quencing, when combined with target-enrichment protocols, provide a Italy, 5Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pavia-IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, P, Italy. straightforward strategy for generating complete de novo assembled KIR haplotypes. Here we generated complete diploid haplotypes of the KIR re- gion for 8 individuals on the PacBio RS II platform. The haplotypes ranged in size from 75 kb to 250 kb and captured complete, phased sequence in- Inherited Thrombocytopenias (IT) are a group of heterogeneous disorders formation, with one exception in which a gap of 1 kb was found. This par- caused by almost 30 genes. Although many genes have been identified since ticular example was later determined to be the largest and most complex the introduction of Whole Exome Sequencing (WES), almost half of IT pa- haplotype in the cohort. Large structural variations within the region were tients still remains without a molecular diagnosis. As IT are characterized also observed, with two haplotypes showing deletions spanning both the by a wide genetic heterogeneity, identification of novel disease-genes is still centromeric and telomeric regions and one other haplotype containing a challenging. In our cohort of 274 affected families characterized at the mole- large tB01 insertion. cular level, 5 genes are responsible for about 50% of cases, while the remai- These data represent the first demonstration of de novo assembled KIR ning genes are responsible each for less than 2% of cases. To overcome this haplotypes derived from diploid human genomes using single-molecule se- difficulty and describe novel IT genes, we performed WES in 107 patients quencing. The resulting sequences demonstrate the extensive diversity and (86 families) affected with autosomal dominant IT of unknown molecular heterogeneity of the KIR region, which makes investigation into this locus origin. We compared the cumulative variant allele frequencies (sum of the uniquely suited for long-read single-molecule sequencing. allele frequencies of each variant) of each gene in our IT cases to that of a control cohort, consisting of the Exome Aggregation Consortium non-Fin- 
P07 .18 nish European samples (33.370 individuals) and we found 7 genes, affecting The characterization of KMT2A (MLL) chromosomal breakpoints 22 families, significantly enriched in rare variants (f<1•10-5) in IT cases. M. Macejova1, L. Zejskova1, R. Plachy1, T. Jancuskova1, D. W. Hardekopf1, J. Stika1, M. Two genes (ACTN1, ETV6) are known to be causative for IT. The identified Ondrackova1, N. Kosyakova2, T. Liehr2, A. Zavrelova3, P. Zak3, V. Petecukova4, J. Novak4, T. variants was confirmed to be pathogenic through segregation analysis and Kozak4, S. Pekova1, S. Pekova1, M. Karas5; functional studies. For the other 5 genes, which are novel candidate genes, 1synlab genetics s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany, 34th Department of Internal Medicine – Hematology, segregation analysis and screening of further IT patients are ongoing. Charles University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic, Conclusions: the availability of a large patients cohort can overcome the 4Internal Clinic of Hematology University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Prague, Czech problems due to genetic heterogeneity and led to the identification of 5 Republic, 5Department of Hemato-oncology, University Hospital Plzen, Plzen, Czech strong candidate IT genes in our cohort. Republic. 
P07 .16 Evaluation of Micro particle Production by JAK2V617F positive the Introduction: Chromosomal rearrangements involving the human KMT2A Endothelial Cells H. Hekimoglu, I. Uslu, S. Sözer Tokdemir; gene (MLL, mixed lineage leukemia) are associated with development of Institute of Experimental Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. acute leukemia. The presence of certain MLL rearrangements is an indepen- dent prognostic factor and patients are usually treated according to high- risk protocols. Minimal residual disease (MRD) detection provides an ob- Introduction: A cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase (JAK), is encoded by Janus Ki- jective assessment of treatment response. However, MRD assays using MLL nase 2 gene (JAK2), plays an important role in growth and differentiation fusion transcripts as molecular markers usually do not provide sufficiently of hematopoietic cells. A point mutation, characterized as V617F, is found sensitive detection of residual leukemic cells. mostly in Philedelphia-chromosome negative myeloproliferative neoplasms Methods: For the identification of MLL breakpoint sequences we used two (MPN). Recently, micro particles (MP) were related with tVh61e7 Ft hromboembo- different approaches. First approach was long-range PCR followed by se- lic complications. This study focuses on the role of JAK2 in MP produc- quencing of the PCR products. Second approach included combination of tion from endothelial cells (EC). conventional chromosome microdissection, next-generation sequencing Materials and Methods: Lentiviral vectors, carrying JAK wild type or mutant and sequencing of the final PCR products. Leukemia/patient-specific se- in addition to green fluorescent protein (GFP), were transfected to Human quences of the chromosomal breakpoint were used to develop MRD assays Embryonic Kidney cells by Lipofectamine. The viral particles were collected and enabled us to perform sensitive monitoring of MRD using qPCR in 9 by ultracentrifugation and infected into Human Umbilical Vein EC. In order acute leukemia patients. to isolate MPs, the infected EC culture supernatants were centrifuged and Results: We identified unique breakpoint sequences in 9 patients with acute concentrated. The spectrophotometric evaluation of the MP was performed. leukemia. Using first approach we detected MLL/AF6, MLL/AF9 (2 pa- After labeling of MPs with CD31, the flow-cytometry analysis were perfor- tients), MLL/AF10, MLL/ENL (2 patients) and MLL/ELL. Second approach med with applying 0.5-0.9 µm microbeads to set up MP gates. was used for identification of MLL/AF10 and MLL/AF4 breakpoints. Iden- Results: In this study, we have successfully infected the lentiviral vectors tification of unique breakpoint sequences was followed by the design of into EC. The analysis of the infected EC supernatants was demonstrated that sufficiently sensitive MRD assays. The MRD levels of residual leukemic cells the MPs were composed of RNAs. Labeling the MPs withV 6
E1 C7
F marker CD31 correlated with clinical outcome. revealed the origin MPs to be EC and both JAK2 and JAK2 increased the Conclusion: MLL breakpoints could be identified by various methods (in- MP production 2 fold compared to GFP control. verse PCR, panhandle PCR). Our results show other approaches for identi- ConclusVi6o17nF: This study provides insight to understand the possible effects fication of unique MLL breakpoint sequences, which can be utilized for the of JAK2 on EC regarding to the MP pVr61o7dF uction. Further studies might be design of the leukemia-specific assay for MRD monitoring in patients with helpful to understand the role of JAK2 on EC and as well as the role of acute leukemia. MPs for thrombus formation.  P07
.19  P07
.17 The role of partially methylated domains in normal and neoplastic Resolving KIR genotypes and haplotypes simultaneously using Single- hematopoietic cells Molecule, Real-Time Sequencing A. Merkel1, M. Durran Ferrer2, J. I. Martín-Subero2, S. C. Heath1, the BLUEPRINT J. M. Ekholm1, C. W. Pyo2, K. Eng1, R. Hall1, C. Vierra-Green3, S. Spellman3, D. Roe4, D. E. consortium; Geraghty4, M. Maiers4, S. Ranade1; 1Centro Nacional d‘Analisi Genomica (CNAG-CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut 1PacBio, Menlo Park, CA, United States, 2Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson d‘Investigacions Biomédiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain. Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 4National Marrow Donor Program, Minneapolis, MN, United States. Leukemia is the 12th most common cancer in Europe, affecting approxi- mately 13 in 100000 people. As part of the European epigenome project BLUEPRINT, we have recently conducted a survey of DNA methylation in The killer immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) genes belong to the immu- over 170 samples from diverse hematopoietic cell types including various n1o5gl2obulin superfamily and are widely studiedE S beH caG u s2 e0 o1 f t6 h e| cB rA itiR caC l rE oL leO N lA eu, kS eP mA iaI sN u b| t W ypeW s.W.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Globally, we find that cells of the lymphoid lineage modulate their methylo- We performed whole exome sequencing in the members of a large 6 genera- me more than those of the myeloid lineage. Although many sites of dynamic tion pedigree with a hitherto unknown AID. Medical data were collected re- DNA methylation coincide with tissue specific regulatory regions, a signi- trospectively. IL-1β and IL-18 concentrations were analyzed in plasma. Skin ficant proportion (particularly in terminally differentiated lymphoid cells) biopsies were obtained of lesional and uninvolved skin from three patients is associated with large partially methylated domains (PMDs) - a tendency for routineN hLiRstCo4lo. gy and immunohistochemical staining of IL-1β and IL-17. that is amplified in the related malignancies. Exome sequencing revealed a novel heterozygous c.1333T>C p.(Ser445Pro) They appear compact hetorochromatin, associated with repressive histone variant in The variant segregated with the 13 affected family mem- marks, low transcriptional activity and late replication timing. At the same bers (LOD-score 3.58). Prediction software programs (Sift, Polyphen) in- time, these regions coincide with active regions of open chromatin in em- dicated pathogenic properties. Moreover the variant is located next to the bryonic stem cells, indicating that they might have originated from areas recently described p.(His443Pro) pathogenic mutation. In affected family under ‘lockdown’ from the pluripotent state to ensure cell fate. members, the clinical phenotype was influenced by weather conditions, We propose that PMDs represent higher order chromatin structures that are stress, and infection. Severity of the clinical phenotype varied considerably. established early during lymphoid differentiation as part of lineage commit- In a subset of the patients, the clinical symptoms resolved promptly after ment. Over time and with increasing number of cell replications these regi- anakinra treatment, while other patients responded only partially. Biop- ons experience passive loss of methylation ultimately forming large domains sies of lesional skin showed a unique lymfocytic-histiocytic infiltrate in the of low and intermediate methylation. We find that in lymphoid leukemias dermis, unlike the histology of previously described autoinflammatory skin these regions are further enlarged and contribute to low global methylation, disease. Plasma concentrations of IL-18 were extremely elevated in all pati- presumably caused by the high proliferation rate that is a hallmark of most ents, even without an inflammatory episode (median 4,324N pLgR/Cm4l ; ref. 0-34 cancers. As such, we believe the chromatin structures underlying PMDs are pg/ml). of significant importance for cell identity and integrity. In conclusion, in this study we NdLeRscCr4ibe a novel variant in in a large pedigree with a partially anakinra-responsive AID, and expanded the clini-  P07
.20 cal phenotype associated with -inflammasome mediated AID. MonoMac syndrome, a rare cause of neutropenia M. T. Bataneant, Maria Puiu, Patricia Urtila, Mihaela Baica, Mihaela Lelik, Maria Pop, Margit Serban, M. Puiu, P. Urtila, M. Baica, M. Lelik, M. Pop, M. Serban;  P07
.22 University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. Physiological repression of PAR P1
 transcription during pro- inflammatory macrophages development results from differentiation- associated cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 phase Introduction.Congenital neutropenias usually are characterized by bacterial A. Robaszkiewicz, E. Wisnik; University of Lodz, Institute of Biophysics, Department of Environmental Pollution recurrent severe infections but chronic viral infection is not a part of the Biophysics, Lodz, Poland. clinical picture of this group of rare diseases. Case presentation.A male without significant family history of chronic in- fections or malignancy, who had at 4 years of age generalized warts with ADP-ribosylation - post-transcriptional modification of proteins carried out an evolution of 4 years was diagnosed accidentally at 11 years of age with by PAR P1
 is capable of shifting gene expression up and down. In human mild neutropenia(700/mmc) and mild decreased platelet count(130.000/ pro-inflammatory macrophages (M1) PAR P1
 acts as a repressor of genes en- mmc).Bone marrow aspiration showed normal cellularity without any dys- coding cytokines and as indicated in our study the differentiation process of plastic feature.He was treated with Prednison and G-CSF without response. CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells and premonocytic cell line TH P1
 into ma- Secondary causes of neutropenias were excluded by absence of drug admi- crophages is associated with the loss of PAR P1
. Therefore, we searched for nistration history, negative serology for HBV, HCV, HIV, CMV, EBV and nega- the mechanism responsible for PAR P1
 repression during pro-inflammatory tive ANA, dsDNA, ANCA antibodies.Immunologic tests showed IgA=0,46g/ macrophage development. The differentiation of HSC and TH P1
 was indu- l(0,7-4,32),IgG=6 g/l(6,44-11,96),IgM=2,12 g/l(0,52-3,57),BLf=270(300- ced with GM-CSF and PMA, respectively. The expression of PAR P1
 was deter- 500),TLf=2548(1400-2000),CD4+=1093(700-1100),CD8+=1381(600- mined with real-time PCR and western blot. The contribution of miRNA was 900),NK=79(200-300). WHIM syndrome was suspected but no mutation in verified using Ago2 inhibitor - aurintricarboxylic acid, RNA synthesis was CXCR4 gene was founded. Vinh described in 2010 a new disease-MonoMac monitored with nascent RNA capturing, cell cycle was analyzed with flow syndrome, characterized by monocytopenia with mycobacterial and viral cytometry. Chromatin association with transcription factors was monitored infection caused by mutation in GATA2 gene.Reanalyzing the hemoleuco- with ChIP. gram we founded persistent decreased count of monocyte cells < 100/mmc. The reduction of PAR P1
 protein in macrophages results from transcripti- The genetic test identified mutation c.1192 C>T R398W in GATA2 gene . on repression of PAR P1
 gene as these cells demonstrate lower Pol2 occu- Conclusion:Even if neutropenia is not a part of the clinical definition of the pancy around TSS and de novo synthesis of PAR P1
 mRNA. Moreover, Ago2 MonoMac syndrome, we must think to it when neutropenia is associated inhibitor failed to rescue PAR P1
 decrease indicating that miRNA does not with chronic viral infection and low count of monocyte cell.50% of these contribute to mRNA degradation. The treatment of proliferating macropha- patients will develop myelodysplastic syndrome and myeloblastic leukemia, ge precursors with mimosine, which mimicks differentiation-induced cell so bone marrow transplantation is indicated before developing of these cycle arrest in G0/G1 phase, triggered comparable decrease in PAR P1
 ex- complications. pression. Further analysis revealed the cell cycle-dependent modulation of  P07
.21 Sp1 interaction with PAR P1
 promoter as a mechanism responsible for the Skin lesions and arthralgias in a large pedigree with a partially differentiation-induced PAR P1
 transcriptional repression. anakinra-responsive and possibly IL-18 driven NLR C4
-related Acknowledgements: The study was funded by Polish National Science Cen- autoinflammatory disease tre grant UMO-2013/11/D/NZ2/00033. N. M. L. Volker-Touw1, H. D. de Koning2, T. van Kempen3, K. Oberndorff4, J. Giltay1, C. G. F. de Kovel1, M. Boes5, M. A. M. van Steensel6, G. T. J. van Well7, A. Simon8, J. Frenkel9, M. E.  P07
.23 van Gijn1; A Phelan-McDermid syndrome case with immunological findings 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Dept. A. G. Zamani1, E. H. Sayar2, S. G. Güner2, M. S. Yıldırım1, &. Reisli2; of Dermatology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Dept. of 1Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology , University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Genetics, Konya, Turkey, 2Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, Netherlands, 4Dept. of Pediatrics, Atrium-Orbis Medical Centre, Sittard, Netherlands, Department of Pediatric Immunology, Konya, Turkey. 5Dept. of Pediatric Immunology and Laboratory of Translational Immunology (LTI), University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Dept. of Dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Dept. of Pediatrics, Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PHMDS) can be caused by a heterozygous Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 8Dept. of General contiguous gene Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9Dept. of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. deletion at chromosome 22q13. At least 500 cases of 22q13.3 deletion syn- drome are known. Characteristic signs and symptoms of the syndrome in- clude normal to accelerated growth, moderate to profound intellectual disa- bility, decreased muscle tone (hypotonia), and absent to severely delayed Autoinflammatory disorders (AID) are characterizNeLdR bCy4 chronic or recur- speech. rent systemic sterile inflammation. It is a genetically heterogeneous group A 15-year-old speechless, mentally deficient, unable to walk male under- of diseases. Recently, gain of function mutations in have been descri- went genetic evaluation. He had no eye contact. Clinical examination sho- bed to be associated with AID. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAwINed | aW sWmaWll .fEorSeHheGad.,O loRnGg eyelashes, epicanthal folds and lowset 1e 5ar 3s, large and broad hands and feet with short terminal phalanges. The brainABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index MRI indicated thinning of the corpus callosum (between the body and the sion of the population. This has led to the enrichment of some deleterious splenium), widespread cortical atrophy and dilation of the lateral ventri- variants and loss of others, creating a phenomenon called the Finnish Disea- cles, mild widespread reduction of the white matter. We can not get meta- se Heritage (FDH). phase peripheral blood culture.Then cytogenetic analysis were performed By definition, FDH disorders are more frequent in Finland than elsewhere. from fibroblast cultures. FISH was performed with DiGeorge/VCFS Probe Within each disorder the majority (if not all) of the Finnish patients share TUPL E1
(22q11.2)/ARSA control probe (22q13.3) (Cytocell,UK). The ARSA the same founder Finmajor mutation, again over-represented in Finland. No- (control) probe (22q13.3) did not hybridize and the diagnosis of the 22q13 netheless, FDH disorders are rare (1:10,000-1:100,000). Today, FDH com- deletion syndrome was confirmed. Although there is no history of frequent prises 36 disorders (32 autosomal recessive, two autosomal dominant, and infections, all of immunoglobulin levels, except IgE, revealed to be markedly two X-chromosomal) with a disease spectrum spreading to all branches of decreased. Besides, lack of memory B cells, total T and helper T lymphocyte medicine, but more consistently in pediatrics. Some FDH disorders can be ratio were also found lower than normal from immunological analysis of effectively treated, assuming the correct diagnosis has been performed. peripheral lymphocyte by flow cytometry. Investigating by wholeC-eUxBoNme sequencing the molecular dReEfCeQctLs4 behind rare In this report, the remarkable clinical and immunologic findings were pre- immune disorders in Finnish patients, we identified rare homozygous FDH sented and discussed in detail. Finmajor variants in the (megaloblastic anemia) and AIC DgeAnes (Ra- padilino syndrome).  P07
.24 In addition, we found a previously known disease-associated variant Exome sequencing of 160 patients with primary immunodeficiencies: causing primary antibody deficiency (HIGM2) as part of a founder haplo- translational genomics with direct clinical implications type. The variant is strongly enriched in Finland (~38.5 fold) compared to P. Arts1, A. Simons1, E. Yilmaz2, A. R. Mensenkamp1, W. A. van Zelst-Stams1, M. van Deuren3, M. van der Flier4, A. Simon3, J. A. Veltman1, F. L. van de Veerdonk3, A. Hoischen1, other populations with European ancestries, suggesting it as a potential Fin- M. G. Netea3; major mutation and HIGM2 as a newly found FDH disorder. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,  P07
.26 Netherlands, 2Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey, 3Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Functional study of Peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 as a genetic Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of risk factor for Rheumatoid arthritis Pediatric Infectious diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University Medical A. Suzuki1, Y. Kochi1, H. Matsumura1, E. Kanno1, K. Yamamoto1,2; Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. 1RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 2Univ. of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Introduction: Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) are severe medical con- Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients frequently have autoantibodies to ci- ditions caused by non-redundant defects of innate or adaptive immune re- trullinated peptides, suggesting the involvement of the citrullinating enzy- sponses, leading to recurrent, severe infections. Severely affected PID pati- mes, peptidylarginine deiminases (PADIs), in RA. Previous linkage studies ents with an unknown genetic defect were selected for diagnostic exome- showed that a RA-susceptibility locus included four PADI genes, however it sequencing. in silico was not clear which PADI gene confers RA susceptibility. Peptidylariginine Methods: 160 PID cases were included in this study. First, variation in 294 deiminase type 4 (PADI4) was identified as a susceptibility gene for RA in genes known to cause PIDs are studied using an filter during exomine a trans-ethnic meta genome-wide association study (GWAS). PADI4 is one dviattrao-analysis. Next, 102 patients without a genetic diagnosis after step 1 of the PADI gene family and converts arginine residue to citrulline residue. gave permission for exome-wide analysis of the data. In selected cases PADI4 is highly expressed in immune tissues and cells, especially bone mar- stimulations of identified cytokine production capacity defects and row, macrophages, neutrophils and monocytes. Peptidylcitrulline is an im- provided additional functional evidence for the diagnosis. portant molecule in RA, because it is an antigen of ACPA and only PADI enzy- Results: Diagnostic exome analysis revealed (likely) pathogenic mutations mes (translated protein from PADI genes) can provide peptidylcitrullines by in known PID genes in 32 cases (20%). Exome-wide analysis led to identi- modification of protein substrates. To understand the importance of PADI4 fication of additional causative mutations in 10 cases, for which underlying gene in the progression of RA, we used Padi4-/- mice and showed that PAD4 genes have a known role in specific immunological pathways. One example is significantly affected to progress of collagen induced arthritis (CIA) RA with direct clinical implication of this adpep nroovaoch CwTaLsA 4the characterization model mice. In Padi4-/- CIA mice sera, the concentrations of serum anti- of the genetic, and functional defects in 3 patients with CaTuLtAoi4mmune lym- CII IgM, IgG, and levels of inflammatory cytokines decreased significantly phoproliferative syndrome type V and ( ) mutations. Several rather than in WT CIA mice. We demonstrated that Padi4 expression was in- studies suggest abatacept as treatment for patients with deficiency. duced by CII immunization. In Padi4−/− mice, inflammatory cytokine levels Conclusion: Exome sequencing can provide a genetic diagnosis in a signi- were significantly decreased compared with those in wild-type mice. Inte- ficant number of patients with PIDs. It is important to perform exome-wide restingly, Padi2 expression was induced in immune cells of Padi4-/- mice in analyses after an analysis of the known PID genes because many new PID compensation for the defect in Padi4. As the results, we suggested that Padi4 genes are only just being discovered. The molecular diagnosis provided no- enhanced collagen-initiated inflammatory responses. vel insight in therapeutic options for a subset of our patients.  P07
.27  P07
.25 Newborn screening for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) Enrichment of rare disease causing variants in population isolates: using T-cell receptor circles (TRECs) and high-throughput sequencing the Finnish Disease Heritage example (HTS). L. Trotta1, T. Hautala2, S. Hämäläinen3, J. Syrjänen4, J. Syrjänen4, H. Viskari4,5, M. Lepisto1, J. M. Strand1, K. Gul2, T. G. Abrahamsen2,3, E. Lundman1, H. Gaup1, H. Erichsen2, T. K. Heiskanen6, M. Taskinen7, K. Porkka8, A. Palotie1,9, M. Seppänen10,11, J. Saarela1; Øverland2, A. Rønnestad2, T. E. Hartmann Bjørndalen4, H. S. Sorte5, T. Tangeraas1,2, 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki University, Helsinki, Finland, J. Jørgensen1, C. L. Salvador1,6, A. D. Rowe1,6, T. Rootwelt1,2, R. D. Pettersen1, A. Stray- 2Department of Internal Medicine, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland, 3Department Pedersen1; of Internal Medicine, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland, 4Department of 1Norwegian National Unit for Newborn Screening, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Internal Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 5Department of Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Paediatrics, Division Virology, University of Tampere, School of Medicine, Tampere, Finland, 6Children‘s of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Institute Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Obstetrics and 7Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 8Hematology Research Unit, Biomedicum Gynecology, Women’s Division, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo Helsinki and Hematology Division, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Helsinki University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 9Program in Medical and Population Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 6Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 10Rare Oslo, Norway. Disease Center, Children’s Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 11Adult Immunodeficiency Unit, Inflammation Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Introduction: Children with SCID are apparently healthy at birth, but may ac- quire life-threatening infections during first months of life. Newborn scree- ning (NBS) for SCID was started as a prospective research project based on The correlation between the genetic structure of the population and the dis- informed, written consent in 2015. We are also conducting a retrospective tribution of genetic disorders supports a population perspective in medical study using samples from patients with known immunodeficiencies to test genetics, especially in the field of rare monogenic disorders. The benefits are cut-off values and 2nd tier HTS sequencing. even higher if applied to population isolates. Materials and Methods: TRECs are analyzed by RT-PCR in DNA extracted Finland presents a characteristic population history with a restricted num- from the same dry blood spot card as the ordinary NBS program. Cut-off was b1e5r 4of founders, isolation, several population boEtStlHenGec k2s0, a1n6d r|e BceAntR eCxpEaLnO- NsAet, tSoP 4A0 ITNR E| CW/μWl, aWnd. EonSlHy sGam.OplResG under cut-off and with normal β-actinABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index levels are positive on the 1st tier. 2nd tier testing of known immunodeficien- p<0.001) in active LN. cy genes using the IonAmpliSeq PID panel on Ion Torrent PGM is performed Conclusions: These data show a transcriptional dysregulation in DNA repair to increase positive predictive value. enzymes SIRT1 and OGG1, and transcription factor FOXO1 involved in the Results: Of the 720 children tested so far, the average level is 250 TREC/µl. p53 molecular pathway in SLE patients. In addition, mRNA quantification in 11 samples, all from NICU patients, have fallen below cutoff, without sus- the urinary sediment could be a non-invasive method to establish its asso- picion of a SCID diagnosis. In the retrospective project, screening samples ciation with the renal impairment in SLE. from 7 patients with known immunodeficiency due to defects in I L2
RG,  P07
.30 JAK3, I L7
R, PGM3, LIG4, RECQ L4
 and ADA had TRECs of 0, 0, 0, 11, 0, 60, Screening of KLF1 gene variants in cases with increased levels of fetal and 0/μl, respectively. 2nd tier HTS was able to confirm the molecular alte- hemoglobin rations in 5,5 of the 7. The PID gene panel lacked coverage of the remaining A. Karamani1, C. Chassanidis2, E. Boutou2, E. Voskaridou3, A. Balassopoulou2; mutations, and needs refinement before implementation. 1School of Biology,National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece, Conclusion: TRECs as 1st tier, and HTS SCID gene panel as 2nd tier, promise 2Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Thalassaemia and Hemoglobinopathies Center, Laiko rapid detection of newborns with SCID and other severe T-cell deficiencies. General Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Thalassaemia and Hemoglobinopathies Center, Laiko General Hospital, Athens, Greece.  P07
.28 High-throughput multiplexed digital droplet PCR for detection of severe combined immunodeficiency in newborn screening Introduction: KLF1 is a transcription factor, promoting shift in expression N. Vidal-Folch, D. Milosevic, R. Majumdar, D. K. Gavrilov, D. Matern, K. Raymond, P. from γ to β-globin. This process is carried out either directly, by activating Rinaldo, S. Tortorelli, R. S. Abraham, D. Oglesbee; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, transcription of β-gene, or indirectly by activating transcription repressors Rochester, MN, United States. for silencing γ-genes. Variations of KLF1 lead to increased expression of fe- tal hemoglobin (Hb F), showing clinical benefits for thalassaemia patients, making it an ideal target for gene intervention to increase HbF levels and Introduction: Measurement of T-cell receptor excision circles (TREC) is wi- thus ameliorating the patient’s phenotype. dely used for detection of Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID) in Material and Methods: This study aimed to identify possible variations of newborn screening programs (NBS). Currently, qPCR is predominantly used KLF1 gene, in β-thalassaemia heterozygotes and normal controls presen- to quantify TREC in dried blood spots (DBS). qPCR requires normalization ting high levels of HbF>4%. DNA from 47 blood samples was obtained (32 to controls and is susceptible to variations in amplification efficiency. We heterozygotes/ 15 normal) and analyzed by PCR and Sanger sequencing of evaluated digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) as a novel method for SCID detection. KLF1 gene. Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from one 3mm DBS punch using Results: An already characterized alteration (-148G>A) detected for the wash steps and denaturation at 99°C. Simultaneous quantification of TREC first time in the Greek population (β-thalassemia heterozygote, HbF 19,5%) and RNAseP (internal control) was performed using AutoDG and QX200 in coexistence with one published variation of unknown significance ddPCR Bio-Rad system. A total of 10 diagnosed patient DBS (1 X-linked (c.544T>C,p.Phe182Leu). Two alternations, not yet recorded (g.1980C>A, SCID, 1 RAG1 Omenn syndrome, 2 idiopathic T-cell lymphopenia (iTCL), 1 c.831A>C), were found in β-thalassemia heterozygotes, (HbF: 5,9% and chr22q11.2 deletion negative TCL, 2 DiGeorge syndrome, 1 CHARGE syndro- 10,1%) and a frequent polymorphism (c.304T>C,p.Ser102Pro) was present me, 1 ataxia telangiectasia and 1 cartilage hair hypoplasia) and 80 normal in the majority of tested samples. γ-genes investigation prior to this of KLF1 DBS (age≤7days, gestational age≥36weeks) were screened for TREC levels. revealed the polymorphism -158C>T (HBG1, Cretan-type) for the first time Results are expressed in TREC/ul blood. in an Albanian origin sample. Results: All previously diagnosed patient DBS were confirmed to contain Conclusions: KLF1 analysis in a small cohort of samples revealed variations ≤15 TRECs. Normal DBS ranged 46-276, average of 132 TRECs. Dilution ex- that could possibly contribute in differential HbF expression. More extensi- periments showed LLOQ at 14 TRECs. LOD was 11 TRECs. Precision experi- ve analysis of the above gene along with other non globin genes-modifying ments showed <20 %CV for intra-assay (at 54 TRECs) and inter-assay (at 60 factors of HbF expression- has to be conducted especially in β-thalassaemia TRECs) reproducibility. A reference range study is currently ongoing. patients in order to unravel the mechanism of Hb F regulation. Conclusions: We have developed a highly sensitive and accurate multiplexed ddPCR method for absolute quantification of TREC in DBS without the need  P08
 Intellectual Disability for standard curve. The method is cost-effective, high-throughput and sui- table for NBS testing.  P08
.01  P07
.29 The clinical significance of 15q11.2 B P1
-B P2
 duplications: - Where do Altered expression of DNA repair enzymes involved in molecular we stand? signaling pathway dependent on p53 in systemic lupus erythematosus M. D. Olivares1,2, J. Perez-Hernandez1,2, V. Lendinez-Tortajada1, M. J. Forner2, F. J. S. Serafim1,2, B. Marques1, S. Pedro1, F. Brito1, J. Dupont2, P. Dias2, O. Moldovan2, R. Chaves1,3, J. Redon2,4, R. Cortes1,2; Silveira-Santos2, S. Custódio2, A. Sousa2, A. B. Sousa2, J. de Sá3, A. Queiroz4, M. L. Vicente5, 1Genotyping and Genetic Diagnosis Unit, INCLIVA Biomedical Research Institute, H. Correia1; Valencia, Spain, 2Cardiometabolic and Renal Unit, INCLIVA Biomedical Research 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Hospital de Santa Institute, Valencia, Spain, 3CIBER of Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Diseases Maria, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte EPE, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Hospital de Faro E.P.E., (CIBERDEM), Institute of Health Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, 4CIBER Physiopathology of Faro, Portugal, 4Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal, 5Hospital Amato Lusitano, Castelo Branco, Portugal. Obesity and Nutrition (CIBEROBN), Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. The 15q11.2-q13 region has been well characterized, being associated with Introduction: In systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) apoptosis is thought a range of syndromatic copy number variants (CNVs), and comprises five to be defective, producing increased extracellular DNA and dsDNA antibo- established break points sites (B P1
 to B P5
). dies. The p53 pathway is crucial in apoptosis regulation. We investigated if While the clinical effect for B P1
-B P3
, B P2
-B P3
 and B P4
-B P5
 CNVs is well expression of enzymes (OGG1 and SIRT1) and transcription factor (FOXO1) established, the same cannot be said for B P1
-B P2
 CNVs. involved in p53 pathway were altered in SLE, and associated with immune Recently the 15q11.2 B P1
-B P2
 deletion has been reviewed, emerging as activation. a microdeletion syndrome with low penetrance and variable expressivity Material and Methods: We studied 32 SLE patients (10 with active lupus being the CNV frequently inherited from a healthy parent. This microdeleti- nephritis (LN), 12 with inactive LN, and 10 SLE in absence of LN); and 20 on is considered to be a risk factor for several neurodevelopment disorders. healthy controls. The mRNA levels for p53, SIRT1, OGG1 and FOXO1 were For the reciprocal duplication the picture has been less conclusive. quantified by RT-qPCR in the urinary cellular pellet. Aiming for a better understanding of the clinical significance of this CNV, we Results: Urinary mRNA levels of p53, OGG1 and FOXO1 were significantly di- collected patients with intellectual disability and/or other clinical features, minished in active LN (p<0.01, p<0.01 and p<0.05, respectively), whereas in referred for microarray testing, gathering clinical details for the ones with the other patient groups were similar to control group. However, the expres- the duplication. Data was collected from two genetic laboratories. sion of SIRT1 in the urinary sediment had a significant increase (p<0.01) in With a total of 1545 patients, we identified eleven carrying the duplication active group compared to controls. Furthermore, the three patient groups at 15q11.2 B P1
-B P2
. It was possible to assess inheritance in only four cases, showed an inverse correlation between FOXO1 and OGG1 mRNA levels with all inherited from a healthy parent. All patients presented intellectual disa- antibodies anti-dsDNA (r=-0.47 and r=-0.55, p<0.01), and Systemic Lupus bility, and facial dysmorphism was the second most common feature obser- Activity Index (SLEDAI) (r=-0.22 and r=-0.41, p<0.05). Whereas urina- ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAvINed .| M WicWrocWep.hEaSlyH, aGut.isOmR, cGongenital abnormalities, dystonia and cata1pl5ex5y ry expression of SIRT1 had a direct correlation with anti-dsDNA (r=0.87,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.04 Identifying candidate genes for 2p15p16.1 microdeletion syndrome where reported individually. using clinical, genomic and functional analysis The magnitude of the effect of 15q11.2 duplication remains elusive, and the H. Bagheri1, C. Badduke1, Y. Qiao1, R. Colnaghi2, A. Diana2, I. Abramowicz2, C. Dunham3, outcome unclear, posing a major challenge to genetic counseling. Neverthe- J. Wen1, R. Wildin4, M. Nowaczyk5, J. Eichmeyer6, A. Lehman3, B. Maranda7, S. Martell1, X. less, we expect the collection of more of these cases will establish this gain, Shan1, S. Lewis1, M. O‘Driscoll2, C. Gregory-Evans1, E. Rajcan-Separovic1; as it happened with the reciprocal deletion, as a microduplication syndrome 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Human DNA Damage Response Disorders Group, Genome Damage & Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton, with low penetrance and variable expressivity. United Kingdom, 3BC Children‘s Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4National Human  P08
.02 Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA, Bethesda, MD, United States, Copy number variation at chromosome 16p13.11 in Estonian patients 56Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University Medical M. Andresson1, P. Tammur1, O. Žilina1, K. Kuuse1, M. Nõukas2, T. Reiman1,3,4; Centre, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 65St. Luke’s Children’s Hospital, Boise, ID, United States, 1Tartu University Hospital, United Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Tartu, Estonia, 79Medical Genetics, Universite de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada. 2Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3University of Tartu, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Department of Biomedicine, Tartu, Estonia, 4University of Tartu, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Introduction: The 2p15p16.1 microdeletion syndrome has a core phenotype Tartu, Estonia. consisting of intellectual disability, microcephaly, hypotonia, delayed grow- th, common craniofacial features, and digital anomalies. So far, more than 20 cases with this syndrome have been reported in literature; however, the There are many copy number variations (CNVs) that are associated with size of the deletions and their breakpoints vary making the identification of susceptibility for neurodevelopmental disorders. One such novel CNV is de- candidate genes challenging. Recent reports pointed to four genes (XPO1, letion and duplication at chromosome 16p13.11 whose clinical significance US P34
, BC L11
A and REL) which were included, alone or in combination, in is becoming more ascertained. the smallest deletions causing the syndrome. CNVs at 16p13.11 show broad phenotypic manifestations and incomple- Results: Herein, we describe 8 new cases with 2p15p16.1 deletion and re- te penetrance. They are significantly enriched in individuals affected by view all published cases. We demonstrate functional deficits for the above 4 developmental delay/intellectual disability, autism, epilepsy, dysmorphic candidate genes using patient lymphoblast cell lines (LCLs) and knockdown features and congenital anomalies. Pathogenic 16p13.11 CNVs vary in size, of their orthologs in zebrafish. All genes were dosage sensitive based on re- but harbour the critical region called interval II (chr16: 15.48-16.32 Mb, duced protein expression in LCLs. In addition, deletion of XPO1, a nuclear GRCh37/hg19). exporter, co-segregated with nuclear accumulation of one of its cargo mole- We investigated the burden of CNVs at 16p13.11 (HumanCytoSNP-12 v2-1 cules (rp S5
) in patient LCLs. Other pathways associated with these genes BeadChips; Illumina Inc.) in a sample of 3,212 individuals with a range of (e.g. NF-kB and Wnt signaling as well as DNA damage response) were not neurodevelopmental conditions, clinically referred for chromosomal mi- impaired in patient LCLs. Knockdown of xpo1a, rel , bcl11aa and bcl11ab croarray analysis. Cases were compared with 14,747 controls from the resulted in abnormal zebrafish embryonic development including microce- Estonian Genome Center. We identified 16 patients with CNV within the phaly, dysmorphic body, hindered growth, small fins as well as structural 16p13.11 region, representing ~ 0.5 % of the patients analyzed, as compa- brain abnormalities. red to ~ 0.15 % in the Estonian general population. Eight cases were with Conclusions: Our multifaceted analysis strongly implicates XPO1, REL, and deletion and eight with duplication in that region, including one prenatally BC L11
A as candidate genes for the 2p15p16.1 microdeletion syndrome. diagnosed case. We found that patients with CNV in 16p13.11 present with varied clinical  P08
.05 features as previously described. These features are incompletely pene- Haploinsufficiency of ZNF385B and neurological manifestations in trant. All deletions and duplications identified encompass the critical region 2q31microdeletion syndrome N. Okamoto1, K. Shimojima2, T. Yamamoto2; of the CNV. The sizes of the rearrangements vary between 0.3-2.7 Mb. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute for Our findings confirm that genomic abnormalities at chromosome 16p13.11 Maternal and, Osaka, Japan, 2Tokyo Women‘s Medical University Institute for Integrated predispose to a range of neurocognitive and developmental disorders in in- Medical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. dividuals who carry them  P08
.03 Phenotypic variability associated with the recurrent 1q21.1 copy Microdeletion of 2q31 involving the HOXD gene cluster is a rare syndrome. number variant: eight new cases The deletion of the HOXD gene cluster is thought to result in skeletal ano- A. Perez-Granero1,2,3, N. Govea1,3,2, M. Grimalt1,3, E. Miravet1,3, J. Rosell1,3,2; malies in these patients. HOX genes encode highly conserved transcription 1Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma, Spain, 2Institut de Investigacions Sanitàries factors that control cell fate and the regional identities along the primary de Palma (IDISPA), Palma, Spain, 3GCV Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de body and limb axes. Several patients with this syndrome have neurological Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain. manifestations. We experienced a new patient with 2q31 microdeletion en- compassing the HOXD gene cluster and some neighboring genes including the ZNF385B. The patient showed digital anomalies, growth failure, epilep- Introduction: The chromosome 1q21.1 locus is a region with a high suscep- tic seizures, and severe intellectual disability. MRI showed delayed myelina- tibility to recurrent deletions and duplications. These disorders have incom- tion and a low signal intensity in the bilateral basal ganglia. Abnormal MRI plete penetrance and variable expressivity. Hence the clinical significance of findings in the 2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome have been reported in some this copy-number variation (CNVs) can be difficult to evaluate (from deve- other patients. They were also haploinsufficient for ZNF385B. The ZNF385B lopment delay, mild to moderate intellectual disability, autism, psychiatric is a zinc finger protein expressed in brain. We suggest that haploinsufficien- and behavioural problems to normal phenotype). cy of ZNF385B is responsible for the neurological features of this syndrome. Materials and Methods: Our laboratory has examined 664 samples by tar- geted array comparative genomic hybridization using an (Cytochip ISCATM  P08
.06 8x60 v2.0 Illumina). Samples were received from patients with mental re- 2q37.3 deletions among children with intellectual disability, autism tardation, epilepsy, autism and/or congenital anomalies. When parental and/or congenital malformations I. A. Demidova1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, K. Vasin2,1,3, M. A. Zelenova2,1,3, N. S. Shmitova2, N. S. samples were available, the familiar study was performed. Shmitova2, O. S. Kurinnaia1,2,3, Y. B. Yurov2,1,3, I. Y. Iourov2,1,3; Results: We have identified 5 patients with microdeletion and 3 patients 1Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics named after Y.E Veltishev at the Pirogov with microduplication 1q21.1. One patient with microdeletion was referred Russian National Research Medical University, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian for microcephaly and the other 4 patients for developmental abnormalities Federation, 2Mental Health Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow State or mental retardation. In two cases the parents are also affected. We have University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. only one case of parental samples and the deletion was of paternal origin. Two patients with microduplication were referred for epilepsy and the other one by autism. All have macrocephaly. In two cases we have the paren- Introduction. 2q37.3 deletion syndrome is considered to be a rare chro- tal samples and the duplication was of maternal origin in both cases. mosomal disorder associated with variable clinical features, among which Conclusions: In our group of patients the recurrent 1q21.1 CNV is the most are intellectual disability (ID), autistic features, brachydactyly, short stat- frequent anomaly (1,2 %). The macrocephaly is constant in patients with ure, hypotonia and obesity. Some facial features are characteristic for the duplication 1q21.1. The family study is inherited origin in all our studied syndrome (i.e. round face, frontal bossing, arched eyebrows, deep-set eyes, cases. The clinical variability and the incomplete penetrance make genetic upslanted palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, thin upper lip, minor ear counselling very difficult, especially in prenatal diagnosis. anomalies). Haploinsufficiency of HDA C4
 seems to be the most critical for 156 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONtAhe, SphPeAnIoNty p| iWc sWpecWtru.EmS. HHeGre.,O wRe Ghave attempted to assess chromosomeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 2q37.3 deletions and HDA C4
 haploinsufficiency per se in children with in- ents, with ID and/or ASD studied by Agilent 180K oligonucleotide array- tellectual disability, autism and/or congenital malformation. CGH, we have detected 14 patients with 8p imbalances (5 deletions, 8 dupli- Materials and Methods. Molecular karyotyping by SNP/oligonucleotide mi- cations and one inverted duplication). Single gene deletions were observed croarray (resolution: >1kbp) was used to analyze 300 children with ID, au- in 3 patients and larger interstitial deletions in 2 patients (one with a 3,4Mb tism spectrum disorders and congenital malformations. 8p21.2 deletion and the other with two adjacent deletions in 8p23.1 and Results. Cytogenetically visible 2q37 deletions were detected in 2 cases. in 8p23.1p21.3. Interstitial duplications were identified in 8 patients, inclu- Molecular karyotyping confirmed the presence of these deletions (5Mb and ding a 6,3Mb 8p21.3p21.1 duplication, a 960Kb 8p23.1 duplication, a 274Kb 8.5Mb). Furthermore, a CNV within 2q37.3 (44kbp) leading to HDA C4
 loss 8p22 duplication, 4 patients with a small 160Kb duplication inherited from was detected in a patient. All affected female patients had ID, autism and healthy parents classified as a CNV of unknown clinical significance and one minor ear anomalies. One had widely set nipples and hypotonia. Another patient with a single gene duplication. In brief, our results are in accordance one had a short statue. Two patients presented with ocular hypertelorism. with published data suggesting existence of multiple hotspots in 8p causing HDA C4
 haploinsufficiency was observed in all three cases. complex rearrangements and variety of phenotypes. Conclusions. We show that 2q37 deletions can be common in children with  P08
.09 ID, autism, congenital malformations tending to a frequency as high as 1%. ADNP mutations are a frequent cause of autosomal dominant Therefore, one can suggest that 2q37.3 deletions are likely to be more com- intellectual disability mon among these children than previously recognized. Supported by the A. Riess1, U. Moog2, S. Waldmüller1, P. Bauer1, O. Riess1, S. Karch3, E. Schröck4, N. Di Russian Science Foundation (Grant #14-35-00060). Donato4, A. Rump4, L. Mackenroth4, A. Tzschach4; 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University Hospital Tübingen,  P08
.07 Tübingen, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 7p21 Interstitial duplication - male patient with global developmental Germany, 3Center for Child and Adolescent Medicine, Heidelberg University Hospital, delay, autism, dysmorphisms and epilepsy Heidelberg, Germany, 4Technische Universität Dresden, Institute of Clinical Genetics, J. B. Melo1,2,3, S. I. Ferreira1, A. Jardim1, A. Mascarenhas1, M. C. Robalo4, I. M. Carreira1,2,3; Dresden, Germany. 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2CIMAGO – Centro de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, Genética e Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CNC-IBILI, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the activity dependent neuro- Coimbra, Portugal. protector homeobox gene ADNP, which encodes a transcription factor in- volved in the SWI/SNF remodelling complex, were recently shown to be as- sociated with moderate to severe intellectual disability (ID). Additional cli- Duplications involving the short arm of chromosome 7 are rare events, and nical abnormalities which included short stature, muscular hypotonia and most occur in association with rearrangements of other chromosomes as a facial dysmorphisms had enabled the delineation of a new entity termed consequence of missegregation of a balanced translocation in a carrier pro- Helsmoortel-van der Aa syndrome (OMIM 615873). Since its first report in genitor. The majority of the patients described have a 7p terminal duplicati- 2014, studies in large ID cohorts identified mutations in 14 unrelated pati- on in association with other imbalance, making 7p interstitial duplications ents, suggesting that ADNP mutations are a comparatively frequent cause of even more rare events. The ones described have variable sizes, usually with autosomal dominant ID. cytogenetically visible imbalances, with few characterized by array-Compa- We report on three unrelated German patients (two boys and one girl) in rative Genomic Hybridization. whom ADNP mutations were detected by next-generation sequencing. Cli- Here we report a 12 year old male with global developmental delay, facial nical problems that are in accordance with those of previously reported dysmorphisms, hypotonia and epilepsy that was analyzed by Agilent 180K patients included severe ID, muscular hypotonia, short stature and hypopla- oligonucleotide array-CGH, with an average probe spacing of 17Kb. The stic corpus callosum. Borderline microcephaly, which had so far only been analysis revealed a 5.5 Mb interstitial duplication in chromosome 7p21. reported in a minority of patients, was present in two of our patients. One 2p21.1(14,624,128-20187,355)[hg19]. patient had unilateral iris coloboma, which has hitherto not been reported Common to all reported patients with 7p duplications is the presence of in- in association with ADNP mutations. tellectual disability and variable facial dysmorphisms, while manifestations Our findings corroborate the assumption that ADNP mutations are one of like cardiac anomalies, skeletal anomalies and hypotonia are present only in the more frequent causes of ID in sporadic patients, and they expand the some of the patients. The reported patient is the third reported with autism, clinical spectrum of the probably underdiagnosed Helsmoortel-van der Aa after the report of a 7p21.1p22.2 de novo duplication, larger but overlap- syndrome. ping the one reported, and a 7p11.2p14.1 proximal duplication. This is the  P08
.10 first report of a 7p21 interstitial duplication associated with epilepsy. Clinical and quantitative PCR confirmation of copy number variations Establishing the exact boundaries of 7p pure interstitial duplications, iden- detected by array CGH tifying the genes involved and their functional characterization might lead A. C. Ceylan1, E. Z. Taşkıran1, P. Ö. Şimşek Kiper2, G. E. Utine2, K. Boduroğlu2, M. to pinpoint candidate genes responsible for specific manifestations. A de- Alikaşifoğlu1,2; tailed clinical characterization of the patients will also help in this genothy- 1Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, pe-phenothype correlation in order to define critical regions responsible for Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, the different manifestations. Department of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.  P08
.08 8p rearrangements detected by array-CGH in a 1500 cohort of Introduction: Copy Number Variations (CNV) are known to underlie several patients with intellectual disability diseases such as intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and schi- L. M. Pires1, S. I. Ferreira1, M. Val1, N. Lavoura1, J. Saraiva2, I. M. Carreira1,3,4, J. B. Melo1,3,4; zophrenia. It is also well known that CNVs play important roles in microde- 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de letion syndromes. Several methods were developed to detect CNVs. One of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CIMAGO – Centro de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, these methods, array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH), is now Genética e Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 4CNC- IBILI, Universidade de Coimbra, the recommended first-tier test for molecular diagnosis in patients with Coimbra, Portugal. cognitive disorders. aCGH detects genome-wide CNVs, however, findings should be validated. Thus, the aim of this study was to verify CNVs detected by aCGH in patients with cognitive disorders,. Array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) has increased the Materials and methods: aCGH (Agilent® 8x60K) analyses for 150 patients diagnostic yield in patients with intellectual disability (ID), autism spectrum with cognitive disorders detected 19 CNVs - either of unknown clinical si- disorders (ASD) and multiple congenital anomalies due to its improved re- gnificance or of likely pathogenicity. Afterwards, these CNVs were verified solution. The short arm of chromosome 8 (8p) is structurally complex be- by SYBR Green-based quantitative-PCR (qPCR). cause of the existence of two olfactory gene clusters flanking a 5Mb region Results: Verification was done in 18 CNVs. Of these, 4 CNVs turned out to of 8p23.1, several low copy repeats (LCRs) and common inversion polymor- be false positives. Two CNVs were de novo. Clinical correlation of the CNVs phisms that makes this region prone to various recurrent genomic rearran- revealed that these 16 CNVs were among the already known microdeleti- gements that include: 8p23.1 deletions or duplications, 8p23.1 paracentric on and/or microduplication syndromes. In order to draw attention to the inversions, pericentric inversions, 8p translocations, 8p inverted duplicati- importance of verification, two patients will be presented: One with a con- on with associated terminal deletion, among others. In addition to these 8p firmed and paternally inherited deletion at 2q37, and the other with a false pathogenic imbalances, others have been reported as copy number variants positive duplication at 1q21.3. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 157 (CNVs) without apparent clinical significance. In our cohort of 1500 pati- Conclusion: The current study has shown that CNVs detected by aCGHABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.13 Clinical utility of whole exome sequencing; case report of a child should always be verified, for example by qPCR, especially when there is an with global neurodevelopmental delay focused on autism spectrum impact on clinical phenotype. Verification is also important for the family for disorder accurate genetic counseling. A. Vallmajó1, D. Casellas1, A. Castan1, M. García1, B. Rodríguez-Santiago2, M. Obón1; 1Hospital U de Girona Dr. Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain, 2qGenomics Laboratory,  P08
.11 Barcelona, Spain. Implementation of arrayCGH in a Portuguese tertiary hospital: 5 years and over 1400 cases R. Silveira-Santos, A. Sousa, S. Custódio, S. Serafim, J. Dupont, O. Moldovan, P. Dias, A. Introduction: Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD, OMIM#209850) are a Medeira, I. Cordeiro, A. B. Sousa; Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria - group of heterogeneous neurobehavioral syndromes without an accurate CHLN, Lisboa, Portugal. molecular genetics protocol after a non-conclusive karyotype, fragile-X and CGH-array tests results. Here we report the case of a two-years-old child, born at 41 weeks gestation after induced labor for oligohydramnios, with a Successful application of arrayCGH to prenatal and postnatal genetic dia- global neurodevelopmental delay focused on ASD, a suggestive hereditary gnosis led to a significant increase in the detection rate of chromosomal ab- family history and normal karyotype, fragile-X and CGH-array tests. Who- normalities. Here, we reflect on our 5-year experience (2011 to 2015) with le exome sequencing was performed to depict the complex genetics autism the implementation of arrayCGH. spectrum disorder. Different array platforms were used with increasing probe density and, Material and methods: Exome sequencing and selective analysis of ASD since 2013, included SNPs to investigate patients whose phenotype was known genes was applied at first. Then a second analysis extended to re- consistent with an imprinting disorder or an autosomal recessive disorder maining OMIM genes was carried out (qGenomics Laboratory) caused by autozygosity. We examined 1414 patients belonging to 1261 fa- Results: ASD related genes analysis did not reveal any significant finding, milies (95 prenatally, 1319 postnatally), who were referred mostly for intel- but the extended study to other OMIM genes identified a likely pathogenic lectual disability, autism and/or congenital abnormalities. mutation in GDI1 gene (c.389-1G>-C; hemizygous splicing variant). This In 10/95 (11%) prenatal and in 365/1319 (28%) postnatal cases we identi- gene has been strongly associated with intellectual disabilities (ID) although fied possibly relevant copy number variations (CNV) or regions of absence of there is only evidence from 3 published families with X-linked ID and GDI1 heterozygosity (AOH). Overall there were 1125 relevant CNVs thatM rBeqDu5ired mutations (one nonsense, two missense) (Strobl-Wildemann G, et al. Am J further investigation originating 468 reportable CNVs (203 deletions, 265 Med Genet A. 2011). duplications), ranging in size from 43kb (intragenic deletion of ) to Conclusions: The mutation found in the studied family provides more evi- 154Mb (X aneuploidy). After segregation analysis and/or confirmatory dence about the GDI1 role in X-linked ID. Furthermore, GDI1 seems to be tests, 266 variants were classified as pathogenic and 202 as of uncertain related also to another clinical feature, ASD. Our findings suggest including clinical significance. We also detected an AOH containing a gene associated GDI1 in ASD panels as well as in X-linked intellectual disabilities. Finally, our with Bardet-Biedl syndrome, consistent with the patient’s phenotype, and a work underlines the utility of whole exome sequencing instead of specific case of partial UPD(14). gene panels for an accurate diagnosis and complete genetic counselling. Large size rearrangements can be benign and, conversely, very small size  P08
.14 CNVs may be pathogenic. The global analysis of our array database suggests Targeted gene panel to investigate intellectual disability and autism a postnatal cut-off of 30kb and, for prenatal reporting, a 150kb cut-off for spectrum disorders comorbidity deletions and a 200kb for duplications. However, we recommend analyzing E. Leonardi, A. Gasparini, M. Carraro, E. Bettella, R. Polli, F. Cesca, S. Sartori, S. C. E. each case on an individual basis and in close connection with the clinicians. Tosatto, A. Murgia; University of Padua, Padova, Italy.  P08
.12 ARV1 - a new candidate gene for intelectual disability and seizures R. Segel1,2, A. Aran1,2, H. Fridman1, P. Renbaum1, S. Gulsuner3, S. Zeligson1, T. Walsh3, M. King3, E. Levy-Lahad1,2; Intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are clinical- 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Hadassah Medical School, the Hebrew ly and genetically heterogeneous diseases. Recent whole exome sequencing University, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Departments of Medical Genetics and Genome Sciences, studies indicated that genes associated with different neurologic disorders University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. are shared among these disorders or converge on common functional pa- thways. The aim of this study was to design a customized multiplex PCR-based gene Intellectual disability (ID) and seizures are genetically heterogeneous. We panel to investigate the genetic bases of ID and ASD comorbidity. The gene report two male siblings with severe ID and seizures, born at term to con- panel covers 74 genes, including a subset of genes that are found recurrently sanguineous Palestinian parents. Both have non-verbal communication mutated in ID or ASD conditions, genes shared among ID and ASD disease and severe ID without regression, seizures started in the first year of life. network and ID/ASD genes that are directly connected to these. We analy- Hearing and vision are normal. Both are normocephalic, brain MRI demon- zed 18 clinically selected patients with ID and ASD without syndromic fea- strated mild cortical atrophy in the older brother only. Lactate, ammonia, tures, negative for Fragile-X test and array CGH. For all 18 patients, 85-97% Acyl-carnitine, liver function and lipid profile were normal. of the targeted regions achieved read depths of at least 20x, with average Whole Exome sequencing of the affected siblAinRgVs1, both parents and two un- read depths ranging from 91x to 612x. 22 rare single nucleotide variants affected sisters revealed only one variant that was homozygous in both af- (SNV) were found in the exonic sequences of 16 out of the 18 patients: most fected children, heterozygous in the sisters: p.G189R (c.G565A). This of them are predicted to be deleterious and have very low frequency or are residue is highly conserved in all vertebrates, Gerp score of 4.7. This variant no present in public databases. Although familial segregation analysis will has not been reported in 1000 Genome or EVS, Only 2 heterozygotes re- be helpful to determine the pathogenic nature of the variants, likely causa- ported in ExAC (frequency e-051.648), predicted as damaging by Polyphen tive variants have been assigned for 8 (44%) of the patients. These results (0.998), and likely pathogenic in Clinvar, based on a single indication of this confirm the diagnostic value of the targeted gene panel for investigating vAaRrVia1nt in a family with an unspecified neurodegenerative disease (Alazami children with ID and ASD. 2015). Funding: Italian Ministry of health Young Investigator Grant GR-2011- is an endoplasmic reticulum transmembrane protein, first identified 02347754 to E.L. as essential for sterol esterification in yeast. Arv1-/- mice exhibit a dramatic  P08
.15 lean phenotype. In mammalian cells, Arv1 is required for normal choleste- Effectiveness of whole-exome sequencing and costs of the traditional rol, bile acid and triglyceride homeostasis, its knockdown increases lipid- diagnostic trajectory in children with intellectual disability mediated cell death. ATRhVe1 effects of the G189R mutation on these functions G. R. Monroe1, G. W. Frederix2, S. M. C. Savelberg1, T. I. de Vries1, K. J. Duran1, J. J. van der will be presented. Smagt1, P. A. Terhal1, P. M. van Hasselt3, H. Y. Kroes1, N. M. Verhoeven-Duif1, I. J. Nijman1, Our results suggest mutations cause functional brain abnormalities, E. C. Carbo1, K. L. van Gassen1, N. V. Knoers1, A. M. Hövels2, M. M. van Haelst1, G. Visser3, G. should be considered as a candidate gene for ID with seizures, and provide van Haaften1; further evidence of the role of sterol metabolism in neurological function. 1Utrecht University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, Utrecht, Netherlands. 158 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONIAnt,r SodPuActIiNon |: TWhiWs sWtud.Ey SinHveGst.igOatReGd whole-exome sequencing (WES) yield in a subset of intellectually disabled patients referred to our clinical diagno-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index de novo stic center and calculated the total costs of these patients’ diagnostic trajec- assessed by generation of embryoid bodies and teratoma formation in SCID tory in order to evaluate early WES implementation. mice. We confirmed mCNicTrNod6eletion and lack of chromosome aber- Materials and Methods: We compared 17 patients’ trio-WES yield with the rations byC aNCTGNH6. In addition, we produced targeted missense mutation in retrospective costs of diagnostic procedures by comprehensively examining the remaining intact allele using CRISPR/Cas9 system to “enhance” patient records and collecting resource use information for each patient, be- effects of deletion. iPSCs neuronal differentiation was directed by ginning with patient admittance and concluding with WES initiation. We cal- overexpression of transcription factor NGN2. According to preliminary data, culated cost savings using scenario analyses to evaluate the costs replaced nearly all cells were positive for neuron specific markers aCnNdT hNa6d electro- by WES when used as a first diagnostic tool. physiological parameters comparable to those of a healthy donor. Results: WES resulted in diagnostically useful outcomes in 29.4% of pati- Conclusions: PaCtNieTnNt-6specific iPSC-derived neurons with deletion ents. The entire traditional diagnostic trajectory average cost was $16,409 and complete knock-out could be used as a unique model for studying ef- per patient, substantially higher than the $3,972 trio-WES cost. WES resul- fects caused by copy number changes. ted in average cost savings of $3,547 for genetic and metabolic investigati- This study was supported by the Russian Science Foundation, grant No. 14- ons in diagnosed patients and $1,727 for genetic investigations in undia- 15-00772. gnosed patients.  P08
.18 Conclusion: The increased causal variant detection yield by WES and the Eight further individuals with intellectual disability and epilepsy relatively high costs of the entire traditional diagnostic trajectory suggest carrying biallelic CNTNA P2
 aberrations allow delineation of the that early implementation of WES is a relevant and cost efficient option in mutational and phenotypic spectrum patient diagnostics. This information is crucial for centers considering im- M. Smogavec1, A. Smith2, J. Hoyer3, D. Lederer4, M. Nassogne5, E. E. Palmer6,7, M. Deprez4, plementation of WES and serves as input for future value-based research V. Benoit4, I. Maystadt4, C. Noakes2, A. Leal3, A. Reis3, D. Shears8, K. Brockmann9, C. into diagnostics. Zweier3; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Georg August University,  P08
.16 Göttingen, Germany, 2Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, A 1.77 Mb deletion in 3p26.3 encompassing CNTN6 and CNTN4 genes: United Kingdom, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität case report Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 4Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de F. Brito1, B. Marques1, S. Pedro1, S. Serafim1, R. Goncalves2, J. Freixo2, H. Correia1; Pathologie et Génétique, Charleroi (Gosselies), Belgium, 5Pediatric Neurology Unit, 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Hospital D. Estefânia, Saint-Luc University Hospital, UCL, Brussels, Belgium, 6GOLD (Genetics of Learning and Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central EPE, Lisboa, Portugal. Disability) Service, Hunter Genetics, Waratah, Australia, 7University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Interdisciplinary Pediatric Center for Chromosome microarray analysis is a powerful diagnostic tool and is being Children with Developmental Disabilities and Severe Chronic Disorders, University Medical Center, Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany. used as a first-line approach to detect chromosome imbalances associated with intellectual disability, dysmorphic features and congenital abnormali- ties. This test enables the identification of new copy number variants (CNVs) Introduction: Heterozygous copy number variants (CNVs) or sequence and their association with new microdeletion/microduplication syndromes variants in the contactin associated protein 2 gene CNTNA P2
 have been in patients previously without diagnosis. We report the case of a 7 year-old discussed as risk factors for a wide spectrum of neurodevelopmental and female with moderate intellectual disability, severe speech delay and auto neuropsychiatric disorders. Biallelic aberrations in this gene are causative and hetero aggressivity with a previous 45,XX,der(13;14)mat karyotype for an autosomal-recessive disorder with epilepsy, severe intellectual disa- performed at a younger age. ACfNfyTmNe6t rix CCyNtoTSNc4an 750K chromosome mi- bility (ID) and cortical dysplasia (CDFES), however, due to the limited num- croarray analysis was performed detecting a 1.77 Mb deletion at 3p26.3, ber of reported individuals, the full mutational and clinical spectrum has encompassing 2 OMIM genes, andC NTN4 . These genes play an im- still to be characterized. portant role in the formation, maintenance, and plasticity of functional neu- Methods and Results: Targeted sequencing, chromosomal microarray analy- ronal nCeNtwTNor6k s. Deletions or mutations in gene have been implicated sis or multi gene panel sequencing identified homozygous mutations, com- in intellectual disability and learning disabilities. Disruptions or deletions pound heterozygous CNVs or compound heterozygous CNVs and mutations in the gene have been associated with development delay and other in eight individuals from six unrelated families. All aberrations were inheri- neurodevelopmental disorders. The haploinsufficiency of these genes has ted from healthy, heterozygous parents and are predicted to be deleterious been suggested to participate to the typical clinical features of 3p deletion for protein function. Epilepsy occurred in all patients with onset in the first syndrome. Nevertheless inheritance from a healthy parent has been repor- three and a half years of life. Further common aspects were severe ID (7/8), ted, suggesting incomplete penetrance and variable phenotype for this CNV. regression of speech development (5/8), and behavioural anomalies (7/8). We compare our patient with other similar reported cases, adding additio- Interestingly, cognitive impairment in one of two affected brothers was in nal value to the phenotype-genotype correlation of deletions in this region. comparison relatively mild with good speech and simple writing abilities.  P08
.17 Cortical dysplasia that was previously reported in CDFES, was not present Modeling of chromosomal diseases related to intellectual disability in MRIs of six individuals and only suspected in one. using genome editing of induced pluripotent stem cells from a patient Conclusion: By identifying novel homozygous or compound heterozygous, with CNTN6 gene microdeletion deleterious CNVs and mutations in CNTNA P2
 in eight individuals from six T. A. Shnayder1, A. G. Menzorov1,2, N. M. Matveeva1, V. S. Fishman1, I. E. Pristyazhnyuk1, independent families with moderate to severe ID, early onset epilepsy and T. V. Karamysheva1, A. A. Kashevarova3,4, N. A. Skryabin3,4, E. A. Sazhenova3, I. N. behavioural anomalies, we considerably broaden the mutational and clinical Lebedev3,4,5, O. L. Serov1,2; spectrum associated with biallelic aberrations in CNTNA P2
. 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Insitute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk,  P08
.19 Russian Federation, 4National Research Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian Coffin-Lowry syndrome, a familial “female only” case; natural history Federation, 5Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. and variability of Coffin-Lowry syndrome in females A. Kattentidt1, R. Kersseboom1, T. Rinne2, E. van der Zon1; 1Zuidwester, Spijkenisse, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Radboud Introduction: Previously we have described threCe NpTatNie6nts with intellectual University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. disability Canntdn s6ome dysmorphic features. Patients had microdeletion or mi- croduplication at 3p26.3, affecting a single gene, (Kashevarova et al., 2014). In CkNnToNck6-out mice lack of this gene causes abnormal dendrito- Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is a rare X linked semi-dominant mental re- genesis. We decided to produce patient-specific neurons to study molecular tardation syndrome, in males characterized by severe intellectual disability, mechanisms of deletion effect in humans. growth retardation, distinct facial features and progressive kyphoscoliosis. Materials and Methods: Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) were pro- In females, the phenotype is less explicit and ranges from the full pheno- duced from patient skin fibroblasts with 3p26.3 microdeletion and healthy type as seen in males, to completely absent. The diagnosis in females can be donor using standard protocol with four transcription factors. Array-based challenging. Furthermore, data on the natural history in affected females is comparativCeN gTeNn6omic hybridization (aCGH), RT-PCR and FISH analyses were still scarce. RP S6
KA3 used to confirm microdeletion in iPSCs. CRISPR/Cas9 system was used to We describe a familial case of CLS with two affected adult females and no knock-out allele. Neuronal differentiation of iPSCs was performed by affected males. The molecular analysis of the gene revealed a he- NGN2 overexpression (Zhang et al., 2013). terozygous frameshift mutation in exon 11, once previously reported in the Results: Eight iPSC lines had diploid EkaSrHyoGty p2e0 (1466, X|Y B).A PRluCripEoLtOenNcyA w, aSs PAlIiNter |a tWurWe. BWot.hE SsiHsteGrs.O prReGsented well-known features of CLS: intelle1ct5u9alABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index disability, facial dysmorphic features and soft, fleshy hands. Both females genomic imbalances in genes that are involved in neurodevelopmental dis- were affected by a psychiatric disorder, including psychotic disorder and orders. This preliminary data are strong indications that implementation of depression. Interestingly, there was a strongly intrafamilial variability in the targeted custom aCGH in research may reveal new candidate genes under- severity of psychiatric disease and psychosocial functioning. Both parents lying neurodevelopmental disorders. were asymptomatic. The genetic testing to determine whether the mother is Supported in parts by the Croatian Ministry of Science Education and Sport an asymptomatic carrier is ongoing. (LB); BICRO-HIT (FB). To our knowledge this is one of the very few families with affected females  P08
.22 only. This case demonstrates the variability of clinical phenotype and natu- Epilepsy and its correlationship to psicomotor development degree in ral history of CLS in adult females. Furthermore, we illustrate the challenges the Spanish cohort of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome of treatment of a psychiatric disorder in females with CLS. J. Nevado1,2, R. Blanco3, I. Málaga3, J. J. Granizo4, P. Barruz1, P. D. Lapunzina1; akattentidt@gmail.com 1INGEMM, Hospital Universitario la Paz-IdiPaz, MADRID, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 4Hospital Infanta Cristina, MADRID,  P08
.20 Spain. Clinical, chromosomal and molecular characterization of a cohort of 160 patients with corpus callosum agenesis with or without intellectual disability C. Depienne1,2,3, C. Nava1,2, A. Rastetter1, S. Heide1,2, C. Mignot2,4, B. Keren2, F. Lesne2, A. Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a contiguous gene syndrome caused Faudet2, L. Boutaud5, C. Alby5, C. Bole5, P. Nitchké5, T. Billette de Villemeur6, M. Moutard6, mainly by deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4. Epilepsy represents a T. Attié-Bitach5, D. Héron2,4; major clinical challenge during early years in WHS, with significant impact 1Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S on quality of life. The main aim of this work it will be to describe social, 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, ICM, Paris, France, 2Département demographic and clinical features of a cohort of WHS in Spain trying to esta- de Génétique, Hopital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France, 3Service de cytogénétique, blish whether or not the level of psychomotor development in this cohort Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 4Centre de Référence correlates with size of the deletion and other clinical features. Déficiences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France, 5Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker, APHP, Paris, France, 6Service de Neuropédiatrie, Methods: Using high-resolution SNP-array, we finely mapped CNVs in Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France. around 40 individuals with WHS. Seizure and other phenotypes data were collected through a comprehensive questionnaire supplemented with avai- lable medical records, and statically analyzed. Corpus callosum agenesis (CCA) corresponds to complete or partial ab- Results: We show a complete description of a cohort of WHS in our coun- sence of the corpus callosum, the main brain structure connecting the two try. Although main clinical features were similar to other previous studies, hemispheres, and is the most frequent brain malformation in humans. CCA our cohort showed a better degree of psychomotor development than other is usually diagnosed antenatally, and prenatal counseling is therefore a ones. In fact, seizures in this cohort were preferentially under a febrile con- crucial issue, especially in apparently isolated CCA. To determine the type text (91%), and related to communication skills; more than 60% was able and frequency of genetic anomalies and to identify new genes involved in to communicate (non-verbal), 46% say words, and 27% to make short sen- CCA, we recruited prospectively a cohort of 150 patients with CCA and in- tences, in a context that positively correlates with shorter deletions. tellectual disability (ID), and several families with CCA without ID. Clinical Conclusions: We founded a direct correlationship between size of the deleti- examination has allowed establishing a diagnosis for 10 patients, whereas on, severity of the epilepsy and the level of psychomotor development delay. a chromosomal abnormality was identified in 20 patients. Next, we have Our preliminary results suggested that epilepsy in WHS may be a complex sequenced 423 candidate genes selected for their known or putative asso- event and may it involve the synergistic effects of loss of two or more genes. ciation with CCA in humans (345) or mouse models (79) in 100 probands. Granted by Endoscreen  S2011
/BMD-2396 A pathogenic mutation was identified in 18 patients in 8 different genes  P08
.24 (ARID1B, ZBTB18, TUBA1A, FOXG1, SPTAN1, ARX, MED12, DYN C1
H1). In Exome trio analysis as an effective approach in deciphering the addition, we have sequenced the exome of 5 trios, 4 sib pairs, and 3 families genetic etiology of rare diseases with CCA without ID segregating as a dominantly inherited trait. Our results M. Peña-Vilabelda1, J. Botet1, P. Maietta1, M. Martinez-Garcia1, A. Fernández-Jaén2, show that next generation sequencing approaches are powerful diagnostic D. Martín Fdez.-Mayoralas2, A. L. Fernández2, A. Patiño3, I. Espejo Portero4, M. Alonso tools for CCA and confirm the large genetic heterogeneity of this condition, Cerezo5, A. Mesas Arostegui6, A. Santana Rodríguez7, I. Málaga8, J. Solera Santos9, M. in which many genes are still unknown. Moreover, the identification of ge- A. Motos Guirao10, B. Gil Fournier11, L. Martorell Sampol12, M. D. Miramar Gallart13, J. Bernar Solano14, S. Alvarez1; nes involved in CCA without ID will change the paradigm of prenatal genetic 1NGS Laboratory, NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Quirón, Madrid, counseling. Spain, 3Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 4Hospital Universitario Reina  P08
.21 Sofía, Córdoba, Spain, 5Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain, 6Hospital El Ángel, Málaga, Spain, 7Hospital Universitario Materno Infantil de Canarias, Las Customized high resolution arrayCGH for neurodevelopmental Palmas, Spain, 8Instituto Neurológico Dr. Mateos, Oviedo, Spain, 9Complejo Hospitalario disorders: our experience Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain, 10Centro de Estudios Genéticos de Andalucía, M. Rincic1, Z. Krsnik1, K. Gotovac2, T. Liehr3, F. Borovecki2, L. Brecevic1; Granada, Spain, 11Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Madrid, Spain, 12Hospital Sant Joan 1Croatian Institute for Brain Research, School of Medicine University of Zagreb, Zagreb, de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 13Hospital Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 14Hospital Ruber Croatia, 2Department for Functional Genomics, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Internacional, Madrid, Spain. University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Centre for Translational and Clinical Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) has entered the medical practice as an effective diagnostic test transforming the molecular diagno- Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a powerful tool for de- sis and clinical management of undiagnosed genetic diseases. Exome trio tecting relative small genomic imbalances. Here we report on the design and analysis is a very effective strategy to identify de novo, hemizygous, newly potential of a targeted aCGH for the evaluation of patients with neurodeve- homozygous and in compound heterozygous potentially causal variants of lopmental disorders. An array was designed on Agilent’s SureDesign web rare genetic disorders. application in 8X60K format, covering 6,803 genes, with a probe spacing of Methods: We performed exome sequencing using Ion AmpliSeqTM Exome 0.66-20 kb. RDY technology (Life Technologies) with Ion ProtonTM and Ion  S5
-XLTM. Overall 39 patients were analyzed and 479 genes had aberrant copy number Sequencing reads were analysed using Torrent Suite software. Trio annota- (CNV). These genes were screened by an algorithm for brain specific gene ted variants using ION Reporter were prioritized with an in-house analytical expression (publically available data). Expression heat maps were found for pipeline to identify causative genetic variants. 316 genes: 93 were below the expression threshold of 5.5, 134 had expres- Results: We present the analysis of the first 130 trios referred to NIMGe- sion level up to 9, and 86 had high expression level up to 13, respectively. netics. Patients were mainly children with syndromic intellectual disabili- Comparing custom array with commercially available Agilent 8X60K plat- ty (55%). The genetic etiology was potentially elucidated in 55 probands forms, the custom one is superior in terms of numbers of specific genes co- harboring 38 causal variants and 22 likely causative variants, achieving a vered. Furthermore, comparing the resolution of arrays (33 kb SurePrint 3G, 43% molecular diagnostic rate. Among these patients, 36 harbored de novo 60 kb ISCA), our design has much higher average resolution of 8.2 kb and variants, 6 hemizygous maternally inherited variants, 4 in compound hete- therefore has a capability to detect smaller CNVs. Considering that our cu- rozygous variants, 7 newly homozygous variants and 3 variants inherited stom array was able to detected imbalances in 220 genes that are expressed from parents. Patients with syndromic intellectual disability (54%, 38/70) i1n 6b0rain, the design presented showed to be aE pSoHwGer f2ul0 t1oo6l |fo Br AdeRteCcEtinLgO NaAn,d S sPpeAcIifNic |n eWurWoloWgi.cEalS dHisGor.dOerRs G(53%, 9/17) showed higher molecular diagnostics rates than patients with non-neurologic disorders (27%, 3/11)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.27 Foxp1-related intellectual disability syndrome: a recognizable entity and non-syndromic intellectual disability (19%, 6/32). I. Meerschaut1,2, J. Pètre3, N. Revencu3, N. Bockaert2, A. Oostra2, O. Vanakker1,2, M. Conclusions: In our cohort exome trio analysis provide a diagnostic yield of Vilenov4, T. J. L. de Ravel5, D. Mekahli5, K. K. Vaux6, J. Sebat7, F. F. Hamdan8, J. L. Michaud8, 43% in patients whom traditional molecular diagnostics strategies were un- P. Lapunzina9, N. Di Donato10, L. Hudgins11, A. K. Hanson-Kahn11, B. Dallapiccola12, A. informative. The implementation of WES as a first-tier diagnostic approach Novelli12, J. Andrieux13, J. Morton14, N. Ragge14, J. Radley14, M. J. Parker15, K. Neas16, A. Dheedene1, B. Menten1, D. Lederer17, B. Callewaert1,2; will provide a higher diagnostic yield and a cost-efficient option particularly 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, in rare syndromic intellectual disabled patients.  P08
.25 2Department of Pediatrics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Centre Génétique, Offspring of an FMR1 premutation carrier: son with a deletion of Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 4NYS Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY, United States, 5Centre for Human FMR1 exon 1 and daughter with a full mutation Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 6Gleeson Laboratory for A. Baumer, E. Wey, R. Abbas, S. M. Azzarello-Burri, A. Rauch; Neurodevelopmental Genetics, University of California, San Diego, CA, United States, Institute of Medical Genetics, Schlieren, Switzerland. 7Beyster Center for Genomics of Psychiatric Diseases, University of California, San Diego, CA, United States, 8CHU Saint Justine Research Center, Montréal, QC, Canada, 9Instituto de Genética Médica Y Molecular, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 10Institut The vast majority (approx. 99%) of fragile X syndrome patients present with für Klinische Genetik, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 11Department a trinucleotide repeat expansion (>200 CGG repeats) in the 5’ UTR of the of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, FMR1 gene. Deletions and point mutations are detected in less than 1% of 12Laboratorio Di Genetica Medica, Ospedale Pediatrico del Bambino Gesu’, Rome, Italy, 13Institut de Génétique Médicale, Hospital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 14Clinical patients. Deletions affecting single exons or the entire FMR1 gene arise eit- Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 15Sheffield her de novo, are transmitted from mothers carriers of the same deletion, or Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children’s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, derive from a maternal pre- or full-mutation allele. 16Genetic Health Service NZ, Wellington, New Zealand, 17Centre de Génétique Humaine, We report on the transmission of a mutant FMR1 allele from a premutati- Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique asbl, Gosselies, Belgium. on carrier mother to her two children. The healthy mother is carrier of an FMR1 allele with an expansion in the premutation range (approximately 84 CGG repeats). A deletion of the entire exon 1 was detected in her 2-year- Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) and specific language impairment old son diagnosed with fragile X syndrome. The analyses were based on a (SLI) cover a wide range of conditions with heterogeneous phenotypes and RP PCR and a methylation sensitive MLPA assay, including CNV analysis. A etiologies, making them challenging for clinical geneticists. Mutations in prenatal investigation for her daughter showed that she is carrier of a full fFoOrXkPh1ead box protein  P1
 (FOX P1
), a transcription regulator, are associated mutation with approximately 285 CGG repeats. This latter analysis was per- with ID and SLI, with or without autistic features (MIM: 613670). Multiple formed on chorionic villi using RP PCR. The results for both siblings showed patients have been described, though so far, no specific phenotype no evidence for mosaicisms. emerged. FOX P1
 This case report draws attention to the fact that premutations may not only Materials and Methods:F WOXeP r1eport on the clinical and molecular data of 21 r Pe 0s 8u .l 2t 6in repeat expansions but also in deletions affecting the FMR1 gene. novel and well-characterized patients with mutations and review the New insight into genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with 25 previously reported patients to delineate the condition. FOXG1 point mutation Results: Phenotypic analysis shows a combination of neuromotor delay, ID, D. Mitter1, M. Pringsheim2, M. Kaulisch3, R. E. Lutz4, B. Conover4, N. S. Hauser5, T. A. SLI, and typical facial features including a high broad forehead, bent downs- Grebe6, C. Courage7, B. Zoll8, W. Heinritz9, R. Westman10, L. Rohena11, K. Ramsey12, J. lanting palpebral fissures, ptosis, blepharophimosis, and a short nose with Cohen13, S. A. Fatemi13, N. Sakkubai13, S. Schröder14, K. Plümacher14, G. J. Kluger2, J. bulbous tip. Relative macrocephaly, strabismus, a wide mouth with down- Lemke1, K. L. Helbig15, I. Prehl16, K. Hörtnagel16, B. Zirn17, K. Brockmann14; turned corners, and pronounced nasolabial folds appear more vdaer ianbolveo. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany, 2Klinik für Neuropädiatrie und Behavioural problems and autistic features are common. Brain, cardiac and Neurologische Rehabilitation, Epilepsiezentrum, Schön Klinik, Vogtareuth, Germany, urogenital malformations seem associated. Molecular data show 3., Leipzig, Germany, 4Department of Genetic Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical mutations in all cases, either monogenic or part of a more extended intersti- Center, Omaha, NE, United States, 5Department of Genetic Medicine and Metabolism, Children’s Hospital Central California, Madera, CA, United States, 6Division of Genetics tial 3p deletioFnOsX. P S1
ubgroup analysis reveals sensorineural hearing loss and and Metabolism, Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 7Division of more severe ID in patients with interstitial 3p deletions. Human Genetics, University Children’s Hospital Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland, 8Institut Conclusions: -related ID syndrome is a recognizable entity that seems für Humangenetik, Universitätsmedizin, Göttingen, Germany, 9Praxis für Humangenetik, more frequent than expected. We expand the phenotypic description with Cottbus, Germany, 10Children’s Specialty Center, St. Luke’s Children’s Hospital, Boise, typical facial features and associated organ system involvements. This will ID, United States, 11Medical Genetics, San Antonio Military Medical Center, San Antonio, enable clinicians to make a gestalt diagnosis and will be helpful to evaluate TX, United States, 12Center For Rare Disorders, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 13Moser genotype-phenotype correlations when interpreting large NGS data obtai- Center for Leukodystrophies and Neurogenetics Service, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins Medical Institution, Baltimore, MD, United States, 14Klinik für Kinder- und n Pe 0d 8 .i 2n 8 patients with ID and/or SLI. Jugendmedizin Universitätsmedizin, Göttingen, Germany, 15Division of Clinical Genomics, Identification of de novo FOX P1
 variants in three unrelated Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States, 16CeGaT, Tübingen, Germany, 17Genetikum individuals. Stuttgart, Genetic counselling and diagnostics, Stuttgart, Germany. L. I. Alba Valdivia1, S. García Miñaúr2,3,4, P. Lapunzina Badía1,3,4, E. Vallespín1,3,4, L. Fernández1,3,4, Á. del Pozo Maté1,3,4, K. Ibáñez Garikano1,3,4, J. Silla1,3,4, F. Santos-Simarro1,3,4, M. Mori1,3,4, R. Mena1,3,4, V. Fernández Montaño1, P. Tirado Requero5, E. Mansilla1,3,4, J. The FOXG1 syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant developmental ence- Nevado1,3,4, M. de Torres1,3,4, M. Palomares Bralo1,3,4; phalopathy. In the literature, 53 patients with a point mutation in the FOXG1 1Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2INGEMM. Hospital Universitario La Paz, gene have been reported (until December 2015). Through international Madrid, Spain, 3Instituto de Investigación Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, collaboration, we collected data from 30 new patients with a heterozygous 4Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 5Neurología Infantil. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. FOXG1 point mutation, including 18 novel mutations, and present detailed phenotypic description and neuroimaging. We performed systematic stati- stical analysis and genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with FOXG1 syndrome based on the molecular and clinical data of a total of 83 patients Background and aims: FOX P1
 is a member of the Forhead Box P (FOXP) sub- with a point mutation in FOXG1. Our analysis shows a higher phenotypic family of transcription factors, which also includes FOX P2
. Disruptions of variability than expected. The most characteristic clinical features in pati- FOX P2
, the closest relative to FOX P1
, have been involved in the etiology of ents with a FOXG1 mutation are: (1) severe microcephaly, including primary familial verbal dyspraxia. microcephaly, (2) short stature, (3) moderate to severe psychomotor delay, In the last few years, 11 individuals with FOX P1
 variants have been repor- with some patients achieving unsupported walking and speech, (4) preser- ted, supporting the implication of this gene in the pathogenesis of human vation of social interaction, (5) frequent neurological abnormalities inclu- cognitive disorders including language impairment. These patients show ding hypotonia, stereotypies, dyskinesia, strabism, bruxism, and spasticity, autism spectrum disorders, intellectual disability, global developmental de- (6) variable forms of epilepsy, (7) abnormal sleep pattern, (8) gastrointesti- lay and moderate to severe speech delay. nal features, (9) development of scoliosis or kyphoscoliosis, and (10 ) brain We report on three new individuals with de novo FOX P1
 variants showing anomalies. Our results show a correlation between location and coding ef- features that are consistent with this new clinical entity (MIM 613670). fect of the FOXG1 mutation. The most severe phenotype is associated with Method: Whole genome aCGH was carried out in patients 1 and 2 using a truncating mutations in the 5’ domain and the fork head domain, the mildest custom-designed 60K oligonucleotide array (KaryoArray®v3.0). phenotype is associated with missense mutations in the fork head conser- Whole exome sequencing was performed as a trio in patient 3 to identify de ved site 1. These data serve for improved interpretation of new FOXG1 se- novo mutations related to the phenotype after a normal result using aCGH. quence variants and well-founded genetic counselling. Results: Patient 1 had a 379 Kb de novo deletion that only affected FOX P1
. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAPINati e| nWt 2W caWrr.ieEdS aH 6G.28.O MRbG de novo deletion including FOX P1
 and othe1r6 g1e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.33 PAC S2
 de novo missense mutation in two patients presenting with nes. In patient 3 a de novo nonsense mutation (p.R525X) was identified. intellectual disability and recognizable facial dysmorphism Discussion and conclusions: N. Jean-Marçais1,2, K. Tatton-Brown3, D. Héron4, E. Backer5, The Deciphering These cases contribute to the characterization of the emerging phenotype Developmental Disorders Study, J. Donadieu6, J. Rivière2,7, D. Lehalle1,2,7, A. Bruel7, Y. associated with protein-disrupting FOX P1
 variants. Duffourd2,7, J. Thevenon1,2,7, L. Faivre1,2,7, C. Thauvin1,2,7; Screening for FOX P1
 variants should be considered when evaluating indi- 1Centre de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, F-21079 Dijon, France, 2Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies du viduals with developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism and severe Développement (TRANSLAD), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, F-21079 Dijon, language defects. France, 3South West Thames regional Genetics Service University, St George’s university, This study is supported by Instituto de Salud Carlos III grant PI13/02010 NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4Service de Génétique, Hôpital  P08
.31 Pitié-Salpétrière, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 5Genomic Pathogenic long indels identified in patients with intellectual Diagnostics Laboratory, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester disability Univesity Hospitals, NHS Foundation Trust, Saint Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United S. Pajusalu1,2, R. Pfundt3, L. E. L. M. Vissers3, M. P. Kwint3, T. Reimand1,2,4, K. Õunap1,4, J. A. Kingdom, 6Department of Internal Medicine & French Reference Center for Rare Veltman3,5, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa3; Auto-immune & Systemic Diseases, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique des 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 7Equipe d’Accueil 4271, Génétique des Anomalies du Estonia, 2Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Développement, Université de Bourgogne, F-21079 Dijon, France. Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Syndromic or non-syndromic intellectual disability (ID) has multiple un- Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands. derlying etiologies including in particular monogenic rare disease. Most of these causes are currently unknown. In the last five years, the development of whole exome sequencing (WES) has lead to identify many new genes re- Whole exome sequencing (WES) continues to facilitate the genetic diagnosis sponsible of ID. Using WES we identified the same de novo missense hete- of patients with intellectual disability (ID). Sensitive methods exist for the rozygous mutation (p.Glu209Lys) in the PAC S2
 gene in two patients pre- identification of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and indels less than 20bp senting with moderate ID, neonatal seizures and similar recognizable facial in size. However, the discovery of long indels 20 - 200bp in size, remains dysmorphism (bulbous nasal tip, wide mouth, thin upper lip and everted challenging even in non-repetitive regions of the genome such as exons. As lower lip). A moderate neutropenia is observed in one of them. This mutati- a result the role of small deletions (long indels) is currently unknown and on involves a highly conserved amino acid in an acid domain constituted by under reported in many studies. ramified amino acids, leading to possible polarity and protein conformation We analysed the WES data from 98 patients with ID to identify pathogenic changes. The PAC S2
 gene encodes for a protein mainly expressed in brain, long indels located in exons of 650 ID genes using Pindel and Platypus. All heart, kidney, pancreas and testis. PAC S2
 is involved in controlling the ex- patients had previously screened negative for WES based SNV, small indel changes between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria, in ER and large copy number variants. To assess the sensitivity of the calling algo- homeostasis and in apoptosis induction. Cellular studies have demonstra- rithms we compared variants discovered in the patient cohort to 35 exonic ted that PAC S2
 knockout would lead to ER dissociation and mitochondria indels described in the Genome of the Netherlands dataset with an allele fragmentation, as well as a defect in tBid-mediated apoptosis. PAC S2
 is also frequency greater than 5%, 20-200bp in size. a paralog to PAC S1
 (54% of identical sequence) previously reported in a hu- We were able to detect 74% (n=26) of common exonic indels, serving as an man disorder characterized by ID. These data allow considering PAC S2
 as a estimated detection sensitivity. Further analysis of the rare variants within new gene responsible for ID with recognizable facial features. The identi- the patient cohort identified two indels predicted to explain the patients’ fication of other individuals will be the next step for the description of this clinical syndrome (diagnostic yield 2%). A 42bp homozygous deletion of new syndrome. exon-intron border in PGA P3
 gene, and a 114bp heterozygous complex in- del disrupting the MEC P2
 gene.  P08
.34 Despite the fragmented nature and short read length of WES data, using Characterisation of emerging pathological CNVs in adults with specific software tools for long indel detection increases diagnostic yield in intellectual disabilities and co-morbid psychiatric disorders patients with ID. K. Wolfe, A. Strydom, A. McQuillin, N. Bass; Funding: NWO 016.166.015 and ERC DENOVO 281964 University College London, London, United Kingdom.  P08
.32 De novo 16p13.3 duplication in a girl with intelectual disability, behavioural abnormality and dysmorphic features - characterization Chromosomal copy number variations (CNVs) are highly implicated in the of 16p13.3 duplication without CREBBP gene aetiology of neurodevelopmental disorders. Research in pediatric cohorts D. Gieruszczak-Białek1,2, A. Skorka1,2, M. Kucharczyk2, M. Młynek2, M. Kugaudo1,2; with developmental delay/intellectual disabilities (ID) has led to the iden- 1The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2The Childrens Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. tification of new CNV syndromes. Many adults with ID harboring rare CNV syndromes remain unidentified, precluding description of later onset psych- iatric phenotypes. In an attempt to further characterise very rare emerging CNV syndromes we The availability and use of CGH with high-resolution microarrays has greatly undertook genome wide chromosomal microarray analysis and comprehen- improved the detection of micro-deletion and duplications in patients with sive psychiatric phenotyping of adults with idiopathic ID recruited from ID developmental delay and congenital anomalies. Here we report the molecu- psychiatry services across England. lar karyotyping and phenotypic description of a new patient with 16p13.3 Of the 202 adults recruited to the study 11% had CNVs classed as likely pa- duplication. Our patient presented with intelectual disability, behavioural thogenic by the clinical diagnostic laboratory. These included a 1.7Mb de- abnormality and dysmorphic features, Whole-genome oligonucleotide mi- letion at 2q13 and a 2.4Mb duplication at 4p16.3, both of which are poorly croarray (PerkinElmer CGXTM HD 4x180K Oligo Array) analysis revealed characterised in adulthood. We undertook further targeted recruitment of a 2.41 Mb duplication on chromosome 16p13.3 (chr16:788,264-3,203,164; children and adults with CNVs in these regions to expand the phenotypic hg19) encompassing 124 genes (including 71 OMIM genes) as well as the data on these emerging pathological CNVs. critical regions for alpha thalassemia with intellectual disability (AT-ID), tu- Study of adults with idiopathic ID and psychiatric disorders has enabled the berous sclerosis 2 (TS C2
), and polycystic kidney disease 1 (PKD1). FISH stu- phenotypic characterisation of two CNVs associated with co-morbid patho- dies in both parents gave normal results, proving the de novo occurrence of logies. Ongoing characterisation of rare CNVs in adulthood could inform cli- this aberration in the child. According to the literature, 16p13.3 duplication nical management of children with emerging CNV syndromes. consists of a contiguous gene syndrome with variable phenotypic expressi- on, and CREBBP is the critical gene responsible for the main clinical features of 16p13.3 microduplication. To date, there is no evidence of other genes in this region contributing to the phenotype. It is suggested that other genes play additive or modulator role justifying some of the features found in in- dividuals with dup 16p13.3.In the presented girl, the 16p13.3 duplication is responsible for the clinical phenotype, although it does not include the CREBBP gene. We indicate another possible candidate genes, contributing additional information for this microduplication syndrome and providing new data supporting further genotype-phenotype studies. T1h6is2 study was supported by the MNiSW GrantE NSoH. 0G19 23/0I1 P16
/ 2| 0B1A3/R7 C2
.ELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.35 Netherlands, 2Department of Experimental Oncology, Laboratory of Stem Cell Six individuals with intellectual disability, cerebral white matter Epigenetics, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy, 3School of Medicine and the abnormalities and motor impairment are homozygous for a splice site Robinson Research Institute, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 4Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, North Adelaide, Australia, 5Department of mutation in the ABC C9
 gene Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Human and Medical Genetics, G. Å. M. Hansen1, B. Nygård1, H. Hjellnes1, R. Glad1, M. Falkenberg Smeland1, V. Marton1, C. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 7National Centre for Medical Jonsrud1, M. Van Ghelue1,2; Genetics, Our Lady‘s Children’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 8Department of Medical 1Department of Medical Genetics, Division of Child and Adolescent Health, University Genetics, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 9Division of Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Health, Houston, TX, United Health Sciences. The Arctic University of Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway. States, 10Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 11Departments of Neurosciences and Pediatrics, UCSD/Rady Children‘s Hospital, San Diego, CA, United States, 12Center for Medical Genetics, Keio Two families with members displaying substantial motor impairment, mild University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 13Institute of Medical Genetics, University of intellectual disability and periventricular white matter abnormalities on Zurich, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland. cerebral MRI were referred to our department. Four affected siblings in family 1 had been thoroughly investigated for neuromuscular disorders, de novo YY11 including mitochondrial disease. Two siblings in family 2 were previously Trio-based exome sequencing of 10 patients with intellectual disability (ID) diagnosed with tuberous sclerosis due to cerebral MRI abnormalities. A trio previously identified a missense mutation in , a transcription from each family was analysed using the Trusight One sequencing panel, factor with an important role in various bioloYgYi1ca l processes , such as prolife- targeting 4813 disease associated genes on an Illumina MiSeq platform. All ration, differendeti antoivoon , embryogeneYsiYs1, apoptosis, and tumor development. six patients (10-31 years old) were homozygous for a splice site mutation Our study aimeYdY 1t,o determine the role of mutationsin ID.Additional c.1320+1G>A in ABC C9
. ABC C9
 encodes sulfonylurea receptor 2 (SUR2), patients with mutations in were collected through targeted re- which is a regulatory subunit of the K-ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) sequenci2n g of further exome sequdeen ncoinvog studies, and tYhYr1ough Gene- channel. These SUR2-containing KATP channels are enriched in the sarco- Matcher3and lemma, where they sense intracellular ADP content and trigger the opening Decipher. In total, YeYig1ht patients with mutations in (four mis- or closing of potassium channels. These channels are critical in cells during sense and four truncating mutations) and three patients with small deleti- periods of high energy demand. The outcome ABC C9
 of the c.1320+1G>A ons encompassing were identified. All patients showed below average variant is an in frame deletion (r.1165_1320del) resulting (if translated) IQ that ranged from moderate ID to mild learning problems. Other recur- in a SUR2 protein lacking 52 amino acids (p.Ala389_Gln440del). This com- rently observed features included intrauterine growth retardation, feeding promised SUR2 protein might explain some of the clinical findings in these problems, behavioral problems, and dystonia. In four patients, typical facial patients. Whereas heterozygous mutations in ABC C9
 are known to cause dysmorphisms were present: facial asymmetry with a broad forehead, full- Cantu syndrome (hypertrichotic osteochondrodysplasia, OMIM#239850), ness of the upper eyelids, and a Gingko leaf-like shape of the upper lip.To we speculate if the homozygous mutation identified in these two families gain inYsiYg1h t into the effects of YY1 mutations on downstream signaling, we may cause a new, distinct syndrome. profiled lymphoblastoid cell lines frodme npoavtoie nts with mutations and deleti- ons of YY1through RNA-seq and ChIP-seq for YY1 and enhancer chromatin  P08
.36 marks.In conclusion, we show that mutations in theY Ytr1anscription Haploinsufficiency of histone acetylase modifier BRPF1 is responsible factor are recurrently observed in patients with ID, and we present a for mild intellectual disability with ptosis and might participate to characterization of the main gene network nodes affected by mutations clinical manifestations of the 3p deletion syndrome F. Mattioli1, E. Schaefer2, K. Yan3, A. Magee4, G. Vieville5, K. Dieterich5, C. Philippe6, X. and deletio1ns. 2 ReferencesVissers et al, 2010, Nat GenetSobreira et al, 2015, Hum Mu- Yang7, J. Mandel1, A. Piton1; 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2Service de génétique médicale, Strasbourg, France, tat3Chatzimichali et al, 2015, Hum Mutat 3Goodman Cancer Center & Department of Medicine McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast,  P08
.38 Ireland, 5Hôpital Couple – Enfant, Grenoble, France, 6Medical Genetics Service, Sainte- Identification of new candidate genes in intellectual disability and Justine Hospital, Montréal, QC, Canada, 7Goodman Cancer Center & Department of epilepsy Medicine McG, Montréal, QC, Canada. J. Halvardson1, J. Zhao1, A. Zaghlool1, C. Wentzel1, P. Georgii-Hemming2, E. Månsson3, H. Ederth Sävmarker4, G. Brandberg5, C. Soussi Zander1, A. Thuresson1, L. Feuk1; 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Örebro Intellectual disability (ID) is a common neurodevelopmental disorder cha- University Hospital, Örebro, Sweden, 4Gävle Hospital, Gävle, Sweden, 5Falun Pediatric racterized by an extreme genetic heterogeneity with more than five hundred Clinic, Falun, Sweden. genes now described as implicated in mendelian forms. We performed exo- me sequencing in a large family with five affected individuals presenting with mild ID, ptosis, growth retardation and hypotonia with a suspected It has been estimated that at least 20-30% of intellectual disability (ID) pa- autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. We identified a 2-bp deletion tients are co-diagnosed with epilepsy, representing a strong over-represen- causing a frameshift in BRPF1, a gene not yet implicated in ID. The muta- tation of epilepsy in ID patients compared with the general population pre- ted transcript is expressed in fibroblasts and leads to a truncated protein. valence of 0.5-1 %. Here we present the results of exome sequencing in 39 The BRPF1 protein activates two histone acetyltransferases (KAT6A and trio families where the index patient is diagnosed with both ID and epilepsy. KAT6B) causing syndromic ID in human when mutated. We have therefore The families have no history of disease and have previously been screened investigated how the truncation can affect BRPF1 interaction with its part- for copy number variation using arrays. ners KAT6A and KAT6B, as well as its histone H3 binding ability. BRPF1 is In 39 patient-parent trios we identified 29 de novo mutations in coding located in the 3p25 region, involved in a deletion syndrome characterized sequence. Analysis of de novo and inherited variants using standard gui- by ID with additional features, and presumably due to the loss of the SETD5 delines for interpretation of coding variants yielded a molecular diagnosis gene. The identification of a truncating mutation in the BRPF1 gene perfect- in 11 families (28.2%). Variants in genes of unknown clinical significance ly cosegregating with ID in one large family with phenotype overlapping the were further investigated using protein and co-expression networks, as well 3p25 deletion syndrome suggests that BRPF1 might also participate to the as previously published exome sequencing results in neurodevelopmental cognitive and dysmorphic phenotype of this syndrome, and especially pto- disorders. Both network analysis and a number of previously published de sis, hypotonia, and growth retardation, as these clinical features are present novo mutations implicate the gene HECW2 as a novel candidate gene in ID in patients with 3p25 deletion only when BRPF1 is included. In addition, and epilepsy. we also report few other patients with similar phenotype carrying BRPF1 Our results also highlight the utility of network analysis and comparison deletions or point mutations, confirming the involvement of the gene in syn- to previous large-scale studies as a way to prioritize candidate genes for dromic mild ID. further studies. This study adds to the increasingly growing list of causative and candidate genes in ID and epilepsy and highlights HECW2 as a new can-  P08
.37 didate gene in neurodevelopmental disorders. Clinical and functional characterization of patients with de novo This work was supported by the Regional research council, the ERC Starting mutations and deletions of YY1 Grant Agreement n. 282330 and the Swedish Medical Research Council. A. T. Vulto-van Silfhout1, M. Gabriele2, R. Kumar3, J. H. M. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, W. M. Nillesen1, E. Douglas4, S. Kjaergaard5, A. Stray-Pedersen6, S. A. Lynch7, E. Frengen8, D. Rodriguez-Buritica9, C. Schaaf10, J. Friedman11, P. L. Germain2, A. Vitriolo2, J. A. Rosenfeld10, K. Kosaki12, A. Rauch13, J. Gecz3, G. Testa2, B. B. A. de Vries1, D. A. Koolen1; 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 163ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.39 France, 8Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital The French HUGODIMS consortium experience on intellectual de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 9Service de Cardiopédiatrie, Hôpital d’enfants, disabilities CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 10Service d’Ophtalmologie, APHP, Hôpital Necker Enfants S. Bézieau1, S. Küry1, T. Besnard1, X. Latypova1, A. Denommé2, B. Cogné1, S. Schmitt1, P. Malades, Paris, France, 11Service d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpital civil, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, Boisseau1, M. Vincent1, S. Mercier1, B. Isidor1, HUGODIMS; France, 12Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de Purpan, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, 1CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 2CHU d‘Angers, Angers, France. France, 13Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences and Donders Centre for Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Background: Intellectual disabilities (ID) constitute a heterogeneous group of syndromic and non-syndromic disorders of variable prevalence. The The PUF60 gene encodes for the Poly-U Binding Splicing Factor 60 kDa number of genes accounting for the vast majority of ID is so important that which belongs to the spliceosome. Recently, PUF60 haploinsufficiency has a targeted analysis is questionable. Numerous studies pointed to the rele- been discussed as the best candidate gene for the 8q24.3 microdeletion vancy of exome sequencing of patients/parents trios to increase diagnostic syndrome phenotype, in seven patients with developmental delay (DD), yield. post-natal proportionate growth retardation, and facial dysmorphism. Va- Purpose: Our goal was to determine the efficiency of exome sequencing to riable features comprised ocular coloboma, joint laxity and/or dislocation, unravel the molecular cause of ID in patients with severe phenotype seen by vertebral anomalies, branchial anomalies, cardiac, and renal defects. To clinical geneticists from Western France hospitals. date, a unique patient has been reported with a de novo probably patho- Method: Following a trio-based exome sequencing strategy, we investigated genic mutation in PUF60 (p.His169Tyr) associated with DD, microcepha- 75 patients with severe ID which could not been explained by fragile X syn- ly, craniofacial and cardiac defects. We report on three additional patients drome, copy number variations (CGH array) or even by known candidate carrying a de novo heterozygous mutation in PUF60 identified by whole genes. exome sequencing (WES), including a splice-site mutation (c.24+1G>C), a Results: For almost 50% of the cases tested so far, we have been able to ex- nonsense (p.Arg448*), and a missense change (p.Val483Ala). All four mu- plain the molecular cause of the disease or highlight new ID candidate genes. tated patients share a core facial gestalt that was present in patients with Conclusions: Our work confirmed that the trio-based whole-exome sequen- 8q24.3 microdeletions, associated with DD. Other findings included feeding cing is a powerful approach for diagnosis and research. New identified ge- difficulties (3/4), cardiac defects (3/4), IUGR (3/4), hip dislocation (2/4), nes highlighted the importance of several signaling pathways such as the vertebral anomalies (1/4), distal anomalies (3/4), bilateral microphthalmia NMDAR one, in the occurrence of neurodevelopmental disorders. and irido-retinal colobomas (1/4), and branchial arch defect (1/4). These  P08
.40 results confirm the major role of PUF60 in the 8q24.3 microdeletion pheno- MED13L haploinsufficiency syndrome - four additional cases type since patient with a microdeletion share common manifestations with emphasizing the variability of the phenotype patients carrying a point mutation. PUF60 can be added to the list of genes P. M. Tørring1, L. B. Ousager1, C. Brasch-Andersen1, M. J. Larsen1, L. N. Krogh1, U. causing a recognizable form of syndromic intellectual disability, as well as to Dunkhase-Heinl2, M. Kibæk3, L. Laulund3, N. Illum3, M. Zollino4, C. R. Fagerberg1; the list of syndromic colobomas. 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense C, Denmark, 2Dept. of Pediatrics, Hospital of Southern Jutland, Aabenraa, Denmark, 3Dept. of Pediatrics,  P08
.42 Odense University Hospital, Odense C, Denmark, 4Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Diagnosis of intellectual disability by sequencing all genes known in Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. pathology. MED13L B. Keren1, C. Mignot2, C. Nava1, E. Lejeune3, C. Mach3, C. Estrade3, V. Olin3, A. Lafitte3, S. Karagic3, A. Jacquette2, P. Charles2, S. Whalen2, I. Marey2, S. Heide3, F. Mochel3, A. Afenjar4, Introduction: haploinsufficiency syndrome has recently been de- D. Doummar5, T. Billette de Villemeur5, A. Guet5, D. Rodriguez5, M. Marie-Laure5, Y. Marie6, S. Chantot-Bastaraud7, R. Touraine8, F. Lesne2, A. Faudet2, F. Soubrier3, D. Héron2, scribed and is characterized by moderate intellectual disability (ID)M, sEpDe1e3chL C. Depienne1; impairment, and dysmorphic facial features, in some cases accompanied by 1Département de Génétique, ICM UPMC, Inserm UMR_ S1127
/CNRS UMR 7225, GH congenital heart defects. We present four additional patients with Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France, 2Département de Génétique, centre de référence haploinsufficiency syndrome and review the literature for phenotypical and déficience intellectuelle de causes rares, filière Défiscience, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, genetic aspects of previously described patients. APHP, Paris, France, 3Département de Génétique, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, Materials and methods: In the search for genetic aberrations in individu- France, 4Département de Génétique, centre de référence déficience intellectuelle de aMlsE Dw1it3hL ID, two of the patients were identified by chromosomal microarray causes rares, filière Défiscience, GH Armand-Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 5Service de Neuropédiatrie, GH Armand-Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 6ICM, plateforme analysis, and one by exome seqMuEenDc1i3nLg. One of the individuals, suspected of de génotypage et séquençage, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, Paris, France, haploinsufficiency sydne dnroovmo eM, EbDas1e3dL on clinical features, was iden- 7Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, GH Armand-Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 8Service de tified by MsaEnDg1er3 Lsequencing of . MED13L Génétique, CHU Nord, Saint-Etienne, France. Results: All four patients had aberrations, including two in- tragenic microdeletions, one nonsense and one frameshift mutation. Phenotypically, they all had ID, speech and motor delay, open The etiologies of intellectual disability (ID) are very heterogeneous. For this mouth appearance, and macrostomia. Two patients were diagnosed with reason, exome sequencing is increasingly used in the diagnosis of ID. autism, and three had macroglossia. None had congenital heart defects. We sequenced 151 index cases with the Illumina TruSight One panel which The literature was reviewed with respect to clMinEicDa1l3 fLeatures and genetic targets the coding sequences of 4813 genes involved in human pathology. aberrations. Our aim was a diagnostic yield close to exome sequencing but less expensi- Conclusions: Even if most clinical features of haploinsufficiency ve. All patients had a negative diagnostic work-up before sequencing inclu- syndrome is rather non-specific, the syndrome may be suspected in patients ding chromosome microarray analysis. with developmental delay, speech impairment, and macroglossia, macrosto- A definitive or likely diagnosis was found for 42 index cases (28%) in 39 mia, or open mouth appearance. different genes: 30 were autosomal dominant (de novo or with a low mo-  P08
.41 saicism in one parent), 6 were autosomal recessive, 6 were X-linked. We also Dominant mutations in the splicing factor PUF60 cause a recognizable made 4 partial diagnoses which do not explain the whole phenotype. Besi- syndrome with intellectual disability, heart defects and short stature des, 10 variants were classified as variants of unknown significance. Finally, S. El Chehadeh1,2, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse3, J. Thevenon2,4, P. Kuentz4,2,5, A. Bruel4, C. we identified 7 incidental findings irrelevant with the indication. Thauvin-Robineta2,4, C. Bensignor6, H. Dollfus1,7, V. Laugel7,8, J. Riviere2,4,5, Y. Duffourd2, In our series, 56 patients had autism and ID with normal motor develop- C. Bonnet9, M. Robert10, R. Isaico11, M. Straub11, C. Creuzot-Garcher11, P. Calvas12, N. ment and autistic regression. In these patients, we achieved a unique dia- Chassaing12, C. Gilissen13, R. Pfundt13, J. S. Klein Wassink-Ruiter3, L. Faivre2,4; gnosis (1.7%); therefore our diagnostic yield was 42% among our 95 pati- 1Service de génétique médicale, Institut de génétique médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), ents with ID and no autism. We had also 35% diagnoses in our 40 patients Centre de Référence Maladies Rares «Anomalies du développement et syndromes with ID and epilepsy. malformatifs» de l’Est, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 2FHU TRANSLAD, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares «Anomalies Overall, this technique provides a significant advance in the diagnostic strat- du développement et syndromes malformatifs» de l’Est, Centre de Génétique, CHU egy of patients with ID. However, it highlights the need to better characterize de Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University its clinical indications. Mostly, our experience suggests that ID as part of an Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4EA 4271, Génétique et Anomalies autistic syndrome is currently not a good indication due to the supposed du Développement (GAD), Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 5Laboratoire de multifactorial nature of this pathology. Biologie Moléculaire, Plateau technique de biologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 6Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital d’enfants, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 7U1112 Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Faculté de médecine, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, 164 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.43  P08
.45 A novel mutation (c.132 G>C) in PQB P1
 gene is linked to severe to Epilepsy is not a mandatory feature of STXB P1
 associated Ataxia- mild intellectual disability in five male cousins Tremor-Retardation Syndrome M. M. Alwasiyah1,2, B. Al-wasiyah3, C. Trujillo4, H. Bouazzi5; S. Beck-Woedl1, A. Riess1, U. Grasshoff1, M. Sturm1, F. Akmut1, M. Schöning2, A. Tzschach3, 1Aziziah Maternity & Children Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 2Center of Excellence in O. Riess1, J. Gburek-Augustat2; Genomic Medicine Research (CEGMR), King Abdullaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, 3King Abdullaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 4Erfan & Bagedo Hospital, Jeddah, Germany, 2Children‘s Hospital; Paediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine, Saudi Arabia, 5Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, Paris descartes University, Paris, University of Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 3Institute of Clinical Genetics, Technische France. Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. STXB P1
 Introduction: Ten percent of intellectual disabilities are related to genes on Introduction: Mutations in the gene were first described to cause the X chromosome. Among the 1200 genes of the X chromosome, 115 of Ohtahara syndrome (Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, EIEE) charac- them so far are X-linked intellectual disability genes (X-LID). PQB P1
gene is terized by very early infantile epileptic encephalopathy with frequent tonic well known to be involved in syndromic and non-syndromic X-LID. Here we spasms and a suppression-burst pattern on electroencephalogram. In the report a French family with 5 affected males who showed severe to mild following years a wider phenotype was recognized having milder forms of intellectual disability associated with developmental delay. Subsequent epilepsies. genetic analysis with X exome sequencing has revealed a novel missense Material and Methods: More than 150 patients with intellectual disability mutation, c.132G>C. Which was predicted to be deleterious by Polyphen-2 (ID) and movement disorders, in whom genomic imbalances and fragile X software. This mutation was inherited by all the affected relatives. The mo- syndrome had been excluded, were screened for exonic variants using the thers and the grandmother have been found heterozygous for the mutation. TruSight One enrichment panel (dIell unmoviona). STXB P1
 Material and methods: NGS for XLID was performed for 2 patients using SO- Results: Here, we present three female patients with an ataxia-tremor-re- LiD 5500 sequencer (Life technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA). Sorting and tarSdTaXtiBoPn1 syndrome caused by a dominant mutation. Two of calling of SNP/InDel were performed using SAMTOOL and GATK software. the girls were diagnosed through next-generation-sequencing as mutations All sequence variants were prioritized by scoring phylogenetic conservation in were not suspected. The third patient was diagnosed by targeted and functional impact (SIFT and Polyphen-2). Candidate variants were con- genetic testing due to its clinical features strikingly similar to the first two firmed by Sanger sequencing. girls. All patients showed intellectual disability and movement disorders. Results: Sequencing of X-exome from all patients identified three missense Additional behSaTvXiBoPra1l disturbances such as hyperactivity, stereotypic beha- variants (c.731G>A/G244Q , c.86-88del/K29del and - c.132G>C- R10P) re- vior, hand biting and hyperventilation burst were also recognized in affected spectively in three different genes (TLR8, SPANXN4, and PQB P1
). patients with mutations Conclusion: We have identified three candidate genes for this family (PQB P1
, Conclusion: In summary, the characteristic feature of our thSreTeX BpPa1tients TLR8 and SPANXN4), whose mutations are respectively (p.R10P, pG244Q is the lack of epilepsy which is in contrast to the majority of the patients. and pK29del). To our knowledge these mutations are new, they segregate Hence, epilepsy is not a mandatory feature of patients with a mu- with the disease phenotype, and are absent in healthy subjects. The only tation. gene known for its involvement in the ID is PQB P1
  P08
.46  P08
.44 A microdeletion at Xp11.22 detected by whole exome sequencing Homozygote RTTN mutation in a patient with microcephaly and confirms SHROOM4 association with Stocco dos Santos syndrome and intellectual disability XLID in a large Greek kindred E. Yasar1, G. Yigit2, Y. Li2, J. Altmuller3, P. Nurnberg3, S. Karatoprak4, U. Kornak5,6,7, B. B. Hagnefelt1, C. Konialis1, K. Lilakos2, S. Karapanou1, C. Pangalos1; Wollnik2, I. Tekedereli1; 1InterGenetics-Diagnostic Genetics Center, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Haematology, 1Medical Genetics Division, Inonu University School of Medicine, Malatya, Turkey, University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece. 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Gottingen, Gottingen, Germany, 3Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Division, Inonu University School of Medicine, Malatya, Turkey, 5Institute of Introduction: The direct implication of several X-linked genes in XLID has Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 7Berlin- been questioned, mainly due to the lack of replication of the particular fin- Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, Charité - Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, ding and to inherent difficulties in validating de novo variants. We present Berlin, Germany. the identification of a microdeletion encompassing the SHROOM4 gene, detected through whole exome sequencing in a large Greek kindred with syndromic XLID, thus establishing the involvement of SHROOM4 in Stocco Introduction: Primary microcephaly is an important clinical symptom as- dos Santos Syndrome and syndromic XLID. sociated with various genetic disorders and can be found isolated or as one Materials and Methods: A 45 yr old male, presenting with mild dysmor- of the features of a syndrome. Microcephaly and intellectual disability usu- phic features, kyphosis, short stature, moderate intellectual disability and ally present together and more than 300 OMIM entries are described with with four other similarly affected male relatives, was referred for genetic the coexistence of these two features. In this report we describe a patient testing. Common genetic causes had been previously excluded. Whole exo- with microcephaly, deficiency of speech development, delayed motor skills, me sequencing (WES) was performed on an Ion Proton PI chip, followed seizures and a homozygous RTTN gene mutation. by variant prioritization utilizing a custom analysis pipeline, including CNV Materials and Methods: Cranial MRI, EEG, echocardiography, abdominal detection through a modified coverage analysis plug-in. USG, visual evoked potential (VEP) and brainstem auditory evoked response Results: Combined analysis of WES data from the proband revealed a high- (BAER) tests were performed. Karyotyping, FISH analysis and whole exome ly probable deletion of the Xp11.22 chromosomal region, approximately sequencing (WES) were performed. 1,85Mb in size encompassing OMIM genes SHROOM4 and BM P15
. Subse- Results: The index patient was 9 years and presented with primary micro- quent aCGH analysis confirmed the presence of the microdeletion in 3 other cephaly, developmental delay, recurrent seizures, and intellectual disability. similarly affected males in the family and the expected maternal segregation Cranial MRI showed pachygyria, neuronal migration anomaly and cerebro- in the kindred. cerebellar atrophy. EEG showed frontotemporal epilepsy. Echocardiogra- Conclusions: The findings presented herein provide important evidence phy, abdominal ultrasonography, VEP and BAER tests were normal. The confirming, the hitherto debatable, involvement of the SHROOM4 gene in patient had normal karyotype and FISH analysis for Prader Willi/Angel- syndromic XLID and its association with Stocco dos Santos syndrome. Fur- man Syndrome. WES analysis revealed a causative homozygous missense thermore, the employed data analysis pipeline illustrates the power of WES (c.2796A>T) RTTN gene mutation. analyses for the detection of constitutional CNV’s, particularly those asso- Conclusions: RTTN gene encodes rotatin protein which is localized at the cil- ciated with X-linked genetic disorders. iary basal bodies. In mice, rotation protein defects result in abnormal axial rotation and neural tube differentiation. Even though specific functions in human are still unknown, it is suggested that rotatin has similar effects on the development of the neural tube and the notochord. Since clinicaRl TvTarNi- ability in patients carrying autosomal recessive RTTN mutations has been described, it is important to further define the clinical spectrum of - associated disorders. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 165ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.47  P08
.49 A novel splicing mutation in the IQSE C2
 gene that modulates the KAT6A truncating mutation in a girl with global developmental delay phenotype severity in a family with intellectual disability and a distinctive phenotype I. Madrigal1, M. Alvarez-Mora1, J. Rossell2, L. Rodriguez-Revenga1, O. Karlberg3, S. Sauer4, M. Palomares Bralo1,2,3, S. García Miñaúr1,2,3, L. Fernández1,2,4, E. Vallespín5,6,4, Á. del A. Syvänen3, M. Mila1; Pozo Maté1,6,4, K. Ibáñez Garikano5,6,4, J. Silla1,6,4, F. Santos-Simarro1,6,4, R. Mena5,6,4, R. 1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Martín Arenas1, P. Tirado Requero7, E. Mansilla1,6,4, J. Nevado1,6,4, L. Alba Valdivia5, M. de Mallorca, Spain, 3Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala Torres1,6,4, P. Lapunzina Badía1,6,4; University, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, 1INGEMM,Hospital Universitario La Paz., Madrid, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación Germany. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación en Red Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain, 5INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz., Madrid, Spain, 6Instituto de Investigación Hospital Univeristario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 7Servicio de neurología Introduction: The IQSE C2
 is known to have a significant role in cytoskeletal infantil. Hospital Universitario La Paz., Madrid, Spain. organization, dendritic spine morphology and synaptic organization. Material and Methods: We studied a non-consanguineous family with five affected individuals with unexplained mild to severe ID and one with lear- Background and aims: Implementation of exome sequencing in individuals ning disabilities, studied by next generation sequencing. with intellectual disability syndromes has enabled the identification of de Results: Here we report on the first splicing variant in IQSE C2
 novo heterozygous mutations in up to 40% of patients with severe ID. Re- (g.88032_88033del; NG_021296.1) that co-segregates in a family diagnosed cently, heterozygous truncating mutations in KAT6A have been reported in with an X-linked form of ID. In a percentage of the cells, the variant activates 10 individuals by two independent groups as the cause of a distinct ID syn- an intraexonic splice acceptor site that abolishes 26 amino acids from the drome. Common features included global developmental delay, hypotonia, highly conserved PH domain of IQSE C2
 and creates a premature stop codon speech delay, microcephaly and/or craniosynostosis and craniofacial dis- 36 amino acids later in exon 13. Interestingly, the percentage of aberrant morphisms.Here we present a girl with a de novo heterozygous mutation in splicing seems to correlate with the severity of the disease in each patient. KAT6A with a phenotype that resembles the one reported in previous cases, The impact of this variant in the target tissue is unknown, but we can hy- reinforcing the association between KAT6A mutations and a new recogniz- pothesize that these differences may be related to the amount of abnormal able syndrome. IQSE C2
 transcript. Method: Whole exome sequencing was performed as a trio in this family in Conclusions: To our knowledge, we are reporting a novel mechanism of an attempt to identify de novo mutations causing the ID and the peculiar IQSE C2
 involvement in ID. Variants that affect splicing are related to many phenotype observed in this girl.At 22 months she presented with growth genetic diseases and the understanding of their role in disease expands and developmental delay, congenital heart defects, microcephaly and di- potential opportunities for gene therapy. Modulation of aberrant splicing stinctive facial features. Inicial investigations (cerebral MRI, skeletal survey, transcripts can become a potent therapeutic approach for many of these abdominal US scan, metabolic screen, standard chromosome analysis and a diseases. 60K customized aCGH) were all normal. This work was supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII; Results: A de novo mutation in KAT6A was detected: NM_001099412.1:c.4 PI12/00879), cofinanced by the Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional ‘una 228_4232delAAAGA(p.Lys1410Glyfs*7).This change was confirmed by San- manera de hacer Europa’ and AGAUR from the Autonomous Catalan Govern- ger sequencing. ment (2014 SGR603).  P08
.48 Discussion and conclusion: This case contributes to delineate the phenotype Mutation spectrum of KMT2D gene in Kabuki syndrome of a new intellectual disability syndrome associated with KAT6A mutations V. Gatinois1,2,3, G. Sarrabay1,2,3, G. Boursier1,4, A. Fabre1, E. Sanchez2, D. Genevieve2,3,5, I. and highlights the potential of whole exome sequencing for the identificati- Touitou1,2,3, M. Barat-Houari1,2; on of causal mutations in individuals with intellectual disability where no 1Laboratoire de génétique des maladies rares et autoinflammatoires - Hopital A. de diagnosis has been reached after routine investigations. Villeneuve - CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2Unité INSERM U1183 - Hôpital St This study is supported by Instituto de Salud Carlos III grant PI13/02010 Eloi - CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 3Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4UMR CNRS 9214 / Inserm U1046 - Université de Montpellier, Montpellier,  P08
.50 France, 5Service de Génétique Médicale - Hôpital A. de Villeneuve - CHU de Montpellier, KCNK9 imprinting syndrome - a treatable disorder? Montpellier, France. J. M. Graham1, N. Zadeh2, E. Tan3, M. Deardorff4, L. Sagi-Dain5, S. Shalev6; 1Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2CHOC Children’s Hospital, Orange, CA, United States, 3KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, Introduction: Kabuki syndrome is a rare genetic disease involving multiple 4Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Emek Medical malformations, intellectual deficiency and a distinctive facial phenotype. Ge- Center, Afula, Israel, 6Rapapport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel. netic transmission of Kabuki syndrome is mainly autosomal dominant with an estimated incidence of 1 in 32,000 births. In most cases, a KMT2D point mutation is responsible of the syndrome. Barel et al. (2008) mapped a new KCNK9 imprinting syndrome to chromo- Materials and Methods: A large cohort of French Kabuki patients was collec- somal region 8q24 in a large Arab Israeli family, and demonstrated that this ted. For each of them, a previous clinical assessment was performed and 260 syndrome is caused by a specific missense mutation 770G>A in exon 2, re- probands with a high confidence were selected. KMT2D analysis was done placing glycine at position 236 by arginine (G236R) in the maternal copy by Sanger sequencing. Highlighted variants were scored into a 5-categories of KCNK9 within this locus. KCNK9 (also called TASK3) encodes a member classification of pathogenicity based on scientific literature, public mutation of the two pore-domain potassium channel (K2P) subfamily. This gene is databases, population frequencies, mutation nature, family segregation and normally imprinted with paternal silencing, thus a mutation in the maternal prediction tools. copy of the gene will result in disease, whereas a mutation in the paternal Results: We identified more than 200 unique pathogenic or likely patho- copy will have no effect. Exome sequencing in 4 other patients with deve- genic mutations among which 50 were never published before. Truncating lopmental delay and central hypotonia revealed de novo G236R mutations. mutations were the most common type of variations. Missense mutations These patients demonstrated congenital hypotonia, variable cleft palate, showed a non homogenous distribution with high density in exons 50 to normal MRIs and EEGs, delayed development, and severe feeding problems. 53 encoding the highly conserved SET domain of KMT2D protein. Most of Associated facial dysmorphic features included dolichocephaly with bitem- mutations were de novo and a very few cases showed a dominant inheri- poral narrowing, short philtrum, tented upper lip, palatal abnormalities, tance from a parent with all or any clinical evidences of the proband. Some and small mandible. Features in older members of the original Arab Israeli of these de novo mutations were recurrent highlighting the existence of mu- family included intellectual disability of variable severity, severe feeding dif- tational hot spots on KMT2D. ficulties in infancy with dysphagia of liquids and dysphonia with a muffled Conclusions: This large cohort allowed us to collect and classify a large voice into early adulthood, generalized hypotonia, weakness of proximal number of unpublished mutations. This work has been shared on a public muscles, elongated face with narrow bitemporal diameter, and reduced fa- LOVD-database (http://databases.lovd.nl/shared/genes/KMT2D) in order cial movements. We describe the clinical features in the 4 recently recogni- to improve both interpretation of KMT2D variants and management of Ka- zed patients and compare them with those found in members of the original buki patients. Arab-Israeli family and suggest this may be a treatable disorder. 166 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.51  P08
.53 About a case with a novel KIRRE L3
 variant: further clinical Unreported mutation found by whole exome sequencing in the KPTN delineation of the associated phenotype gene is causative for Macrocephaly in an Iranian infant E. Ranza1, M. Guipponi1, J. L. Blouin1, P. Makrythanasis1, C. Gehrig1, C. Menache2, A. H. Galehdari1, G. Shariati2, A. Saberi3, M. Hamid4, E. Jahangiri1, F. Seifi1, N. Mazaheri1, M. Bottani1, A. Martin3, M. E. Williams3, S. E. Antonarakis1,4; Zamani1, J. Zeighami1, M. Sarvari1; 1HUG, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Neuropediatrics, Clinique 1Genetics, Ahwaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Narges Genetic Diagnostic Lab, Ahwaz, Iran, des Grangettes, Chêne-Bougeries, Switzerland, 3Department of Neurobiology and Islamic Republic of, 3Jondishapur University, Ahwaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Pasteur Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, Institute, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. 4Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Mutation in KPTN gene have been identified as causative for autosomal re- cessive mental retardation and clinically characterized by significantly be- KIRRE L3
is a cell-adhesion molecule of the immunoglobulin superfamily, low average general intellectual functioning associated with impairments that has been implicated in cerebral development, synaptic maintenance in adaptive behavior and manifested during the developmental period. Most and plasticity. It interacts with neuronal proteins, including the synaptic consistent features are global developmental delay, macrocephaly with scaffolding protein CASK, which is associated with an XK-lIiRnRkEedL 3intellectual frontal bossing, high levels of anxiety, repetitive speech, and mild to severe disability (ID) syndrome (OMIM#300749). speech deficits. Recent repots suggest that KPTN mutations are associated To date, only a few patients with pathogenic variants in have been with a broader phenotypic spectrum. We used next generation sequencing reported (OMIM#612581): their phenotype was described as mild to severe to find out disease causing gene confirmed by Sanger sequencing. We iden- ID, without further details, highlighting the need for a better clinical delinea- tified a novel nonsense mutation(c.609 G>A) in 14 years old Iranian patient tion of this syndrome. with autistic behavior, macrocephaly, skull deformity, speech impairment Here, we report a case of a 12 year-old male with moderate ID, obesity, and symptoms included hydrocephaly have been showed by MRI at birth. ADHD and behavioural problems, mostly hyperphagia. The patient also had This mutation was neither found in ExAC nor 1000G and ClinVar. mild dysmorphic features, such as enophthalmia, bulbous nose, short phil- trum, thin upFpMeRr1 lip and wide spaced teeth with two missing superior cani-  P08
.54 nes. Brain MRI revealed wide asymmetrical ventricular spaces. Exome sequencing reveals LINGO1 causative variants in autosomal Array-CGH, testindge nanovdo 15q11.2 DNA methylaKtIiRoRnE w L3
ere all normal. recessive intellectual disability and developmental delay Exome sequencing followed by targeted analysis of a panel of 990 ID ge- M. Ansar1, S. Riazuddin2, P. Makrythanasis1,3, M. T. Sarwar4, Z. Iqbal5,6, J. Khan4, S. A. nes, identified a novel missense variant in c.2019G>A:p. Paracha4, M. Hussain5,7, A. Razzaq5,7, D. L. Polla5, A. Suhail4, A. Holmgren8, D. Misceo8, A. P. (Met673Ile) which was classified as likely pathogenic according to the latest M. de Brouwer5, M. Guipponi1,3, F. A. Santoni1,3, E. Frengen8, J. Ahmed4, H. van Bokhoven5, ACMG guidelines. The functional impact of the mutant KIRRE L3
 on synapse S. Riazuddin9,10, S. E. Antonarakis1,3; development in neuronKaIl RcRelElsL 3is currently ongoing. 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, School of KThIRisR EstLu3dy will provide insight into the clinical spectrum associated with Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA, Baltimore, MD, United pathogenic variants in and the molecular mechanisms underlying States, 3Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, -related neurodevelopmental disorders. 4Institute of Basic Medical Sciences (IBMS), Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan, 5Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and  P08
.52 Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Department Efficacy of GenIDA, a family-oriented international online registry and of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 7National Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, 8Department of Medical clinical database for genetic forms of intellectual disability and/or Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 9Allama Iqbal autism, to collect medically relevant information on the Koolen - de Medical College, University of Health Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan, 10Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Vries Syndrome Bhutto Medical University, Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences, Islamabad, Pakistan. F. P. Colin1, K. P. J. Schellekens2, T. Mazzucotelli1, T. Kleefstra2, D. A. Koolen2, J. L. Mandel1,3,4; 1Translational medicine and neurogenetics dept., Institut de génétique et de biologie moléculaire et cellulaire (IGBMC) – INSERM U964 – CNRS UMR7104 – University of LINGO1, a transmembrane receptor, is predominantly expressed in central Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University nervous system and is involved in the inhibition of neuronal myelination, Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Genetic diagnostic laboratory, CHU, Strasbourg, through activation of the NgR1 signaling pathway. Various GWAS and ex- France, 4Collège de France, Chaire de génétique humaine, Paris, France. pression studies have implicated increased expression of this gene with Multiple Sclerosis, Essential Tremor and Parkinson’s disease. We have stu- died two unrelated Pakistani consanguineous families from different areas Intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are over- of the country. Eleven patients of both families presented with moderate lapping disorders that constitute a major public health problem with a cu- to severe intellectual disability, speech and motor delay. Out of 11 pati- mulated frequency of about 2.5%. Progress in genome analysis has allowed ents, four presented with microcephaly and seven with generalized tonic- the identification of many recurrent CNVs and more than 600 genes impli- clonic seizures. We performed exome sequencing in order to identify the cated in monogenic forms of ID/ASD. However, information on the clinical potential causal variant. We have identified a homozygous missense variant spectrum and natural history is often lacking behind. These data are essen- (NM_032808.6:c.869G>A:p.(Arg290His)) in family one and different homo- tial for improved clinical management of patients and genetic counselling of zygous variant in family two (NM_032808.6:c.863A>G p.(Tyr288Cys)) in family members. LINGO1, that were predicted to be pathogenic by SIFT, PolyPhen and Mu- Therefore, we initiated a unique database model for specific genetic causes tationTaster, and segregated with the phenotype in the respective families. of ID/ASD, called GenIDA (genida.unistra.fr), whereby clinical information NgR1 signaling pathway mediated by LINGO1-NgR1 complex, negatively is entered and updated by the family of the affected individual based on a regulates oligodendrocyte differentiation and neuronal survival. Previously structured clinical questionnaire that is available in multiple languages. We mouse and zebrafish models have been described and presented the role have used Koolen - de Vries syndrome (KdVS) as a test case for the GenIDA of LINGO1 in abnormal neuronal development and central nervous system approach. KdVS is a multi system condition characterized by (neonatal) hy- myelination. Taken together, our results indicate that LINGO1 missense va- potonia, moderate ID, epilepsy, congenital abnormalities and characteristic riants cause autosomal recessive intellectual disability. However, further facial dysmorphism. We transferred a large existing family-based KdVS clini- functional studies are warranted to dissect the exact role of the identified cal dataset (>70 cases) and asked parents to update the data on the GenIDA variants. website. This project shows the willingness of parents to participate in studies dealing with rare diseases affecting their child. Direct comparison with data collected by clinicians allowed us to evaluate the quality of the data entered by families, search for novel and/or more penetrant comorbidities (i e. be- havioral problems like hyperactivity were significantly more reported) and generate a first natural history analysis. - University of Strasbourg Institute of Advanced Study - Fondation University of Strasbourg ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 167ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.55 Recurrence of MEF2C heterozygous mutation in siblings indicating parental germline mosaicism pronounced eyebrows, down turned corners of the mouth, and a prominent I. K. Nielsen1, I. S. Pedersen2, V. Q. Le2, A. Ernst2, J. R. Ostergaard3; philtrum. MEF2C mutations are estimated to account for 1% patients with 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, severe mental retardation and 2% Rett-like patients, with a phenotype simi- 2Section of Molecular Diagnostics, Clinical Biochemistry, Aalborg University Hospital, lar to those with the microdeletion. Aalborg, Denmark, 3Department of Pediatrics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, We report 5 new patients seen by our team, 4 with deletions including Denmark. MEF2C and one with a point mutation. We compare this additional pheno- typic data with that reported in the literature, and including a patient with MEF2C the deletion of both MEF2C and the adjacent RASA1 who also presents with Introduction: The autosomal dominant mental retardation syndrome-20 capillary malformation, confirming a previously reported association. We (MRD20) is caused by a heterozygous mutation in the gene and also discuss the facial phenotype of our patients, with reference to the re- characMteEriFz2eCd by severe intellectual disability with absent speech, limited cent literature around MEF2C as a transcription factor in craniofacial de- walking abilities, hand stereotypies, epilepsy, and lack of major malforma- velopment. tions. is essential for early neurogenesis, neuronal migration and differentiation of the brain. To date, all individuals reported have been sim-  P08
.57 plex cases, resulting from de novo deletions or point mutations. We report Novel PGA P1
 gene mutation in patients with mental retardation in a a case with putative gonadal mosaicism in a parent leading to siblings with Turkish family MRD20. L. Özer1, D. Trujillano2, E. Ünsal3, S. Aktuna3, F. Akyiğit1, P. Çelikkol1, A. Rolfs4, V. Baltacı5; 1Mikrogen Genetic Diagnosis Center, Ankara, Turkey, 2Centogene, Rostock, Germany, Material and methods: Female siblings (2 and 10 yrs) of healthy unrelated 3İstanbul Yeni Yüzyıl University School of Medicine ,Department of Medical Biology and parents. The children had a similar phenotype with severe intellectual disa- Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey, 4Centogene, Rostock, Turkey, 5İstanbul Yeni Yüzyıl University bility, absent spoken language, few seizures, stereotypic hand movements, School of Medicine ,Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, iSTANBUL, Turkey. unstable wide-based gait, and minor facial dysmorphism. Whole exome sequencing was carried out and mutations were validMatEedF Cb2y, Sanger sequencing. Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the PGA P1
 gene were reported as cau- Results: A pathogenic heterozygous frame-shift mutation in sative for autosomal recessive mental retardation type 42 and hereditary NM_001193347.1:c.582delT was detected in lymphocytes from both girls. spastic paraplegia type 67. Materials and Methods: Here we represent a The mutation was not found in lymphocytes from any of the parents. The Turkish family with two affected children who were born as the first (14 parents did n ot wish to have any other samples taken in order to confirm a years old male) and second child(11 years old male) of consanguineous fa- somatic or germline parental mosaicism. mily. Growth and motor delay, delayed language development, short stature, Conclusions:Finding the same mutation in siblings, and not in the parents, intellectual disability, stereotypic movements, autistic features, large ears, indicates parental gonadal mosaicism. To the authors’ knowledge, this has abnormality of the pinna, flattened nasal bridge, shortening of all distal pha- not been described before for MRD20, suggesting that the recurrence risk, langes, clinodactyly of 5th finger were noted in two patients. The second for parents with a child with MRD20, might be higher than by chance alone. child had epileptic seizures which were not seen in first child. Cranial MRI Considerations of (and testing for) mosaicism might be considered a helpful of first child revealed bilateral myelinisation delay at temporal lobes, thin- tool in the genetic counseling of these families. ning of corpus callosum.Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed for patients and their parents. Results : WES analysis revealed homozygous pre-  P08
.56 viously unreported variant in exon 25 of the PGA P1
 gene, c.2349delins14 MEF2C mutations in the clinic - a case series (p.His783Glnfs*2) in patients. Both parents are heterozygous carrier of the C. Breen1,2, J. Innes1,2, J. Clayton-Smith1,2, E. A. Jones1,2, H. Kingston1,2, W. Reardon1,2, B. Kerr1,2, S. Douzgou1,2; detected variant. Conclusions: We present a novel PGA P1
variant in a Tur- 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Institute of kish family. Few cases were reported about PGA P1
 mutations in patients Human Development Faculty of Medical & Human Sciences, University of Manchester, with intellectual disability. Our case presentation will be helpful to define Manchester, United Kingdom. the phenotype of the patients with PGA P1
 mutations and to confirm the cli- nical findings of previous studies and also to shed light on the further stu- dies. PGA P1
 Patients with chromosome 5q14.3q15 microdeletions involving the phe- nocritical MEF2C gene present with features including early and severe de- Table 1. Reported Cases with Mutations: velopmental delay including absence of speech and hypotonia; many remain unable to walk unaided. A facial gestalt includes a high and wide forehead, PATIENT AGE SEX ORIGIN CLINICAL FEATURES MUTATION REFERENCES 1,2 4 ,2 F,M Syrian developmental delay, hypotonia,seizures ,stereotypic c.589_591del Murakami et al., movements, large ears, flattenend nasal bridge 2014 3,4 6, 9 M,M ? spastisity, developmental delay c.1952+1G4T Novarino et al, months 2014 5 7 M ? cerebral visual impairment ,strabismus, nystagmus, c.274_276del Bosch et al , 2015 intellectual disability, hypotonia, upward slanting andc.921_925del palpebral fissures, deep-set eyes, large ear lobes, prominent helices and antihelices, teeth showed extra mamelons with diminished enamel 6,7 9,5 F,M Turkish severe psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, nystagmus, (c.1090-2A>G; IV S9
- Granzow et al, retinal dystrophy, comprised mild synophris, low 2A>G; p.?) 2015 frontal and posterior hair line, hypertelorism, bifid PRESENT CASE uvula, mild pectus excavatum and broad 1st toes. 8,9 11,14 M,M Turkish developmental delay, seizures ,stereotypic movements, c.2349delins14 autistic features ,large ears,clinodactyly ,flattened nasal bridge, strabismus 168 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.58 Microdeletion located in Xq22 in a girl. Confirmation of a specific phenotype Materials and Methods F. Giuliano1, H. Karmous-Benailly1, M. Dayem-Quere1, C. Desaldeleer2, C. Costet-Fighiera3, We analyzed consanguineous family with two affected children having G. Pitelet2; DMMD. Other two affected children diagnosed with ULD. 2 affected sibs 1Department of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice, Nice, France, were genotyped using SNP array. Homozygous regions were detected using 2Department of Pediatrics, Hôpitaux Pédiatriques de Nice, CHU Lenval, Nice, France, PLINK. WES was performed for 2 affected sibs. In addition, analysis of CSTB 3Consultation of Ophtalmology, Clinique Saint George, Nice, France. gene was performed for promoter region via longPCR, as mutations in CSTB have been implicated in ULD. Results Alteration of proteolipid protein 1 gene (PL P1
) mapped in Xq22 is usual- According to previous results, homozygous haplotypes were valid for 6 di- ly known to lead to an X-linked hypomyelination disorder, Pelizeus Merz- stinct chromosomes. Variants filtered from WES data solely for homozygous bacher desease (PMD; MIM =312080). Mutations and duplications are the regions. Amongst, novel variants with pathogenic affect on protein were main causes of PLP dysfunction in affected patients. Rare deletions have prioritized. Evaluating homozygous haplotypes for filtered variants, segre- been described, all of them of small size. gation analysis in the family is continuing. Five females with microdeletion, exactly mapped in Xq22 are reported LongPCR analysis revealed repeat expansion of almost 60 copies in promo- [Yamamoto et al, 2014], but do not share the similar features as PMD male ter region in ULD patients. However, they appear to share a similar phenotype, including se- Conclusions vere developmental delay, major sleep disturbance, similar facial features, Parallel methods used to explain genetic background of DMMD and preli- ophthalmologic abnormalities and feeding difficulties. Cerebral MRI may minary analysis are still continuing. Also we detected repeat expansion in show thin corpus callosum and for some delayed myelination. CSTB gene’s promoter for affected sibs. We identified a female patient with de novo copy number aberration located Project supported: Istanbul Development Agency:TR10/15/YNK/0093 and in Xq22. We compare our clinical, biological and radiological data with the TUBITAK:113 S331
 five affected ones previously described by Yamamoto et al, aiming to demon- strate that Xq22 deletions in female should be considered as responsible for  P08
.62 a specific phenotype. Expanding the phenotype associated with Naa10 related N-terminal acetylation deficiency  P08
.60 C. Saunier1, S. Støve2, B. Popp3, B. Gérard4, M. Blenski5, N. AhMew6, C. de Bie7, P. Diagnostic challenges due to mosaics Goldenberg8, B. Isidor9, B. Keren10, B. Leheup11, L. Lampert11, C. Mignot12, K. Tezcan13, G. C. Rusu1, A. Sireteanu2, M. Gramescu1, R. Popescu1, E. Gorduza1; Mancini14, C. Nava10, M. Wasserstein15, A. Bruel16, J. Thevenon1, A. Masurel1, Y. Duffourd16, 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Regional Institute of Oncology, P. Kuentz16, F. Huet16, J. Rivière16, M. Slegtenhorst14, L. Faivre16, A. Piton4, A. Reis3, T. Iasi, Romania. Arnesen17, C. Thauvin-Robinet16, C. Zweier3; 1CHU, DIJON, France, 2University of Bergen,, Bergen, Norway, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany, 4CHU, Strasbourg, France, 5University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 6Children‘s National We present 4 different cases to illustrate diagnostic challenges and genetic Medical Center,, Washington, WA, United States, 7UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, counseling issues raised by mosaics. 8Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 9CHU, Nantes, France, 10AP- Case 1: 10 years old male, first child of a young, healthy, unrelated couple. HP, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 11CHU, Nancy, France, 12APHP, Groupe No family history. Physical examination reveals: hypertelorism, hypospadias Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 13Kaiser Permanente, Sacramento, CA, United and developmental delay. Brain MRI identified Dandy-Walker malformation. States, 14Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 15Icahn School of Clinical suspicion of Opitz G/BBB syndrome was raised, but molecular test Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 16CHU / Université de Bourgogne, was normal. In time, areas of dry skin along Blaschko lines became evident DIJON, France, 17Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. and new DNA test identified an X chromosome microdeletion in mosaic. Case 2: 13 years old female, the only child of a young, healthy, unrelated couple. As an infant she presented with milia, cleft palate, lobulated tongue Background: N-terminal acetylation is a common protein modification in eu- and digital anomalies, features highly suggestive for OFD1 syndrome, but karyotes associated with numerous cellular processes. Inherited mutations molecular testing was normal. With age, pigmentary areas along Blaschko in NAA10, encoding the catalytic subunit of the major N-terminal acetyla- lines became evident, suggesting the presence of a mosaic. tion complex NatA have been associated with diverse, syndromic X-linked Case 3: 3 years old macrosomic female that associates mild dysmorphic face, recessive disorders, while de novo missense mutations have been reported blindness, deafness, seizures and severe intellectual disability. The presence in one male and one female individual with severe intellectual disability but of the mosaic was suggested by 2 small skin defects. Blood investigations otherwise unspecific phenotypes. Thus, the full genetic and clinical spec- have been normal, but DNA investigations from oral cells revealed 12p tetra- trum of Naa10 deficiency is yet to be delineated. somy and established the diagnosis of Pallister-Killian syndrome. Methods and Results: Whole exome or panel sequencing identified three dif- Case 4: 5 years old male with mild dysmorphic face, very deep palmar and ferent novel and one known missense mutation in NAA10, de novo in eleven plantar creases, cryptorchydism and developmental delay. The karyotype females, and due to maternal germ line mosaicism in another girl and her revealed trisomy 8 in mosaic (5 lines). more severely affected and deceased brother. Common phenotypes in the In conclusion, we present 4 cases with mosaics to illustrate suggestive fea- affected females included severe intellectual disability and postnatal growth tures and to discuss challenges related to laboratory diagnosis and genetic failure with pronounced microcephaly. In vitro enzymatic assays for the no- counseling. vel, recurrent mutations p.(Arg83Cys) and p.(Phe128Leu) revealed a redu- ced catalytic activity. X-inactivation was random in four of six tested females.  P08
.61 Conclusions: We report on 12 females with mutations in NAA10 and thus Genetic analysis of delayed motor mental development and further expand the mutational and clinical spectrum. The core phenotype Unverricht-Lundborg disease in a large highly consanguineous family of X-linked Naa10 related N-terminal-acetyltransferase deficiency in both from Turkey males and females includes developmental delay, severe intellectual disabi- E. Yucesan1, F. Tuncer1, M. Calik2, N. Bebek3, U. Ozbek1, S. Ugur Iseri1; lity, postnatal growth failure with severe microcephaly and skeletal or car- 1Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Harran University, Harran diac anomalies. Genotype-phenotype correlations within and between both Faculty of Medicine, Sanliurfa, Turkey, 3İstanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. genders are complex and may include various factors such as location and nature of mutations, enzymatic stability and activity, and X-inactivation in females. Combined analysis of homozygosity mapping and whole exome sequencing  P08
.63 (WES) are powerful tool to detect pathogenic variants associated with re- Genetic disease amongst children referred to an East London cessive disorders. Herein, WES and SNP array used for clarifying delayed neurodevelopmental clinic over fifteen years motor mental development (DMMD). We also conducted genetic test for S. K. Best1, M. Bajaj1, E. Rosser2; Unverricht-Lundborg Disease (ULD) in family for different individuals. 1Wellington Way Children‘s Centre, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, Introduction 2Clinical Genetics Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS We ascertained consanguineous family presenting two different phenotype, Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. DMMD, Unverricht-Lundborg Disease (ULD) respectively. In this study, we applied two-step approach, where SNP array analysis, defining homozygosi- ty regions were used to limit exome variants to specific chromosomal regi- Introduction: Tower Hamlets in East London is an ethnically diverse area ons. Also mutation analysis of CSTB foEr SUHLDG. 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAw INit h | Whig Wh l Wev .e Els S o Hf Gco .n Osa Rn Gguinity. Patients referred to the neurodev 1el 6op 9- mental clinic with developmental delay or congenital abnormalities bet-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.65 Mendeliome sequencing increases the diagnostic yield in patients ween 1999 and 2013 were evaluated for underlying diagnoses and the use with unexplained intellectual disability by 30% (a single center of genetic testing. experience) Methods: Clinical notes were reviewed. Genetic test results were obtained. A. Rump1, L. Mackenroth1, A. Kahlert1, J. Lemke2, K. Hackmann1, E. Betcheva-Krajcir1, A. Excel analysis and Chi-squared testing was performed. Undiagnosed pati- Krüger1, R. Opitz3, F. Kuhlee1, A. Tzschach1, E. Schröck1, N. Di Donato1; ents were labelled “likely” genetic disease if they had 2/3 of: developmental 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, delay, congenital abnormality or parental consanguinity, and “highly likely” Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 3Abteilung für Gynäkologie und if they had 3/3. Undiagnosed patients with obvious alternative causes were Geburtshilfe, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, not labelled. Dresden, Germany. Results: 749 patients were included. 53.8% (403) had undergone genetic testing, of which 26.2% (164) had a confirmed genetic diagnosis. 40.7% of those undergoing genetic testing had a confirmed genetic diagnosis Introduction: Despite extensive use of chromosomal microarrays, up to 50% (128/403). A further 123 patients were thought likely/very likely to a have of children with developmental delay still remain undiagnosed. Therefore, an undiagnosed genetic disorder, of which 77 (62.6%) had known consan- we applied mendeliome sequencing to 57 index patients with developmen- guineous parents. Confirmed genetic diagnosis was statistically significant- tal delay or intellectual disability (ID) and pre-excluded genomic imbalan- ly more common amongst the consanguineous population than the known ces. non-consanguineous population (43/128 vs 75/333, p<0.025). Method: Genomic DNA samples of 28 parent-child trios plus 29 individu- The proportion undergoing genetic testing increased over time. Microarray als were analyzed for mutations in 4813 genes, using the TruSightOne gene testing was the most common test used and became more prevalent after panel on the MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Sequence variants 2010. were called by two independent platforms: the GATK pipeline installed on 84 different genetic diseases were confirmed. Syndromic disorders and an- the MiSeq and the CLC Biomedical Genomics platform (Qiagen, Hilden, Ger- euploidies were most common. many). All variants with putative effect on amino acid level were screened Conclusions: Genetic disease was common amongst children referred to the for clinical und molecular concordance (i.e. disease-association of the gene, neurodevelopmental clinic and genetic testing is important in their evalua- published mutation) and all modes of inheritance (dominant de novo, auto- tion. Consanguinity significantly increases the likelihood of causal genetic somal recessive, X-recessive) were considered. The results were discussed disease. Neurosusceptibility microdeletions/microduplications are under- in a team of clinicians and molecular geneticists and relevant variants were represented as microarray testing was not routinely available throughout validated by Sanger-sequencing. this period. Results: Using the mendeliome in a diagnostic setting, we established a  P08
.64 diagnosis in 16 of the 57 index patients (28%). For seven further patients, Mosaic Xq26.2q26.3 duplications associated with intellectual we found one or two possibly causative candidates (13%). 5 patients (9%) disability and congenital malformations: a new chromosomal showed incidental findings which either made treatment or surveillance syndrome? necessary (homozygous MUTYH-mutations, SDHA-mutation) or led to an S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, Y. B. Yurov2,1,3, M. A. Zelenova2,1,3, O. S. Kurinnaia1,2,3, K. Vasin2,1,3, V. S. increased risk for a recessive disease in children (PAH- or CFTR-mutations). Kravets1,3,2, M. Gordeeva1, I. Y. Iourov2,1,4; Conclusion: Mendeliome sequencing significantly increases the diagnostic 1Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics named after Y.E Veltishev at the Pirogov yield in patients with ID unsolved by previous routine testing (array-CGH, Russian National Research Medical University, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian karyotyping). However, variant interpretation remains challenging and re- Federation, 2Mental Health Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow State quires standardized procedures for using the new technology in a standard University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of diagnostic setting. Health, Moscow, Russian Federation.  P08
.66 Evaluation of non-coding copy number variants in neurodevelopmental disorders Introduction. Recurrent mosaic duplications are exclusive in the available R. Asadollahi, A. Mihai, B. Oneda, R. Baldinger, R. Reissmann, P. Boonsawat, M. Papik, M. literature. This is especially the case in terms of clinically relevant X chro- Zweier, S. Azzarello-Burri, A. Baumer, P. Joset, K. Steindl, A. Rauch; mosome duplications in females. However, a growing amount of reports on Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. somatic genome variations causing intellectual disability and congenital malformations allows speculations that mosaic (sub)chromosomal rear- rangements might be more common and clinically relevant than previously The genome-wide significance of non-coding CNVs has not been studied in recognized. neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Therefore, by high-resolution chro- Materials and Methods. Molecular karyotyping using SNP/oligonucleotide mosomal microarray analysis, we investigated all non-coding CNVs in 121 microarray (resolution: >1 kbp) was performed in a cohort of 402 children patients with undiagnosed NDDs. We detected 548 rare non-coding variants with intellectual disability, autism, epilepsy and/or congenital malformati- with a median size of 8 kb, of which 94 (~17%) were seen < 3 times in our ons. total in-house arrays and had medium to high regulatory scores. The scoring Results. Four girls (~1%) have exhibited mosaic duplications spanning system was based on the evolutionary conservation and affected non-coding Xq26.2q26.3. RNAs, cis-regulatory elements and histone modification markers. Conside- The age varied from 1 year 1 month to 6 years. Shared features included ring the pattern of inheritance and/or literature assessment, we classified 9 intellectual disability/developmental delay, microcephaly, broad phyGltPruCm3, of 94 (~9.6%) as strong candidates of wAhLCicAhM 6 wereG tRruMe5 positive. From the- ManIdR 1w9iBd2e nMasIRal1 b0r6iAdg, eP,H loFn6g, HlaPsRhTes1,, pMtoIRsi5s0; o3n, Me pIRa4ti2e4n,t PdLeAmCo1n.strated autistic se variants, two (25 kb de novo and 122 kb inherited losses) were within the features. The overlapping region for all duplicatioPnHs iFn6cludeHd  P8
R gTe1nes: regulatory enriched intronic parts of and respectively, both , Although non- involved in majorS YnAePu1ronal processes. We also detected a 21 kb maternal- mosaic duplication in this region involving genes and has been ly inherited X-chromosomal gain in a boy, overlapping the non-codiDnAgA lMas1t described in the literature previously, the lack of phenotypic resemblance to exonD oAfC tTh1e gene and strong regulatory elements in cis. Furthermore, the detected cases and an original bioinformatics analysis allow the specu- we found a 44 kb loss affecting strong regulatory elements near the lation that mosaic duplications Xq26.2q26.3 might be a new chromosomal and involved in the Wnt signaling pathway which co-segregated with syndrome associated with intellectual disability and congenital malforma- the phenotype in a family with three affected members. Of note, in the latter tions. two cases, whole exome sequencing did not reveal any pathogenic variant. Conclusions. Our study demonstrates that mosaic duplications Xq26.2q26.3 Accordingly, we were able to illustrate a genome-wide overview of rare non- are relatively common in children with intellectual disability, autism, epi- coding CNVs in patients with NDDs as well as non-coding CNVs possibly con- lepsy and/or congenital malformations. Furthermore, our findings demon- tributing to the phenotypes of 4 (3.3%) of the patients. strate the possibility that mosaic chromosomal rearrangements can be a cause for a new chromosomal syndrome. Supported by the Russian Science Foundation (grant: 14-15-00411). 170 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.67 Molecular characterization of NRXN1 deletions from 19,263 clinical microarray cases identifies exons important for neurodevelopmental Quantitative PCR was performed using 7300 Real Time PCR System (Ap- disease expression plied BioSystems, Foster City, CA, USA) on the samples of our proband and C. Lowther1, M. Speevak2, C. Armour3, E. Goh2, G. Graham4, C. Li4, S. Zeesman5, M. his parents to determine the inheritance of chromosomPaAl aRbKe2rration. Nowaczyk5, L. Schultz5, A. Morra2, R. Nicolson6, P. Bikangaga7, D. Samdup8, M. Zaazou2, K. Results: Array-CGH revealed a duplication of 231kb in the chromosome Boyd9, J. Jung10, V. Siu11, M. Rajguru12, S. Goobie11, M. Tarnopolsky13, C. Prasad11, P. Dick14, 6q26 which only included two exons (exon 3 and 4) of gene. He had A. Hussain10, M. Walinga15, R. Reijenga16, M. Gazzellone17, A. Lionel17, C. Marshall17, S. no other pat hogenetic CNV. Real Time PCR revealed that the rearrangPeAmReKn2t Scherer17,18, D. Stavropoulos19, E. McCready20, A. Bassett1; was paternally inherited. 1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Trillium Health Partners Credit Valley Conclusion:Our patient supports the positive association between Site, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Regional Genetics Program, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, gene damages and neurocognitive and developmental anomalies. ON, Canada, 5McMaster Children‘s Hospital, Department of Pediatrics and Clinical  P08
.69 Genetics Program, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 6Departments of Psychiatry, Western Effect of intranasal insulin on development in Phelan-McDermid University, London, ON, Canada, 7William Osler Health Centre, Brampton, ON, Canada, 8Hotel Dieu Hospital, Child Development Centre, Kingston, ON, Canada, 9Bethesda syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial Services, Thorold, ON, Canada, 10London Health Sciences Centre, Children’s Hospital R. J. Zwanenburg1, G. Bocca2, S. A. J. Ruiter3, J. H. Dillingh4, B. C. T. Flapper2, E. R. van den of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 11Department of Pediatrics, Schulich School Heuvel5, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1; of Medicine and Dentistry, London, ON, Canada, 12Cambridge Memorial Hospital, 1Department of Genetics, UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Paediatrics, Cambridge, ON, Canada, 13Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Centre of Expertise for Child Development Care ON, Canada, 14Grey Bruce Health Services, Owen Sound, ON, Canada, 15Vanboeijen, Assen, and Research, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Netherlands, 16Ipse de Bruggen, Zwammerdam, Netherlands, 17The Centre for Applied Pharmacology, UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Department of Mathematics and Genomics, Toronto, ON, Canada, 18McLaughlin Centre and Department of Molecular Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, Netherlands. Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 19Cytogeneitcs Laboratory, Department of Pediatric Laboratory Medicine, the Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 20Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Introduction: Phelan-McDermid (PMS) or 22q13.3 deletion syndrome is a Hamilton, ON, Canada. rare neurodevelopmental disorder. Clinical features include moderate to severe intellectual disability and behavioural problems in the autism spec- trum. Other researchers had observed a beneficial effect of intranasal insu- Purpose: The purpose of the current study was to assess the penetrance of lin on development and behaviour in a pilot study in six children with PMS. NRXN1 deletions. To validate this effect, we conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo- Methods: We compared the prevalence of NRXN1 deletions identified controlled clinical trial using a stepped-wedge design. among 19,263 clinically referred cases to that of 15,264 controls. The bur- Material and methods: Twentyfive children aged 1 to 16 years with a 22q13.3 den of additional clinically relevant CNVs was used as a proxy to estimate deletion including the SHANK3-gene participated in the clinical trial for a the relative penetrance of NRXN1 deletions. period of 18 months. Starting 6 months before the trial, children were sy- Results: We identified 41 (0.21%) previously unreported exonic NRXN1 stematically assessed for development and behaviour every 6 months. The deletions ascertained for DD/ID, significantly greater than in controls 2nd, 3rd and 4th assessments were followed by daily nose sprays containing [OR=8.33 (95% CI 2.98-23.25), p< 0.0001)]. Ten (22.7%) of these had a either insulin or placebo for a 6-month period. A 5th assessment was done second clinically relevant CNV. Subjects with a deletion near the 3’ end of directly after the end of the trial. NRXN1 were significantly more likely to have a second rare CNV than sub- Results: Intranasal insulin did not cause serious adverse events. It increased jects with a 5’ NRXN1 deletion [OR=19.30 (95% CI 3.50-147.24), p<0.0001]. the level of developmental functioning by 0.4-1.4 months per 6-month pe- The prevalence of intronic NRXN1 deletions was not statistically different riod that, while not statistically significant in this small group, was conside- between cases and controls (p=0.613). The majority (63.2%) of intronic red clinically relevant. A stronger, significant effect was observed in children NRXN1 deletion cases had a second rare CNV, a five-fold greater prevalence older than 3 years, who usually show a decrease of developmental growth. than for exonic NRXN1 deletion cases (p=0.003). Conclusions: Although the application of intranasal insulin is a promising Conclusions: The results support the importance of exons near the 5’ end of therapeutic approach, clinical trials in larger study populations are required NRXN1 in the expression of neurodevelopmental disorders. Intronic NRXN1 to prove the therapeutic effect of intranasal insulin in PMS. deletions do not appear to substantially increase the risk for clinical phe- Grant: Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development notypes. 113-20-2009 Funding support: C.L. is supported by a Frederick Banting and Charles Best Contact: 22q13@umcg.nl CIHR Doctoral Award. A.S.B. holds the Canadian Research Chair in Schizo- phrenia Genetics and Genomic Disorders and the Dalglish Chair in 22q11.2  P08
.70 Deletion Syndrome. S.W.S. holds the GlaxoSmithKline-CIHR Endowed Chair Diagnostic flow-chart to improve the detection rate and to uncover in Genomic Sciences at the Hospital for Sick Children and University of To- the genetic heterogeneity in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome: experience on ronto. 260 subjects M. Zollino, S. Ricciardi, S. Frangella, D. Orteschi, M. Murdolo, P. Doronzio, S. Lattante, G.  P08
.68 Marangi; Intragenic duplication of the PARK2 gene contributes to Institute of Genomic Medicine, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy. developmental delay P. Dello Russo, C. Gnan, A. Franzoni, N. Passon, F. Baldan, L. Allegri, G. Damante; Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria S.Maria della Misericordia, Udine, Italy. Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is defined by the association of severe intel- lectual disability, a typical facial gestalt and additional features, including breathing abnormalities. It is caused by haploinsuffciency of the TCF4 gene. Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASDs) are childhood neurodeve- The PTHS phenotype overlaps with different conditions, including mainly lopmental disorders genetically heterogeneous, with evidencUe BfoEr3 hAu, PnAdRreKd2s, Angelman, but also Mowat-Wilson, Christianson and Rett syndromes. RofF sWuDsc2eptibiFliBtyX Olo4c0i. Recently it has been reported that CNVs within or sur- A total of 260 subjects were referred because of clinical suspicion of PTHS. ProAuRnKd2ing genes involved in the ubiquitin pathways, including The genetic diagnosis was obtained in 40/260 (15%) as follows: TCF4 in- and , were detected as possible cause for ASD. Furthermore tragenic variants (30); large 18q21 deletions (2); partial TCF4 deletion (1); gene was identified as candidate gene for attention-deficit/hyperac- balanced de novo translocations (2); MEC P2
 variants (2); UB E3
A variant tivity disorder. The precise function of this gene is unknown yet; however (1); ZEB2 variants (2). the parkin protein seems implicated inP dAoRpKa2minergic transmission. All patients were first distinguished into two categories, depending on clini- Recently was identified a 314kb copy number gain in the long arm of chro- cal presentation. Group A included 125 subjects who all had severe ID with mosome 6q26 including only exon 2 of gene associated to a 3-month- nearly absent speech and high clinical score for PTHS; group B included the old female with neurological problems. remaining 135 subjects with mild to moderate ID and low clinical score for We report a ten-year-old boy who showed behavior problems, language dif- PTHS. ficulties, psychomotor r etardation, cognitive impairment, and no dysmor- All patients with a proven genomic mutation were in group A, increasing phic features. test sensitivity from 15% to 32%. Materials and Methods:Array-CGH assay was carried out (Agilent Human A clinically driven flowchart is suggested in PTHS phenotype, including step Genome CGH oligonucleotide array 180k, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, by step the following tests: 1)TCF4 analysis; 2) array-CGH; 3) conventional CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions on a DNA sample isola- cytogenetics; 4) NGS gene panel analysis (TCF4, CNTNA P2
, NRXN1, UB E3
A, ted from peripheral blood cells. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPASINLC 9| AW6,W MEWCP. E2
S, CHDGKL.O5, RFOGXG1, MEF2C, ZEB2, ATRX); 5) whole exom1e7 s1e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.73 First case of concurrent RAI1 mutation and ANKRD11 partial deletion quencing (WES). Variants detected by WES are presented separatedly, since in a girl with features of Smith Magenis and KBG syndromes a limited number of patients has been analyzed. I. Bestetti1,2, C. Picinelli1, M. Crippa1, M. Mencarelli3, L. Larizza1, D. Milani4, P. Finelli1,2; Nosological implications are discussed. 1Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Supported by Telethon grant nr: GEP 14089. Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 3Molecular Biology Laboratory, IRCCS  P08
.71 Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 4Medical Genetic Unit, Pediatric Highly Two unrelated cases with rare mosaic deletions affecting TCF4 gene, Intensive Care, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy. exhibiting different phenotypes A. Alexandrou1, G. A. Tanteles2,3, I. Papaevripidou1, A. Ketoni1, N. Salameh1, P. Evangelidou1, C. Sismani1, V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou2,3; 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Smith Magenis (SMS) and KBG syndromes are rare autosomal dominant dis- Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Clinical Genetics Department, The Cyprus Institute of orders characterized by distinctive facial features and intellectual disability Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre, (ID), caused by RAI1 and ANKRD11 haploinsufficiency, respectively. Nicosia, Cyprus. Here we describe a 46,XX girl aged 8 years, who shows mild to moderate facial dysmorphisms, ID, and an autism spectrum disorder. Upon exclusion of 17p11.2 SMS locus deletion by previous genetic investigation, RAI1 muta- Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder cha- tional screening identified an unreported heterozygous missense mutation racterized by a distinctive phenotype. PTHS phenotype is caused by mutati- (p.G1036R) inherited from the healthy father who shares with his daugh- ons or variable size deletions involving TCF4 gene (18q21) implying haplo- ter the facial aspect only. MLPA and RT-qPCR analyses on RAI1 revealed a insufficiency of this gene. Mosaic structural rearrangements are extremely wild type condition, whereas high resolution array-CGH analysis disclosed rare events and pose great challenges for interpretation. There is very limi- a rare de novo deletion at 16q24.3, never reported in healthy subjects. The ted literature on mosaic deletions affecting TCF4 gene in which patients are deletion affects the last two exons and the 3’UTR of ANKRD11. RT-qPCR per- described to manifest the full spectrum of the disorder. Herein, we report formed on the KBG gene revealed the simultaneous existence of wild type two unrelated individuals bearing deletions in a low mosaic state. and truncated mRNA, each present at 50% of the total amount detected in The first case is the non-affected father of a patient with a PTHS spectrum healthy controls. phenotype. A deletion of 263.4 kb was identified in the patient removing Based on these findings and considering that ANKRD11 mutations have been exons 4-9 of TCF4 gene. The deletion was inherited from the father who reported in a few clinically borderline Cornelia de Lange (CdLS) patients, a carries the deletion in a mosaic state (~20%). This is the first PTHS case clinical revaluation of the proband was performed. Neither microcephaly reported in the literature of a deletion affecting TCF4 inherited from a clini- and developmental delay, generally associated to CdLS, nor macrodontia cally unaffected parent. and short stature, hallmarks of the classic KBG phenotype, were observed. The second case involves a patient with a phenotype consistent with PTHS. However, the proband shows a composite phenotype mixing up KBG and Array-CGH revealed a very low mosaic (15%) 18q21.2q21.33 deletion of SMS signs. This peculiar clinical picture might result from the combined ef- 10.17Mb in size harbouring theTCF4 gene which was confirm by FISH ana- fect of RAI1 mutation and ANKRD11 de novo deletion, which does not likely lysis (11%). Family studies are ongoing. imply gene haploinsufficiency, as in classical SMS and KBG syndromes. Our findings and review of the literature support that deletions affecting TCF4 independent of their size appear to have no significant effect on the se-  P08
.74 verity of the syndrome. However, it is also demonstrated that mosaic 18q21 Copy number variation in RBFOX1 and DOCK8: Neurodevelopmental deletions can have a normal phenotype which contradicts previous observa- disorders or benign variants? tions that mosaic status of such deletions cause similar phenotypes. S. Albaba1,2, K. E. Hermetz2, M. Rudd2; 1Leeds Genetics Lab, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2Emory Genetics Laboratory, Atlanta, GA,  P08
.72 United States. Characterization of patient with de novo frameshift PUF60 mutation suggests that disruption of this gene is sufficient for most symptoms of Verheij syndrome Deletions and duplications involving the genes RBFOX1 and DOCK8 have M. Hančárová1, M. Havlovicová1, D. Prchalová1, V. Stránecký2, Z. Sedláček1; been implicated in intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disor- 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of ders (ASD). However, the clinical significance of these CNVs is controversial. Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Inherited We analysed 14 RBFOX1 deletions (20-309 kb), six RBFOX1 duplications Metabolic Disorders, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University (34 kb to 1.34 Mb), and eight DOCK8 deletions (22-227 kb) from unrelated Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. individuals. Our analysis revealed that five DOCK8 deletions were terminal de novo and three were interstitial. Two deletions lie within intron 1, two include only exon 1, and four include multiple exons. Thirteen of the RBFOX1 de- Verheij syndrome (OMIM 615583) is associated with rare 8q24.3 letions lie within a single intron; deletion of intron 3 and intron 4 are the microdeletions. Patients show developmental delay, short stature, microce- most common. Though the clinical information provided is limited, seven phaly, coloboma, and craniofacial, skeletal, cardiac and renal defects. Initial- individuals with RBFOX1 deletions have a diagnosis of ASD. The clinical si- ly two patienStsC wRIeBreP dUeFs6cr0ibed wNiRthB Pd2eletidoen sn oovf o15-24 Mb, later followed by gnificance of duplications is difficult to interpret since intragenic gains can fPiUveF 6p0atients with much shorter deletions, the smallest encompassing only lead to loss-of-function, whereas whole gene duplication can lead to triplo- three genes, , and . A loss-of-function missense sensitivity. Half of the RBFOX1 duplications have one breakpoint upstream PUF60 mutatioSnC wRIaBs also found in a similar patient who however lacked of the gene and one breakpoint in intron 2, which is predicted to maintain coloboma and renal abnormalities. These observations and knockdown of the reading frame if the duplications are in direct tandem orientation. One and/or in zebrafish suggested that the two genes influenced RBFOX1 duplication lies entirely within intron 3 and two include only exon different symptoms, together exacerbating the phenotype of the syndrome. 4, which could lead to an out-of-frame transcript. Our analysis sheds light We report a 16-year-old boy with autism, moderate intellectual disability, on the genomic structures of small CNVs implicated in neurodevelopmental speech delay, growth retardation, short stature, microcephaly, cardiac and disorders. Only two CNVs had identical breakpoints, suggesting diversity in renal defects, skeletal anomalies and a facies with bitemporal narrowing, RBFOX1 and DOCK8 rearrangements rather than a few common variants. thick eyebrows, long philtrum, broad nasal root andd teh inno uvpoper lip. Karyoty- However, the clinical significance of these CNV remains unclear since all ping and microPaUrrFa6y0 analysis yielded no findings. Whole exome sequencing CNVs we included were inherited. of the family trio identified a private heterozygous deletion of four nucleotides in (NM_078480.2:c.407_410delTCTA,p.I136Tfs*31). The patient showed no eye symptoms but no focused ophthalmological exami- nation has been performed yet. The presence of severe renal hypoplasia in the patiePnUtF a6n0d his overall similarity to the typical picture of the Verheij syndrome suggest that also the renal symptoms can be attributed solely to defects of which may be of key importance for the syndrome. The case illustrates the strength of exome sequencing in deciphering the genetic basis of diseases. Supported by NT/14200, 00064203, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022 and NF-CZ11- PDP-3-003-2014. 172 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.75  P08
.77 Molecular diagnosis improvement in patients with Rett Syndrome Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome type 2: Report of 9 new cases that extend using Next-Generation Sequencing. the phenotypic and genotypic spectrum H. Maortua1,2,3, A. De la Hoz2,3, C. Martínez-Bouzas1,2,3, M. I. Tejada1,2,3; M. J. Hamilton1,2,3, R. Newbury-Ecob4, M. Holder-Espinasse5, J. A. Hurst6, E. Clement6, W. 1Genetic Service, Cruces University Hospital., Barakaldo-Bizkaia, Spain, 2BioCruces Reardon7, S. Joss2, E. Hobson8, M. Blyth8, M. Al-Shehhi7, S. Lynch9, M. Suri3; Health Research Institute. Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo-Bizkaia, Spain, 3Clinical 1University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2West of Scotland Cinical Genetics group affiliated with the Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare Disease (CIBERER), Service, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Nottingham City Madrid, Spain. Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospitals Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 5Clinical Genetics Service, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Clinical Genetics Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Our Introduction: Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disor- Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 8Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Chapel der characterized by intellectual disability, regression of development and Allerton Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 9ACoRD, University College Dublin, Dublin, progressive microcephaly. RTT is mainly caused by mutations in MEC P2
; Ireland. although mutations in other genes (CDK L5
 and FOXG1) are also found. Ho- wever, a number of patients who show a clinical diagnosis of RTT have no mutations in these genes. Recently, Next Generation Sequencing technology BACKGROUND: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome is an autosomal dominant (NGS) has changed genetic diagnosis because of its ability to detect rare, de neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by growth deficiency, broad novo mutations. thumbs and great toes, intellectual disability and characteristic craniofacial Material and Methods: We designed a NGS panel with 21 genes (ARX, BDNF, appearance. Mutations in CREBBP account for around 55% of cases, with CDK L5
, FOXG1, FOX P1
, FOX P2
, GABRD, HER C2
, JMJD1C, KCNQ2, MEC P2
, a further 8% attributed to the paralogous gene E P300
. Comparatively few MEF2C, MFSD8, PL P1
, SCN2A, SHANK3, STXB P1
, TBR1, TCF4, UB E3
A and reports exist describing the phenotype of Rubinstein-Taybi due to E P300
 WDR45). The panel consists of 11874 amplicons (196.569 Kb), with 98.57% mutations. METHODS: Clinical and genetic data were gathered from 9 pa- target coverage. Target enrichment was performed by HaloplexHS. Libra- tients from the UK and Ireland with pathogenic E P300
 mutations, identified ries were sequenced on an Ion Torrent PGM platform. SureCall software was either by targeted testing or exome sequencing. RESULTS: All patients had used for raw data alignment and variant annotations. Torrent SuiteTM and mild or moderate intellectual impairment. Behavioural or social difficul- Ion ReporterTM software were then used for variant analysis. ties were noted in eight, including three with autistic spectrum disorders. Results: Our custom panel has been validated detecting all the known mole- Typical dysmorphic features of Rubinstein-Taybi were only variably present. cular changes (table below). Furthermore, new variations have been found Additional observations include maternal pre-eclampsia (2/9), syndactyly which are under study. (3/9), delayed bone age (2/9), feeding or swallowing issues (2/9), scolio- Conclusion: This custom panel is a powerful and cost-effective tool to dia- sis (2/9) and hypermobility of the elbow (2/9). Six patients had truncating gnose complex disorders with genetic heterogeneity such as RTT syndrome. mutations in E P300
, with pathogenic missense mutations identified in the This work has been funded by Fundació Agrupació. remaining three. DISCUSSION: The findings support previous observations that microcephaly, maternal pre-eclampsia, mild growth restriction and a Gene Variations mild to moderate intellectual disability are key pointers to the diagnosis of MEC P2
 16 loss-of-function MEC P2
 4 missense E P300
-related Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Variability in the presence of MEC P2
 4 polymorphism typical facial features of Rubinstein-Taybi further highlights clinical hetero- CDK L5
 1 loss-of-function geneity, particularly among patients identified by exome sequencing. Fea- CDK L5
 1 deletion CDK L5
 1unknown variation tures that overlap with Floating-Harbor syndrome including craniofacial ARX 1 missense dysmorphism and delayed osseous maturation were observed in 3 patients. ATRX 1 missense UB E3
A 2 loss-of-function Previous reports have only described mutations predicted to cause haplo- UB E3
A 1 missense insufficiency of E P300
. This cohort includes the first described pathogenic missense mutations in E P300
.  P08
.76 First familial Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome case associated with a novel  P08
.78 E P300
 mutation Abnormal primary dentition : a clue for the diagnosis of the SATB2- M. López1, P. de Castro Castro2, V. Seidel2, E. Domínguez-Garrido1; associated syndrome 1Fundación Rioja Salud, Logroño, Spain, 2Hospital General Universitario Gregorio M. Rio1,2, G. Barcia1,2, J. Bonnefont1,2, J. Amiel1,2, V. Pingault1,2, S. Hanein2, A. Munnich1,2; Marañón, Madrid, Spain. 1Service de génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 2INSERM 1163 Institut IMAGINE Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. SATB2 Introduction: RSTS (OMIM RSTS 1, #180849, RSTS 2, #613684) is a rare (1:125000) autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental disorder characteri- The -associated syndrome (SAS) has been recently proposed as a new zed by broad thumbs and halluces. The vast majority of cases occur spora- clinically recognizable syndrome that results from deleterious alterations dically due to de novo heterozygous mutations. RSTS is caused in 50-60% of the SATB2 gene in humans. We report the clinical characterization of 5 of cases by mutations in the CREBBP gene and by E P300
 gene mutations patiSeAnTtsB i2n whom targeted high-throughput sequencing for the diagnosis of in 5-8%. intellectual disability or neurocristopathies identified a de novo mutation in Subjects and methods: A 9 year-old female patient was referred from Neu- the gene for three patients and a de novo intragenic deletion for two ropediatrics for suspected RSTS. DNA was obtained from blood of the pati- patients. Age at diagnosis was 5 years (2/5), 7 years (2/5), 8 years (1/5). ent and her mother. CREBBP and E P300
 MLPA, panel based-NGS of CREBBP The 5 patients shared the characteristic features of the SAS: intellectual and E P300
 genes and Sanger sequencing confirmation was carried out. Se- disability with limited speech development (5/5), cleft (1/5) or high-arched quence changes were compared to the mother. palate (4/5), and dental abnormalities (5/5). 4 patients presented one frac- Results: The patient and her mother presented with mild learning difficul- ture and osteopenia was seen in two of the patients, confirming that this fin- ties, short stature and microcephaly. The mother had broad thumbs, whe- ding could be added to the list of distinctive findings. All patients had dental reas the child had normal thumbs and halluces. A novel heterozygous de- abnormalities with macrodontia of primary and permanent teeth, irregular letion in exon 31 of E P300
 gene (c. 7219_7222del) was found in both the shape of the teeth, dental crowding. Interestingly, anomaly of the primary proband and her mother, indicating that the mutation is inherited. This is a teeth is a consistent finding detected in the 5 patients. This feature should clearly pathogenic frameshift mutation (p. S2407
fs). be a good handle for early diagnosis of SAS and we therefore suggest adding Conclusion: This is the first report of an inherited E P300
 mutation in RSTS this feature to the list of distinctive features of SAS. worldwide, and the first familial RSTS case in Spain, demonstrating that  P08
.79 transmission is extremely rare. Since most individuals with RSTS due to Severe presentation of primary microcephaly (Seckel-like syndrome) E P300
 mutation are mildly affected, this entity is likely underdiagnosed. in a patient born from an incestous relationship thus special attention should be paid in them. I. Sudholt, K. Komlosi, S. Diederich, D. L. Fend-Guella, U. Zechner, S. Schweiger, O. Bartsch; Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. Seckel syndrome is a genetically heterogenous rare recessive disorder with ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAgINro w| tWh WretWard.EatSioHn,G m.OicrRocGephaly, intellectual disability (ID) and a 1‚b7ird3-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.81 MBD5 molecular screening on Smith Magenis-like Syndrome patients headed‘ appearance. The differential diagnosis includes autosomal reces- without the typical 17p11.2 deletion sive primary microcephaly (MCPH) without additional malformations or M. Sciarrillo1,2, C. Picinelli1, I. Bestetti1,2, A. Sironi1, N. Kurtas1, E. Ponti3, A. Mihalich3, L. neurologic findings. Spaccini4, M. Bedeschi5, C. Pantaleoni6, S. Maitz7, A. Selicorni7, D. Milani8, L. Larizza1, P. We report a 30-year-old woman with profound ID, absent speech, stereo- Finelli1,2; typic behavior, diplegia, proportionate growth deficiency (-5 SD), severe 1Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetic and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational primary microcephaly (-10,5 SD) and dysmorphic features including a slo- Medicine, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 3Molecular Biology Laboratory, IRCCS ping forehead, prominent large nose, small chin, dorsally rotated ears, short Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Buzzi Children‘s and broad fingers, and small feet. She was a product of an incestous abuse Hospital, Milano, Italy, 5Medical Genetic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’Granda Ospedale between father and daughter. In the first 30 years she had the clinical dia- Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 6Infantile Neuropsychiatry, U.O. Developmental gnosis of Seckel syndrome with no identified genetic cause. We used panel Neurology, IRCCS Istituto Neurologico „Carlo Besta“, Milano, Italy, 7U.O.S Clinical diagnostics for over 1200 brain related genes (MPIMG-1-Test) on an Illumi- Genetics and Pediatrics, MBBM Foundation San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 8Medical na MiSeq system and a modified Medical Resequencing Analysis Pipeline for Genetic Unit, Pediatric Highly Intensive Care, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy. variant calling. 3/40 variants fitted an autosomal recessive model with only STIL associated with the phenotype. A novel homozygous likely pathogenic sequence vari- ant STIL c.3377A>G (p.Tyr1126Cys) was found. Segregation analysis confir- Smith Magenis Syndrome (SMS) is a complex heterogeneous disorder, med heterozygosity in the mother. The father (=grandfather) was deceased. caused by RAI1 haploinsufficiency and triggered by 17p11.2 deletion or Homozygous STIL mutations can cause MCPH7 (OMIM #612703) with non- RAI1 gene mutation. Only 50% of patients with a clinical suspicion of SMS syndromic primary microcephaly and moderate ID, however, single cases bear the known defects, making its diagnosis challenging and suggesting also showed severe ID, short stature, and holoprosencephaly. Possibly addi- that other loci may underlie SMS-like phenotypes. tional yet unidentified recessive traits in our patient might have contributed Notably 2q23.1 deletion and brachydactyly mental retardation (BDMR) syn- to a more complex phenotype of classical MCPH7. Our case demonstrates dromes, caused by MBD5 and HDA C4
 haploinsufficiency respectively, are the overlap between syndromic and non-syndromic forms, the close con- two SMS phenotypical and molecular overlapping syndromes as the affec- nection to Seckel syndromes and the clinical utility of NGS in the diagnosis ted patients seem to show a reduced RAI1 transcript levels, implying that of atypical presentations. MBD5/HDA C4
 regulate RAI1. Here we describe a cohort of 30 SMS-like patients without 17p11.2 deleti-  P08
.80 on, and RAI1 microdeletion or mutation. Array-CGH analysis revealed a 29 The identification of a 94,5 kb deletion in Xq24 encompassing the kb deletion at 2q23.1 encompassing exons 1 and 2 of MBD5 in one patient, SL C25
A5 gene confirms its pathogenic role in neurodevelopmental while MBD5 mutational screening identified in a second case an hetero- disorders zygous missense mutation likely pathogenetic, p.A857T. Unexpectedly the A. Zonta1, G. Zacchetti1, I. Fusco1, S. Mellone1, C. Peruzzi2, A. Guala3, M. Giordano1; deletion was found in a mosaic condition in the healthy father of the first 1Human Genetics Laboratory, Dept. of Health Sciences, Piemonte Orientale University, patient, while the missense mutation, previously described in a child with Novara, Italy, 2Child Neurology Unit, Maggiore della Carità Hospital, Novara, Italy, mental retardation, was maternally inherited. The subsequent RT-qPCR sho- 3Pediatric Unit, Castelli Hospital, Verbania, Italy. wed a MBD5 transcript downregulation in the patient with 2q23.1 deletion, normal RAI1 transcript levels in all the patients and unexpectedly in the SMS-like patient with MBD5 haploinsufficiency too. We report on a 16-year-old boy referred for learning disability, deficit in Our findings corroborate the hypothesis that other loci can be causative of attention and social competence, difficulties in daily activities organizati- SMS-like phenotypes and for this reason we are setting up a flow chart ai- on, impulsive and repetitive behaviour, clumsiness and fatigue. The clinical ming at improve the molecular diagnosis in SMS-like patients and shed light examination reported bilateral epicanthus, left palpebral ptosis and valgus on pathogenetic mechanisms. knees. An EEG showed diffuse abnormalities with a poorly organized back- ground. EMG, NCV and CK were normal. His maternal uncle is affected with  P08
.82 intellectual disability and epilepsy. His parents are healthy and non consan- Identification of a RAI1-associated disease network guineous. A. Reymond1, M. Loviglio1, C. R. Beck2, T. Harel2, W. Bi2, M. Leleu3, N. Guex1,4, A. Niknejad4, Array-CGH[60K] identified a 94,5 kb deletion at Xq24 (chrX:118.579.289- E. S. Chen2, E. S. Chen2, S. Gu2, J. White2, I. Crespo4, J. Yan2, W. Charng2, C. A. Shaw2, Z. 118.673.787) encompassing the 3’ end of the SL C25
A43 gene, the SL C25
A5 Coban-Akdemir2, J. Rougemont3, I. Xenarios1,4, J. R. Lupski2; 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, gene and the 3’ end of the CXorf56 gene. The same deletion has been found 2Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale in the proband’s mother, maternal grandmother, maternal uncle with intel- de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, lectual disability and seizures and was not found in another healthy mater- Switzerland. nal uncle. Overlapping microdeletions at Xq24 have been found in patients with non syndromic intellectual disability or borderline IQ scores. The smallest regi- Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is a developmental disability/multiple on of overlap encompassed the SL C25
A43 and SL C25
A5 genes, members congenital anomaly disorder resulting from haploinsufficiency of RAI1. We of the mitochondrial carrier subfamily of solute carrier (SLC) protein ge- investigated a cohort of 149 individuals presenting the constellation of SMS nes. Biallelic mutations of genes belonging to the SL C25
 family cause a wide features, and focused on 15 individuals showing neither hemizygosity in the range of metabolic disorders with CNS involvement. As a deletion of the SMS critical region nor variants in RAI1. Using whole-exome sequencing SL C25
A43 gene has been subsequently found in a healthy subject and the we identified potentially deleterious variants in eight patients. These vari- expression of this gene in the brain is low, a pathogenic role for the SL C25
A5 ants affect KMT2D, ZEB2, MA P2
K2, GLDC, CASK, MEC P2
, KDM5C and POGZ, has been suggested. known to be associated with Kabuki 1, Mowat-Wilson, cardiofaciocuta- The deletion identified in our patient is the smallest deletion reported so far neous, glycine encephalopathy, mental retardation and microcephaly with encompassing the SL C25
A5 gene and confirms that its deficiency can cause pontine and cerebellar hypoplasia, X-linked mental retardation 13, X-linked neurodevelopmental disorders. mental retardation Claes-Jensen type and a recently described intellectual disability syndrome, respectively. Analyses of coexpression networks and biomedical text mining suggest that these pathologies and SMS are part of the same disease network. Further support for this hypothesis comes from transcriptome profiling of 10.5 dpc embryos that shows that the expression levels of both ZEB2 and MA P2
K2 are perturbed in Rai1-/- mice. Chromatin conformation capture revealed contacts between RAI1 and the ZEB2 and GLDC flanking loci, as well as between RAI1 and human orthologs of the genes that show perturbed expression in a Rai-/- mouse model, in particular genes mapping to MMU11. This finding possibly explains the enrichment of MMU11-mapping genes within genes differentially expressed in Rai1-/- mouse embryos. These holistic studies of RAI1 and its interactions allow insight into SMS and other disorders associated with intellectual disability and behavioral abnormalities, demonstrating the utility of a comprehensive genomic approach even in the diagnosis of distinctive disorders. 174 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.83  P08
.86 Exome Sequencing Combined with Linkage Analysis Identifies a Novel Clinical description of two cases of Trichothiodystrophy 4 Gene Associated with a Syndromic Form of Intellectual Disability (OMIM#234050) due to homozygous mutation in MLPKIP in two Y. Kesim1, M. Calik2, F. N. Tuncer1, G. Altiokka Uzun3, A. Iscan4, U. Ozbek1, S. Ugur Iseri1; unrelated families from the same geographical area, suggesting a 1Institute for Experimental Medicine, Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Harran common founder University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Sanliurfa, Turkey, M. Ballesta-Martinez1, V. López-Gonzalez1, M. Sánchez-Soler1, L. Rodriguez-Peña1, B. 3Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Istanbul, Rodríguez-Santiago2, T. Martínez-Menchón3, J. Ferrando-Barbera4, L. Armengol-Dulcet2, Turkey, 4Bezmialem Vakif University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric E. Guillen-Navarro5; Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey. 1Sección de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatria. Hospital Clinico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2qGenomics, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servicio de Dermatología. Hospital Clinico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 4Servicio de Introduction: Syndromic intellectual disability (ID) comprises a group of Dermatología. Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Consejería de Sanidad, clinically and genetically heterogenous conditions, in which intellectual de- Murcia, Spain. ficits are associated with other medical and behavioral signs and symptoms. Herein, we present genetic analyses leading to identification of a novel gene associated with syndromic ID in a consanguineous family. Trichothiodystrophy (TTD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characte- Materials and Methods: All family members including two affected siblings rized by short, brittle hair with low-sulphur content. TTD patients display a were SNP genotyped in order both to perform genome wide copy number wide variety of clinical features, including cutaneous, neurologic, and grow- variation (CNV) profiling and linkage analysis. This strategy was accompa- th abnormalities. Common additional clinical features are ichthyosis, intel- nied by exome sequencing in the affected sib pairs. lectual/developmental disabilities, decreased fertility, ocular abnormalities, Results: CNV analysis did not detect common pathogenic CNV events in the short stature, and recurrent infections. Within the spectrum of the TTD-re- two affected sibs. SNP derived linkage analysis was overlapped with exome lated conditions appear a number of syndromes affecting mainly organs de- variants, which enabled us to investigate exome variants only in linkage in- rived from the neuroectoderm. There are both photosensitive and nonpho- tervals. This collective effort led us to identify a new substitution in a novel tosensitive forms of the disorder. TTD1 (ERC C2
), TTD2 or Sabinas syndrome gene encoding a member of alpha/beta hydrolase superfamily on chromo- (ERC C3
/XPB gene), TTD3 or Pollitt syndrome (GTF2H5 gene), TTD4 or BIDS some 20. Upon this finding, the first-degree cousin of the affected sib pair syndrome (MPLKIP gene), TTD5 or IBIDS syndrome (RNF113A gene), SI- having a similar phenotype was also recruited to the study. The variant was BIDS syndrome, and ONMRS syndrome. also shown to be segregating with the disorder in this new branch of the We report two unrelated patients with tricothyodystrophy type 4 from family. Pathogenicity of the variant is supported further by in silico tools and the same geographical area, carrying the same homozygous mutation in its absence in public databases and apparently healthy 300 controls from MPLKIP gene. First patient is a 7-year-old girl, first child of healthy noncon- Turkey. sanguineous parents (from the same town, 7000 habitants). Microcephaly Conclusions: Combined analysis of linkage and exome sequencing has pro- (-4.74 SD), growth retardation, psychomotor delay, and brittle short gro- ved to be a powerful approach proved to identify defective genes in con- wing hair. Optic microscopy showed pili torti and break stems. Homozygous sanguineous pedigrees. This study was supported by the grants of TUBITAK c.277delT (p.Ser93Profs) mutation in MPLKIP gene was detected by exome (113 S331
) and Istanbul Development Agency (TR10/15/YNK/0093). sequencing. Patient 2 is a 2-year-old girl, second child of healthy unrelated parents, with psychomotor delay, microcephaly (-4.66 SD), limited growth and brittle hair. Hair analysis revealed trichoschisis and break stems. Due to  P08
.85 highly concordant clinical features and geographical overlap with patient 1, A new patient with Treacher Collins syndrome and intellectual analysis of Ser93Profs mutation on MPLKIP was performed first, detecting disability due to a small deletion of TOCF1 and CAMK2A genes I. López-Expósito1,2,3, J. Bafalliu1,2,3, M. Ballesta-Martinez4,2,3, A. Vera-Carbonell1,2,3, V. the same homozygous mutation, suggesting a founder effect in the area. López-Gonzalez4,2,3, G. Soler-Sánchez1,3, M. Sánchez-Soler4, E. Guillén- Navarro5,2,3;  P08
.87 1Centro de Bioquímica y Genética Clínica. Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de Mutations specific to the Rac-GEF domain of TRIO cause intellectual la Arrixaca, El Palmar, Murcia, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER). Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 3Instituto disability and microcephaly Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB), Murcia, Spain, 4Sección de Genética R. Pengally1, S. Greville-Haygate1, S. Schmidt1, E. Seaby1, C. Fagotto-Kaufman1, R. Jabal- Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, El Ameli-Forooshani1, S. Mehta2, M. Parker3, D. Goudie4, C. Mercer1, The DDD Study, A. Palmar, Murcia, Spain, 5Consejería de Sanidad, Murcia, Spain. Debant1, S. Ennis1, D. Baralle1; 1University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Sheffield Childrens Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 4Tayside university Hospitals NHS trust, Dundee, United Kingdom. The Treacher Collins syndrome-1 (TC S1
, OMIM 154500) is an autosomal dominant disorder of craniofacial development, caused by heterozygous mutation in the TCOF1 gene on chromosome 5q32, rarely associated to in- Background: Neurodevelopmental disorders have challenged clinical gene- tellectual disability (ID). tics for decades, with over 700 genes implicated and many whose function Recently, two large deletions (262kb and 1Mb) encompassing TOCF1 have remains unknown. The application of whole-exome sequencing is proving described in two patients with typical features of TCS and ID. The minimal pivotal in closing the genotype/phenotype gap through the discovery of new critical region also involved the CDX1, SL C6
A7, CAMK2A, ARSI and CD74 genes and variants that help to unravel the pathogenic mechanisms driving genes. Authors suggested that CAMK2A could be responsible for the ID, alt- neuropathogenesis. One such discovery includes TRIO, a gene recently im- hough a combinatorial effect with the other deleted genes could not be ruled plicated in neurodevelopmental delay. Methods: Whole-exome sequencing out. was undertaken on a family presenting with global developmental delay, We report on a new patient with TC S1
 and ID, with a smaller deletion microcephaly and mild dysmorphism. Father/daughter exome analysis was (ranged from 150kb to 180 Kb) that only included TOCF1, ARSI and CAMK2 performed, followed by confirmatory Sanger sequencing and segregation genes. The girl was referred for genetic evaluation at four months of age, due analysis on four individuals. Three further patients were recruited through to abnormal craniofacial development. MLPA of TCOF1 showed a complete the deciphering developmental disorders (DDD) study. Functional studies deletion of the gene. At the last evaluation at the age of 10 years, her facial were undertaken using patient-specific Trio protein mutations. Results: We features fit the diagnosis of TCS and she also presented behavioral disorders identified a frameshift deletion in TRIO that segregated autosomal domi- and intellectual disability. CGH array was performed confirming that ARSI nantly. By scrutinising data from DDD, we further identified three unrelated and CAMK2A were also deleted. The function of the ARSI gene is not related children with a similar phenotype who harboured de novo missense muta- with the phenotype of the patient, but CMK2A can play a role in the neuronal tions in TRIO. Biochemical studies demonstrated that in 3 out of 4 families, development. the Trio mutations affected the Dbl homology domain and led to a markedly In conclusion, our patient presents a novel small deletion that narrows reduced Trio-mediated Rac1 activation. Conclusion: We describe an inhe- down the minimal critical region for a contiguous genetic disorder with TSC rited global developmental delay phenotype associated with a frameshift and ID, and strongly supports the hypothesis that haploinsufficiency of CM- deletion in TRIO. Additionally, we identify pathogenic de novo missense K2A gene is responsible for the ID. mutations in TRIO associated with the same overwhelming phenotype; in- tellectual disability, microcephaly, and dysmorphism with striking digital features. We further functionally validate the importance of the Dbl homo- logy domain in Trio protein function. Our study demonstrates how genomic technologies are yet again proving prolific in diagnosing and advancing the understanding of neurodevelopmental disorders. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 175ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.88 UN C80
 UN C80
 mutation causes a syndrome of hypotonia, severe intellectual disability, dyskinesia and dysmorphism, similar to that caused by p.R2536T) or compound heterozygous truncating mutations in . mutations in its interacting cation channel NALCN HEK293T cells transfected with the homozygous p. P1700
S mutation sho- Y. Perez1, R. Kadir1, M. Volodarsky1, I. Noyman2, H. Flusser3, Z. Shorer2, L. Gradstein4, R. wed markedly decreased NALCN currents compared to controls on patch Birnbaum5, O. Birk1,6; clamp recording. Recently, two other groups reported in total 16 affected 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for Biotechnology individuals from 6 families of Arab ethnicity (3 froUmNC  S8
a0udi Arabia, 1 from in the Negev and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Egypt, and 2 related Negev Beduin familiesN) AwLiCthN homozygozity for either 1 Sheva, Israel, 2Pediatric Neurology unit, Division of Pediatrics, Soroka University missenseU N(pC.8V01 89M) or 3 truncating mutations in , with phenotypes Medical Center, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer resembling our patients and patients with deficiency. Biallelic muta- Sheva, Israel, 3Zussman Child Development Center, Soroka University Medical Center, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, tions in result in an intellectual disability phenotype reminiscent of 4Department of Ophthalmolgy, Soroka Medical Center and Clalit Health Services, Faculty the severe end of the Angelman/Rett syndrome spectrum. of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 5Department  P08
.90 of Life Sciences and Faculty of Natural Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 6Genetics Institute, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben Gurion Whole exome sequencing of 28 individuals with likely autosomal University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. recessive intellectual disability reveals truncating variants in previously reported ID-genes R. Buchert1, R. Abou Jamra2, A. Baraghiti3, M. Sturm1, J. Sommerfeld1, C. Vogel1, C. Bauer1, B. Kootz1, S. Junker1, A. Jamal4, M. Hamdallah5, W. Al-Ameri6, A. Rieß1, P. Bauer1, O. Rieß1, Background: A syndrome of profound hypotonia, intellectual disability, intra T. Froukh3; uterine growth retardation with subsequent failure to thrive, dyskinesia and 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, epilepsy was diagnosed in Bedouin Israeli families. Mild dysmorphism was Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Leipzig, Leipzig, evident: plagiocephaly, broad forehead with prominent nose, smooth phil- Germany, 3Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Philadelphia trum and congenital esotropia. We set out to decipher the molecular basis University, Amman, Jordan, 4private practice, Amman, Jordan, 5Farah Hospital, Amman, of this syndrome. Jordan, 6Ibn Alhytham Hospital, Amman, Jordan. Methods: Genome wide linkage analysis and fine mapping were done. Who- le exome sequencing data were filtered for candidate variants within locus. Validation and segregation of the mutation was assayed via Sanger sequen- In a bilateral project between Germany and Jordan, we examined 28 con- cing. UN C80
 expression pattern was analyzed through RT-PCR. sanguineous Jordanian families with intellectual disability (ID) of probably Results: Homozygosity mapping followed by fine mapping identified a 7.5 autosomal recessive inheritance. We conducted whole exome sequencing Mb disease-associated locus (LOD score 3.5) on chromosome 2. Whole exo- (WES) for one affected individual per famiNlyT a5nCd2 filtered for homALoDzyHg5oAu1s me and Sanger sequencing identified a single homozygous nonsense muta- variants. WithG PthRi5s6 a pproach we couldW idDeRn6t2if y homozygous truncating vari- tion within this locus, segregating within the families as expected for reces- ants in the previously established ID-genes (p.Gln447fs5), sive heredity and not found in a homozygous state in 150 Bedouin controls: (p.Gln362*), (p.Trp657*) and (p.Trp836*). c.151C>T, p.(R51*) in UN C80
. Although family pedigrees suggested autosomal recessive ID, we were able Conclusions: The syndrome described is caused by a mutation in UN C80
, to identify autosomal dominant causes in 2 families. In a consanguineous truncating most of the 3258 amino acids highly conserved encoded prote- family with one affected individual, CNV analysis of WES coverage data re- in, that has no known motifs. UN C80
 bridges between UN C79
 and the cati- vealed a de novo deletion on chromosome 4q21.22-21.23 which was pre- on channel NALCN, enabling NALCN’s role in basal Na+ leak conductance viously reported in individuals with ID and fits the phenotype of the exami- in neurons, essential for neuronal function. The phenotype caused by the nTeCdF 4individual. UN C80
 mutation resembles that previously described for homozygous NAL- In another individual we identified a heterozygous truncating mutation in CN mutations. previously described in Pitt-Hopkins-syndrome. Segregation analysis revealed that the likewise affected sister also carries this variant while both  P08
.89 parents are negative for this variant with no traces of somatic mosaicism. UN C80
 mutations lead to a recognizable syndrome with persistent Thus, we propose that this variant is the result of a germline mosaic and hypotonia, encephalopathy, severe intellectual disability and causative for the phenotype. postnatal growth retardation In total, with our approach of WES of affected individuals with likely auto- A. Stray-Pedersen1,2, J. Cobben3, T. E. Prescott4, S. Lee5, C. Cang5, K. Aranda5, S. somal recessive ID, we identified the underlying causes of intellectual disa- Ahmed6, M. Alders7, T. Gerstner8, K. Aslaksen9, M. Tetreault10, W. Qin11, T. Hartley11, S. bility in 6 out of 28 families. However, in 2 families the pathogenic changes N. Jhangiani2,12, D. M. Muzny2,12, M. Tarailo-Graovac13, C. D. M. van Karnebeek14, J. R. were due to de novo events. This stresses the importance of taking into ac- Jupski2,15,12, D. Ren5, G. Yoon6; count all possible patterns of inheritance including germline mosaics when 1Norwegian National Newborn Screening, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, analyzing WES data. 2Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics of the Department of Molecular and This project is funded through a grant by DAAD. Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center University Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  P08
.91 4Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Department A new mutation in KMT2A gene in a boy with Wiedemann-Steiner of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 6Division of syndrome Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, AMC University M. Soeiro e Sá, P. Dias, A. B. Sousa; Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8Department of Pediatrics, Sørlandet Hospital, Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria, Arendal, Norway, 9Department of Pediatrics, Sørlandet Hospital, Kristiansand, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Norway, 10Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and Genome Québec Portugal. Innovation Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 11The Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 12Baylor College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center, Houston, TX, United States, 13Department of Medical Genetics, Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome (WSS) is a rare autosomal dominant intellec- Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, tual disability (ID) syndrome characterized by hypotonia, growth deficiency, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 14Department of Pediatrics and Centre for Molecular Medicine distinctive facial gestalt and hypertrichosis cubiti. It is due to heterozygous and Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, and Care4Rare Canada Consortium, mutations in KMT2A (MLL) gene at 11q23.3, encoding a histone methyl- Vancouver, BC, Canada, 15Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States. transferase. Since the identification of the causative gene in 2012, only 20 cases have been reported, all caused by different mutations. Herein we describe a 10-year-old boy with moderate ID, short stature (<5th UN C80
, a component of the NANLACLNC Nsodium channel complex, interacts di- centile), generalized obesity (BMI in the 95th centile), thick hair with fron- rectly with NALCN and regulates the basal exitability of the nervous system. tal upsweep, low posterior hairline, small and vertically narrow palpebral Loss-of-function mutations of cause autosomal recessive infantile fissures, hypertelorism, bilateral epicanthus, wide nasal bridge, long and hypotonia with psychomotor retardation and characteristic facies (IHPRF; smooth philtrum, broad right first digit, bilateral sandal gap, cutaneous syn- MNAIMLC N#615419). Animal models of UN C80
 and NALCN deficiency have si- dactyly between the second and third toes and bilateral long vellus hair on milar phenotypes to those reported in humans with biallelic mutations in the elbows. Hearing and vision were unaffected. Karyotype, array-CGH and . We report 4 affected individuals from 3 unrelated families of diffe- FMR1 molecular analysis were normal. rent ethnicity (Iraq, Morocco, Norway) with profound persistent hypotonia, The phenotype suggested WSS and the diagnosis was confirmed with the severe intellectual disability, postnatal growth retardation +/- microcepha- identification of a heterozygous variant, c.502+1G>T, in KMT2A. The latter l 1y 7a 6nd seizures due either to homozygous mEisSseHnsGe 2m0ut1a6tio |n Bs A(pR.P C17
E7 LSO, Nw Aa ,s S p Pr Aev Ii Nou s |l y W u Wnre Wpo .Ert Sed H b Gut . Oco Rn Gsidered likely pathogenic because it af- fects splicing.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P09  Neurogenetic and psychiatric disorders Hairy elbows can be isolated or present in association with a spectrum of 
P09 .001 other features; when syndromic they are very suggestive of WSS and analy- Characterization of rearrangements in the 22q11.2 region: A sis of KMT2A is warranted. Etiological clarification classifies WSS within the population-based screening of 25,703 newborn Danes. large group of chromatin remodeling defect disorders, which are thought T. Sparsø1, L. Olsen1, S. Weinsheimer1, M. Bertalan1, W. Mazin1, J. Grauholm2, M. to result from global changes in protein expression during embryonic de- Hollegard2, D. Hougaard2, C. B. Pedersen3, P. B. Mortensen3, W. Thompson1, BROAD velopment leading to multiorgan abnormalities. How this mechanism can investigators, iPSYCH investigators, T. Werge1; produce such a peculiar effect as localized hair growth on the elbows is still 1Biological Psychiatry, Sct Hans, Roskilde, Denmark, 2Section of Neonatal Genetics and unclear. the Danish Neonatal Screening Biobank, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3National Centre for Register-based Research, Aarhus, Denmark. 
P08 .92 De novo Loss of Function Mutations in the KIAA2022 Gene on Xq13.3 Are Associated with Intellectual Disability, Impaired Language, and Purpose: Genetic rearrangements in the 22q11.2 region are mediated by Epilepsy in Females LCR. Frequency estimates of the 3Mb deletion has so far been based on A. Pujol1,2, R. Webster3, M. T. Cho2, K. Retterer2, F. Millan2, C. Nowak4, J. Douglas4, A. hospital recruitments and commonly referred to as 1:4000 newborns. A Amad5, G. Raymond6, M. Johnson6, A. Begtrup2, D. McKnight2, J. Juusola2, O. Devinsky7, W. unique source for population-based studies is provided by the iPSYCH in- Chung8; itiative (www.ipsych.au.dk). Dried bloodspots from all newborns have been 1IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 2GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, 4Boston stored since 1982 and today DNA has been extracted from 76,109 indivi- Children‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, duals (N=25,703 are random samples). Here, we present the first accurate MI, United States, 6Pediatric Neurology, University of Minnesota, Minnesota, MN, population-based prevalence of both 22q11.2 deletions and duplications. United States, 7New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, Using the National Health Registry, we provide population-based incidence 8Departament of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, United rate ratio (IRR) estimates for neurodevelopmental disorders in individuals States. with the 22q11.2 rearrangement. We used incidence density sampling to calculate incidence rate ratio (IRR) estimates for the psychiatric diagnostic categories (ADHD, autism, schizophrenia, and mental retardation). Results: Intellectual disability (ID) affects about 1%-3% of humans with a gen- Among the 25,703 population-based samples we observed a frequency of der bias toward males. In the search for genes involved in monogenic ID, 0.027% (1:3672) for 22q11.2 deletions and 0.0622% (1:1606) for the reci- molecular characterization of chromosomal rearrangements involving the procal duplications. In our samples of ADHD (N=16,715), autism spectrum X-chromosome, and X-chromosome exome sequencing, have been impor- (N=14,333), schizophrenia (N=2,623) and mental retardation (N=4,097), we tant in the identification of the more than 100 genes to date. We report the found a significant increased IRR for individuals carrying the 22q11.2 dele- results of diagnostic whole-exome sequencing in trios to identify five fema- tion (ADHD: IRR=5.00 (p=0.0026), autism: IRR=6.00 (p=0.00309), mental les carrying de novo predicted pathogenic mutations in KIAA2022 (OMIM: retardation: IRR=14.29 (0<0.00001). Carriers of the reciprocal 22q11.2 du- 300524), from 1500 females with ID/developmental delay. The encoded plication showed similar increased risk for neurodevelopmental disorders product, X-linked Intellectual Disability Protein Related to Neurite Exten- (ADHD: IRR=3.75 (p=0.00053), autism: IRR=2.86 (p=0.018), schizophrenia: sion (XPN), is highly expressed in the developing and adult brain and is in- IRR=4.29 (p=0.035), and mental retardation: IRR=4.10 (p=0.00398), howe- volved in the regulation of neuronal migration and cell adhesion. Our five ver, not as profound as for deletion carriers. Conclusion: True population- females come from unrelated families, and are characterized by severe intel- based frequency of the 22q11.2 deletion is marginally higher than the wi- lectual disability, developmental delay, epilepsy refractory to treatment, im- dely accepted 1:4000. Both the 22q11.2 deletion/duplication confer risk of paired language, autism-spectrum disorder, hypotonia, and ataxic gait with neurodevelopmental disorders at the population-level. normal brain MRIs. Additional but less common symptoms include gastroin- 
P09 .002 testinal reflux, esotropia and mild dysmorphisms. The phenotypic severity 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and HTRA2 p.G399S in a patient with in females is similar to that observed in the 13 previously reported males juvenile onset Parkinson disease with pathogenic variants in KIAA2022, who were born from unaffected mo- P. Prontera1, V. Napolioni2, D. Rogaia1, I. Isidori1, A. Mencarelli1, N. Tambasco3, G. Merla4, G. Stangoni1, P. Calabresi3,5; ther carriers. This report, together with three other recently described sym- 1Medical Genetics Unit, Perugia, Italy, 2Department of Neurology and Neurological ptomatic female patients, contributes to the data supporting KIAA2022 as a Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto,, CA, United States, cause of intellectual disability in females, and bears direct implications for 3Neurologic Clinic, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS genetic counseling and testing. Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 5IRCCS Fondazione „S. Lucia“, 
P08 .93 Rome, Italy. A novel mutation in ZMYND11 gene in a girl with severe intellectual disability O. Moldovan1, C. Martins Halpern2, A. Sousa1; 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria, In a patient with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome who developed at 32 years of Lisbon, Portugal, 2Unidade de Neuropediatria, Centro de Desenvolvimento, Hospital age Parkinson Disease (PD), with tremor as the predominant symptom, we Garcia de Orta, Lisbon, Portugal. performed a WES, on Illumina Hiseq1500 after prepping the samples with a Nextera Rapid dCea pntouvroe Exome kit (Illumina) and an array-CGH analysis (CytoChip 4x180K, BlueGnome) of the trio. The array-CGH better defined Introduction: Mental retardation, autosomal dominant 30 (MRD30) the extent of the deletion (from 18,894,865 to 21,505,388 [hg19]), (OMIM#616083) is caused by mutations in the ZMYND11 gene. Less than while WES did not disclosed mutations in known PD genes, but identified ten cases have been previously reported with mutations in this gene. We the controversial HTRA2 p.G399S variant in the heterozygous state, inheri- describe a girl with severe global developmental delay and dysmorphism. ted from the healthy mother. HTRA2 is a serine protease located in the inter- Materials and Methods: She was born to healthy and nonconsanguineous membrane space of the mitochondria and previous studies demonstrated parents at 39 weeks gestation. Family history was unremarkable. Her birth that HTRA2 p.G399S leads to mitochondrial dysfunction, altered mitochon- weight was 2740g (10th centile), length 47,5cm (25th centile) and head cir- drial morphology and decreased protease activity. The region 22q11.2 har- cumference 32cm (3rd centile). Ventricular disproportion and esophageal bors six genes encoding mitochondrial proteins, namely, PRODH, MRP
L40 , atresia were suspected in the prenatal scans, but not confirmed after birth. SL
C25 A1, TANGO2, TXNRD2, and ZDHH
C8 , that we showed to be down re- On the other hand, she presented facial dysmorphism, VSD and axial hypo- gulated in our patient, by a whole transcriptome analysis on RNA extrac- tonia. She also had gastro-esophageal reflux, which motivated recurrent ted from a fibroblast culture obtained from skin biopsies of the patient and episodes of hospitalization for apparent life-threatening events (ALTE), and of an age and sex-matched control (Unrestricted Gene expression Human drug-resistant sleep disturbance. At 1 year and 3 months, her weight and Microarray 4x44K, Agilent Technologies). Even if could be conceivable that length were above the 75th centile and head circumference was on the 50th a severe mitochondrial dysfunction caused by the concomitant defects in centile. She had severe developmental delay with incomplete head control these genes may be the cause of the juvenile PD in our patient, nevertheless and inability to maintain a sitting position. We performed arrayCGH which this single case report cannot allow for firm conclusions, but it provides ad- revealed no significant CNV, and FISH analysis in buccal mucosa cells and ditional starting points for future cross-correlations and investigations of skin fibroblasts to exclude tetrasomy 12p. Finally we decided for trio exome genetic epistasis, especially between rare genetic cause of PD. sequencing and a de novo likely-causative variant was detected (c.1259C>A; p.Ser420Tyr) in ZMYND11 gene, predicted to be pathogenic and previously unreported in population databases. Conclusions: We report a patient presenting a new mutation in ZMYND11 gene which determines the most seveEreS pHheGn o2ty0p1e 6de |s cBrAibeRdC toE LdaOteN. A, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 177ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P09 .003 3p- syndrome with deletion of CH
L1 , CNTN6 and firts exon of CNTN4 gene: phenotype and genotype relationship in a 6 yo boy a significant association between the AADAC deletion and GTS, and a final A. Lafuente, M. Ortiz, J. Juan, G. PI, A. Zúñiga; meta-analysis confirmed the significant association (P=4.4 x 10-4; OR=1.9; Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. 95% CI 1.33-2.71). Furthermore, RNA in situ hybridization and RT-PCR stu- dies revealed that AADAC is expressed in several brain regions previously implicated in GTS pathology. The 3p deletion syndrome is a rare contiguous gene syndrome caused by Conclusions: AADAC is a candidate susceptibility factor for GTS and the pre- deletions in the 3p25-pter region. The deletions are variable in size, they sent findings warrant further genomic and functional studies to investigate don’t present common break- points and mostly occur de novo, but a few the role of this gene in the pathogenesis of GTS. familial cases have been reported. The syndrome is characterized by a re- 
P09 .005 cognizable phenotype including low birth weight, growth and mental re- Reduced penetrance of p.Thr585Met RANB
P2  mutation in autosomal tardation, developmental delay and characteristic facial appearances. The dominant acute necrotizing encephalopathy clinical manifestations in individuals with 3p deletions vary from normal D. R. Carvalho, B. J. A. F. Martins, C. E. Speck-Martins, J. M. Brum, A. La Rocque-Ferreira; to severe. A milder phenotypic effect or a normal intelligence has also been SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil. described for larger, often inherited, deletions of this region and appears to be secondary to the breakpoint’s location and the deletion extent. Proband is a 6 yo male and he is the second child of healthy, non-consan- Acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE) is clinically characterized by fever, guineous parents. Karyotype was normal male. No family history of conge- acute encephalopathy, seizures, and rapid progression to coma within days nital anomalies or mental retardation was referred. The child was born after of onset of a viral illness in otherwise healthy children, with no evidence of 36 weeks of uneventful pregnancy, by caesarean section. He showed a regu- central nervous system infection. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) lar physical and psychomotor development (sitting at 6 months, walking at shows multiple symmetrical lesions affecting primarily the thaRlAaNmBi Pb2u t also 14 months). At school learning difficulties were observed and a neuropsy- brainstem, putamina, periventricular white matter and cerebellum. Most chological evaluation showed a borderline I.Q. level and language disorders. ANE is sporadic and nonrecurrent. A missense mutation in gene CGH microarray analysis showed a sub microscopic 3p26.3 terminal deleti- has been identified as a major cause of familial and recurrent ANE (MIM on. Parents were normal. The imbalance is less than 2 Mb in size and inclu- 608133), also named autosomal dominant ANE (ADANE). Only few families des three OMIM gene: CH
L1  (607416), CNTN6 (607220) and first exón of with ADANE have been reported. RANB
P2  CNTN4 (607280). CNTN4 plays an important role in the neuronal network Clinical and radiological findings of six members of a two-generation ADA- development. CH
L1  has been suggested to be responsible for mental defects NE family were described. Sequencing revealed the c.1754C>T mu- in patients with 3p- syndrome. tation (p.Thr585Met) in five of them. 
P09 .004 DNA was not obtained from radiological affected boy who died at age 13 Association of AADAC deletion and Gilles de la Tourette syndrome in a months after the second episode of coma. His 18-year-old brother manifests large European cohort spastic quadriparesis, dystonia and moderate mental retardation as seque- B. Bertelsen1, H. Stefansson2, L. R. Jensen3, L. Melchior1, N. M. Debes4, L. Skov4, C. Groth4, lae. Their healthy mother (44 years) is the sister of a 42-year-old hetero- T. Werge5, I. Karagiannidis6, Z. Tarnok7, C. Barta8, P. Nagy7, L. Farkas7, K. Brondum- zygous father of three affected girls and he also never had any symptom. Nielsen1, R. Rizzo9, M. Gulisano9, D. Rujescu10, L. A. Kiemeney11, S. Tosato12, M. N. Nawaz2, After acute encephalopathy episodes, the 11-year-old sister presents mild A. Ingason2, U. Unnsteinsdottir2, S. Steinberg2, P. Ludvigsson2, K. Stefansson2, A. W. Kuss3, dysmetria and cognitive impairment with strabismus, while the 10-year-old P. Paschou6, D. Cath13, P. J. Hoekstra14, K. Müller-Vahl15, M. Stuhrman16, A. Silahtaroglu17, sister has spastic diparesis, ataxia and mental retardation. The 7-year-old R. Pfundt18, Z. Tümer1; heterozygous sister manifested unexplained decreased level of conscious- 1Kennedy, Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2deCode Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, ness during two viral febrile infections. She had a complete recovery and 3Department of Human Genetics, University Medicine Greifswald and Interfaculty normal brain MRI. Institute of Genetics and Functional Genomics, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, We reinforce the incomplete penetrance of ADANE and great variability re- Germany, 4Tourette Clinic, Department of Pediatrics, Herlev Hospita, Herlev, Denmark, garding neurologic damage and residual signs. 5Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Centre, Sct. Hans, MHS – Capital Region of Denmark; Institute of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
P09 .006 Sciences, University of Copenhagen; iPSYCH – The Lundbeck Foundation’s Initiative Identification of ADHD candidate genes in large pedigrees combining for Inte, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, linkage analysis and whole-exome sequencing Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupoli, Greece, 7Vadaskert Child and J. Corominas Galbany1, M. Klein1, T. Zayats2, S. Gross-Lesch3, M. Pauper1, C. Jacob3, A. Adolescent Psychiatry Clinic, Budapest, Hungary, 8Department of Medical Chemistry, Reif4, M. Romanos5, A. Arias Vasquez1,6, K. Lesch3, B. Franke1,7; Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, 9Section of Child Neuropsychiatry, Department of Medical and Pediatric Sciences, Netherlands, 2Department of Biomedicine, Bergen University, Bergen, Norway, Catania University, Catania, Italy, 10Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and 3Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University of Wuerzburg, Psychosomatics, Martin-Luther-University, Halle, Germany, 11Department for Health Wuerzburg, Germany, 4Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Evidence, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 12Section of University of Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt, Germany, 5Department of Child Psychiatry, Psychiatry, Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of Verona, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, Verona, Italy, 13Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, Utrecht University & 6Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Altrecht Academic Anxiety Outpatient Clinics, Utrecht, Netherlands, 14University of Behaviour, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Department of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Psychiatry, Groningen, Psychiatry, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud university Netherlands, 15Clinic of Psychiatry, Socialpsychiatry and Psychotherapy, Hannover medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 16Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 17Wilhelm Johansen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a common neuro- psychiatric and multifactorial disorder characterized by inattention, and/ Background: Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (GTS) is a complex neuropsych- or motor hyperactivity and impulsivity. The study of multi-generation pedi- iatric disorder with a strong genetic influence where copy number variati- grees with multiple affected individuals can point towards novel ADHD-re- ons (CNVs) are suggested to play a role in disease pathogenesis. In a pre- lated genes. By combining haplotype analysis and whole exome sequencing vious small scale CNV study of a GTS cohort (n=111), recurrent exon-affec- (WES), we aim to identify genes carrying rare and/or common variants that ting microdeletions of four genes, including the gene encoding arylacetami- contribute to ADHD. Three German pedigrees with multiple ADHD-affected de deacetylase (AADAC), were observed and merited further investigations. adults were used in this study, in which linkage analysis was carried out Methods: We screened a Danish cohort of 243 GTS patients and 1,571 con- on the major part of the individuals and WES data from two or more pati- trols for submicroscopic deletions and duplications of these four genes. The ents were obtained to detect shared genetic variants. Genotyping data was most promising candidate gene, AADAC, identified in this Danish discovery used to identify haplotype blocks segregating with disease. Linkage analy- sample was further investigated in cohorts from Iceland, the Netherlands, ses were performed using a Multi-Point analysis implemented in Superlink Hungary, Germany and Italy, and a final meta-analysis including a total of online SNP, for each family and by combining them. Regions with a maxi- 1,181 GTS patients and 118,730 controls from these six European countries mum LOD score higher than 2 were selected as a candidate regions. Genes was performed. Subsequently, expression of the candidate gene in the cen- in these regions containing shared rare genetic variants were selected as tral nervous system was investigated using human and mouse brain tissues. candidate genes. A common problem in multifactorial diseases is that the Results: In the Danish cohort, we identified eight patients with overlapping effect of individual markers is too weak to be detected; consequently, mul- d 1e 7le 8tions of AADAC. Investigation of the addiEtioSnHalG fi v2e0 c1ou6n t|r BieAs sRhCowEeLdO Nt Aip ,l e S g Pe Ane It Nic |m Wark Wer Ws m .Eay S b He G si .m Ou Rlta Gneously analyzed to increase explainedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index variance. Therefore, gene-set analyses were performed in an independent The high genetic correlation suggests that the vast majority of common va- exome-chip dataset from 1846 ADHD patients and 7519 controls (IMpACT). riant risk is shared between females and males in ADHD and supports com- The gene-set from one family indeed showed a significant association with bining GWAS data from both sexes in meta-analyses. Further, these results adult ADHD, suggesting that the variants in several genes might act together suggest that common genetic variants do not appear to play a significant in increasing ADHD risk. The analysis strategy followed here might provide role in the sexual dimorphism of ADHD. Although no significant difference new knowledge for a better understanding of ADHD’s etiology. in polygenic risk has been detected, these analyses are still severely limi- ted in power and will benefit from increasing sample sizes. (Wellcome- 
P09 .007 Trust:106047) Shared genetic effects between clinical ADHD and smoking, alcohol and breastfeeding in mothers from the general population 
P09 .009 E. Stergiakouli1,2, J. Martin3, M. Hamshere3, B. St Pourcain1,4, N. Timpson1, A. Thapar3, G. The effect of parental age on the presence of de novo mutations - Davey Smith1; Lessons from neurofibromatosis type I 1MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit at the University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, S. Ben-Shachar1, T. Dubov2, H. Toledano-Alhadef3, F. Bokstein3, S. Constantini4; 2School of Oral and Dental Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 1The Genetic Institute, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 3Tel- 3Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, MRC Centre for aviv Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 4Tel-Aviv Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel. Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Background: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is the most common autoso- mal dominant neurocutaneous disease with a prevalence of 1:2,500. Appro- Introduction:Prenatal smoking and alcohol consumption have been sug- ximately 50% of cases are sporadic. Advanced paternal age is associated gested as possible risk factors for ADHD. Inferring causality has not been with germline mutations and autosomal diseases. We aimed to use NF1 as a possible because the mother provides both the prenatal environment and paradigm to study the effect of parental age on sporadic mutations rates for genetic risk factors for ADHD. We investigated if there are shared genetic both advanced and younger parental ages. effects between ADHD and possible risk factors for ADHD using polygenic Methods: The medical charts of 118 NF1 pediatric patients followed in a spe- risk score analysis in the general population. cialized Israeli NF1 clinic were evaluated. Thirty-one cases were diagnosed Materials and Methods: ADHD polygenic risk scores were calculated for by genetic tests and 87 by NIH clinical criteria. Sixty-four cases (54%) had 8340 mothers from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children a negative family history of NF1 (sporadic cases). Data on parental ages at (ALSPAC) based on the results of a genome-wide ADHD case-control stu- the time of the children’s birth were compared to the national population dy (Stergiakouli et al. 2012) and tested for association with smoking and database. alcohol consumption before and during pregnancy and with breastfeeding Results: Significantly fewer fathers had been 25-29 years old at their child‘s status. birth compared with fathers in the general population (7.8% versus 21%, Results: Higher genetic risk for ADHD was associated with higher odds of respectively, p=0.009), and significantly more were ≥40 years old (29.7% smoking before and during pregnancy and not breastfeeding (see Table). versus 13.6%, respectively, p=0.0002). Differences in maternal age between There was no evidence of association with alcohol consumption. Adjusting these two groups were less prominent. for ADHD polygenic score of the child did not change the association. Conclusion: The risk for sporadic NF1 was lower when the fathers were Conclusions: Our results show for the first time that there are shared genetic younger at the time of the affected child’s birth and gradually increased with effects between ADHD and life style choices in mothers from the general po- paternal age. pulation without the disorder. The mother can not only transmit genetic risk for ADHD to her offspring but also expose the child to risk factors through 
P09 .010 her life style choices that are in turn influenced by her genetic risk for ADHD. Differential expression of inflammatory cytokines in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in early and late onset Alzheimer‘s disease Outcome N OR (95% CIs) p value N. Unaltuna1, G. Guven1, E. Lohmann2, H. Hanagasi2, E. Ozer1; Smoking before pregnancy 7530 1.05 (1.01 to 1.1) 0.03 1Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul University, Smoking at first trimester 7543 1.08 (1.03 to 1.15) 0.002 Alcohol consumption before 7530 0.99 (0.91 to 1.08) 0.9 Istanbul, Turkey, 2Behavioural Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of pregnancy Neurology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. Alcohol consumption at first 7543 0.98 (0.94 to 1.03) 0.5 trimester Breastfeeding 6604 1.06 (1.01 to 1.11) 0.03 Introduction: Neuroinflammation is involved in the Alzheimer’s disease 
P09 .008 (AD) pathology. Our major focus was to clarify whether peripheral inflam- Sex-specific genome-wide common variant analyses of attention mation plays important roles in AD pathogenesis, particularly if there is a deficit hyperactivity disorder difference in expression of inflammatory cytokines in early vs late onset J. Martin1,2,3, R. Walters2, D. Demontis4, M. Mattheisen4, S. Lee5,6, M. C. O‘Donovan3, E. Robinson2, Psychiatric Genomics Consortium: ADHD Subgroup, iPSYCH-SSI-Broad ADHD Alzheimer‘s patients (EOAD vs LOAD). For this, we analyzed the expression Workgroup, B. Franke7, A. Borglum4, S. V. Faraone8, A. Thapar3, B. M. Neale2; pattern of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, TGF-β and TNF-α in peripheral blood mo- 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United nonuclear cells of EOAD, LOAD and controls. States, 3Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Aarhus University, Aarhus, Materials-Methods: The study group consisted of 13 EOAD, 14 LOAD and 13 Denmark, 5University of New England, Armidale, Australia, 6Queensland Brain Institute, control patients. Quantitative Real Time PCR of each of the mRNA normali- Brisbane, Australia, 7Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8SUNY zed with GAPDH was used to determine levels of cytokines. Parametric and Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, United States. non-parametric statistical tests were used for comparison of groups and correlations were analyzed using Pearson’s linear correlation test. Results: IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α were found to be significantly down-regula- Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) shows substantial herita- ted in EOAD when compared with the LOAD and the controls. Decrease of bility as measured by twin/family studies and genome-wide association IL-12 expression was observed in EOAD when compared with LOAD. The studies (GWAS). ADHD is about four times more common in males than fe- correlation analyses revealed that IL-6 was inversely correlated with TGF-β males. What is unclear is the nature of the apparent female protective effect. for EOAD, for LOAD, however, IL-6 with IL-10 and IL-12 with TGF-β were One hypothesis is that female cases carry a higher burden of genetic risk. positively correlated. Such differences are present in PSEN1 positive and Alternatively, the sources of variation are different between the sexes. We negative patients as well. examined these two hypotheses using genome-wide data from the Psychia- Conclusions: This is the first study comparing expression levels of periphe- tric Genomics Consortium and the iPSYCH Project in collaboration with the ral cytokines between EOAD and LOAD patients. Our results suggest that Danish Neonatal Screening Biobank. EOAD and LOAD have differences in immune response, which might be Initial sex-specific GWAS meta-analysis of ~11,000 ADHD cases (24% fema- monitored in peripheral blood cells as biomarkers. Further studies with le) and ~21,000 population controls/pseudo-controls (51% female) sho- larger population are needed to explore the underlying mechanisms of our wed no genome-wide significant variants for either sex. Genetic correlation findings. analyses of female and male ADHD using LD-score regression and GREML showed a strong bivariate heritability; Rg(SE)~1.0(0.2). Results examining the relative burden of common genetic risk variants, using a leave-one- sample-out polygenic risk score analysis approach, showed higher mean po- lygenic scores in cases than in controls but no association of ADHD genetic risk with sex in cases. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 179ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P09 .011 
P09 .013 Expression of inflammation-related miRNAs and their selected target Liver X Receptor genes variants modulate risk and phenotype of ALS genes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of early and late onset K. Mouzat1,2, N. Molinari3, J. Kantar1, A. Polge1, P. Corcia4, P. Couratier5, P. Clavelou6, R. Alzheimer disease patients Juntas-Morales2,7, N. Pageot2,7, J. A. Lobaccaro8, C. Raoul2, S. Lumbroso1,2, W. Camu2,7; G. Guven1, E. Lohmann2, H. Hanagasi2, C. Gulec3, E. Ozer1, N. Unaltuna1; 1Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, CHU Nîmes, Nîmes Cedex 9, France, 1Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul University, 2INSERM UMR1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hôpital Saint Eloi, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Behavioural Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department Montpellier, France, 3IMAG, UMR 5149, DIM, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, of Neurology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Centre SLA, Service de Neurologie et Neurophysiologie Clinique, CHRU de Tours, UMR 3Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, INSERM U930, Tours, France, 5Centre SLA, Service de Neurologie, CHU Limoges, Limoges, Istanbul, Turkey. France, 6Centre SLA, Service de Neurologie A, CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 7ALS Center, Département de Neurologie, CHU Gui de Chauliac, Montpellier, France, 8Génétique Reproduction et Développement, Clermont Université, Clermont- Ferrand, France; CNRS, UMR 6293, GReD, Aubière, France; INSERM, UMR 1103, GReD, Introduction: Alzheimer Disease (AD) brains display a changed miRNA- Aubière, France; Centre de Recherche en Nutrition Humaine d‘Auvergne, Clermont- expression-profile which is reflected also in peripheral blood mononuclear Ferrand, France. cells (PBMC). Therefore, we investigated the expression levels of inflamma- tion-related miRNAs and their selected target genes in PBMC of early-onset AD (EOAD), late-onset AD (LOAD) patients and controls. Background: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is one of the most severe Materials-Methods: The study group consisted of 13 EOAD patients inclu- neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by the loss of motor neurons. ding 7 with [PSEN1(+)] and 6 without [PSEN1(-)] PSEN1 mutations, 14 pa- Phenotype of ALS patients is highly variable, and suffers from the lack of re- tients with LOAD and 13 healthy, non-correlated controls. qRT-PCR deter- liable molecular markers. Lipid metabolism has recently been suggested as mined levels of mir-146, mir-144, mir-34a and their target genes: TRAF6, a potent modulating factor of ALS progression. The two isoforms of nuclear TSPAN12, ADAM10, BECLIN1, TREM2. Statistical analyses were performed receptors Liver X Receptors (LXRs), LXR alpha (LXRα) and LXR beta (LXRβ) using SPSS software. play a central role in lipid metabolism as cholesterol sensors. Several lines Results: mir-144 was significantly overexpressed whereas its target genes, of evidence have also pointed LXRs as potential candidates to explain ALS ADAM10 and BECLIN1, were significantly down-regulated in PSEN1(-) phenotype variability. Subsequently, an association study using single nu- EOAD group compared with the others. cleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was conducted to explore LXRs as genetic In contrast, mir-34a was significantly down-regulated in PSEN1(+)EOAD makers for ALS. compared with LOAD and its target gene TREM2 levels were found to be Results: Associations between SNPs of LXRα (rs2279238 and rs7120118) significantly decreased in PSEN1(+)EOAD when compared with controls, and LXRβ (rs35463555 and rs2695121) genes and ALS were assessed by but not with LOAD. genotyping using high-resolution melting analysis in a cohort of 438 ALS mir-146a was significantly down-regulated in PSEN1(+)EOAD compared patients and 330 healthy controls. The two LXRα SNPs rs2279238 and with LOAD. The levels of its target genes, TSPAN12 and TRAF6, were found rs7120118 were shown to be associated with ALS risk. Analysis of clinical to be significantly down-regulated in PSEN1(-)EOAD group compared with parameters revealed that the two LXRα SNPs were associated with age at LOAD. Additionally, mir-146a expression was inversely correlated with onset in ALS patients (p = 0.0027 and p = 0.0298 respectively). This associa- TRAF6 in the LOAD group. tion was also strengthened by the number of rare alleles carried by patients. Conclusions: This is the first study comparing miRNAs and their target gene Moreover, rs2695121 within LXRβ gene was shown to be associated with expression in PBMC of EOAD and LOAD patients. Our results suggest a diffe- disease duration (p = 0.0055). rent role of miRNAs in EOAD compared to LOAD. In addition, the presence/ Conclusions: These findings reveal a new genetic association between LXRs absence of PSEN1 mutation might also influence their regulation. However, and both ALS risk and phenotype, opening new perspectives in the under- studies including larger patient groups are requested to confirm our fin- standing of molecular mechanisms underlying the disease. dings. 
P09 .014 
P09 .012 Association of FTO gene variants with sporadic amyotrophic lateral Screening for preclinical Alzheimer’s disease sclerosis in Greek patients D. Farouk1, M. Shehab1, M. Mekkawy1, H. Afifi1, M. Ragab2, H. Awadallah2, M. Afifi3, S. K. Mitropoulos1, C. Mizzi2, E. Tsermpini3, E. Merkouri-Papadima3, A. Balasopoulou3, V. Temtamy1; Dellatola3, V. Karathanasi3, T. Katsila3, G. P. Patrinos3; 1The National research Center, Cairo, Egypt, 2Department of Environmental Medical 1University of Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 2University of Malta, Msida, Science, Institute of Environmental Research and Studies, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Malta, 3University of Patras Faculty Health Sciences Department of Pharmacy, Patras, Egypt, 3Institute of psychiatry, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. Greece. Introduction: The m ajority of Alzheimer‘s disease (A D) cases arise through Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by degeneration of interactions among genetic and environmental factors, the disease usually upper and lower motor neurons in the motor cortex, brain stem and spi- begins many yearsbefore clinical symptoms appear.Premature centromere nal cord. Patients develop progressive paralysis resulting in death, usually separation (PCS) and micronuclei (MNi) are useful cytogenetic biomarkers caused by respiratory failure. Until now, no effective therapeutic strategy for prediction and early diagnosis. Constricted life space and fewer years of exists. It is well documented that sporadic ALS is a multifactorial disease, in education are two envir.onmental risk factors for AD, avoiding the environ- which a genetic component, such as SOD1, FTO, FUS, TARDP, 
C9 orf72, has mental factors in addition to early detection can significantly decrease the been evident. incidence of the disease We have analyzed 10 unrelated Greek sporadic ALS patients by whole ge- Materials and Methods: This study was conducted on 26 patients diagnosed nome sequencing. Our bioinformatics analysis revealed a strong correlation as AD and a group of 26 matched controls. All subjects performed life space between several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the develop- measurement, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), conventional cy- ment of ALS. Subsequently, our analysis was expanded in 27 sporadic ALS togenetic analysis, Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis and patients of Greek origin and 50 ethnically matched healthy controls, which Cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay (CBMN). were genotyped by Sanger sequencing and allele-specific PCR. Results: The ave*rage years of education were significantly fewer in the Our data indicate a statistically significant outcome (p<0,001) for one of the patients group ( P = 0.0*466) and their average life space was constricted studied SNPs when ALS patients are compared to healthy individuals. compared to controls ( P = 0.0234). Significant positive correlation was As far as we know, this is the first study that reveals such an association bet- found between 2score of MMSE and score of life space trajectories among ween the FTO gene and the pathobiology of the disease. Nevertheless, due the patients (𝑟;; = 0.7886) which demonstrates the effect of constricted life to small sample size, our study should only be considered a pilot study and space on cognitive impairment. Cytogenetic results revealed a significant replication in a larger population cohort is needed to confirm this finding. difference* in percentage of PCS and score of MNi between AD patients and controls ( P < 0.0001) Conclusions: These results clarify that screening for AD by the environmen- tal risk factors and the cytogenetic biomarkers can be valuable for early de- tection as chromosomal instability occurs many years before evidence of clinical symptoms, and treatment is beneficial at this stage. STDF fund, project (5253). 180 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P09 .015 
P09 .017 ANKK1 locus and Parkinson´s disease risk Contribution of chromosomal aberrations in mosaicism to Autism J. Hoenicka1, D. Martínez-Rubio2, E. Pérez-Santamarina2, P. García-Ruiz3, I. Pla4, M. Spectrum Disorders Ezquerra5, M. Martí5, J. Puente6, F. Palau1; M. Lopez-Sanchez1,2,3, I. Cuscó1,2,4, A. Cáceres3,5, J. R. Gonzalez3,2,5, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,2,4; 1Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro 1Genetics Unit, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital del Mar Research de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Centre de Recerca en Epidemiologia Ambiental 3Fundación Jimenez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, (CREAL), Barcelona, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Valencia, Spain, 5Hospital Clínic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6LabGenetics, Madrid, Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 5Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Spain. Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain. Introduction: Single nucleotide variantions (SNVs) of the ANKK1 gene have Introduction: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is one of the most frequent been reported to be associated with a wide spectrum of dopamine-related neurodevelopmental disorders. ASD has a strong genetic component in its neuropsiquiatric and cognitive traits. Given that cerebral dopamine deple- etiology, including de novo germ-line mutations and copy number variants. tion is a hallmark of Parkinson disease (PD) here we hypothesized that Detectable mosaicism for chromosomal rearrangements in blood has been ANKK1 regulatory SNVs contribute to PD risk. reported in >1% of the aging population (>65y), but is very rare in young Materials and Methods: The study included a population sample of 200 PD people. Chromosomal mosaicism due to early developmental events could patients (age 69.48±9.51 years) and 300 healthy controls (age 60.03±3.33) be causative of ASD. from the BancoADN, the DNA National Bank Carlos III in Spain, and 288 Methods: We have studied molecular karyotypes (SNP array) of blood DNA PD patients (age 53.40± 11.91) from the clinical series of Hospital Clínic of of two large ASD datasets, the Autism Genome Project and the Simons Sim- Barcelona (HCB). ANKK1 regulatory regions were studied using ENCODE plex Collection (4427 patients, 9268 parents, 2433 unaffected siblings) for data and Haploview and JASPAR software. Genotyping was performed by mosaic chromosomal alterations >0.4Mb, using the MAD and Tripod soft- TfiI restriction digestion of PCR-amplified fragments. Functional validation wares. As age-matched controls, we also used reported data of 5094 child- was assessed by Luciferase Assay and Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay. ren with no developmental abnormalities. We independently analyzed data Results: Our in silico analysis showed that rs7107223 could be a functio- from cell-line DNA of 564 patients and 806 parents. nal SNV that modulates transcription in the ANKK1 locus. It is located at Results: Mosaic alterations (0.4-155Mb) were detected in blood DNA of the DNase I hypersensitive site (DHS) at the 5´ANKK1 gene. Genotyping of 21 out of 4427 patients (0,47%). A total of 34 events were also detected rs7107223 (Adenine [A] or Thymine [T]) SNV in the Spanish PD population in parental samples (0,37%) and 5/7517 unaffected children (0,07%). The showed the significant overrepresentation of A allele (P=0.0008) and ge- frequency of detectable mosaicism is significantly higher in ASD patients. notypes following a dominant model (P=0.003; OR: 1.831). These findings In cell-line DNA, the frequency was similar in cases and parents although 6 were replicated in the HCB clinical sample. Functional validation studies in- unbalanced chromosomal translocations were detected in patients and just dicated significant differences between A and T alleles in the binding, the 1 in parents. promotor activity and the response to apomorphine. Conclusion: Chromosomal aberrations present in mosaicism are detected Conclusion: rs7107223 is a regulatory variant of ANKK1 locus associated in blood samples of a small but significant proportion of children with ASD with PD risk. (0,47%). This finding at early ages suggests that mosaicism may be present Funding grant: Instituto de Salud Carlos III PI11/0731 in other cell types affecting brain development and causing ASD. 
P09 .016 
P09 .018 Protective effects of ApoE ε2 on cognitive performance are gender- Genomic and genetic variation at complex segmental duplications in specific in healthy elderly from the AsIA-Neuropsychology Study Autism Spectrum disorders M. Via1,2, L. Prades-Senovilla1, N. Lamonja1, J. López-Olóriz1, E. López-Cancio3, J. F. M. Codina-Solà1,2,3, R. Flores1,2,3, A. Homs1,2,3, C. Aguado1,2,3, L. Pérez-Jurado1,2,3, I. Cuscó1,2,3; Arenillas4, M. T. Alzamora5, G. Pera5, P. Torán5, I. C. Clemente1,2, A. Dávalos3, M. Mataró1,2; 1Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 1Dept. Psychiatry and Clinical Psychobiology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain, 2Neurosciences Program, Institut Hospital del Mar d’Investigacions 2Institute of Neurosciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de of Neurosciences, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Universitat Autònoma Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain. de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain, 4Stroke Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Valladolid, Spain, 5Primary Healthcare Research Support Unit Metropolitana Nord, IDIAP Jordi Gol, Santa Coloma de Gramenet, Spain. Introduction: Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are among the most heri- table neurodevelopmental conditions but the aetiology remains elusive in a high proportion of cases. Complex rearrangements and gene conversion Background: Age-associated cognitive decline and dementias have a sub- events in segmental duplications (SDs) could contribute to the phenotype, stantial hereditary component but the effects of genetic risk variants may be but are largely unstudied. To determine their variation and role in ASD, we mediated by individual characteristics. We analyzed potential associations have studied two candidate hot-spot regions: the Williams-Beuren syndro- of allelic variants in genes involved in neuronal growth and synaptic plastici- mGeT Flo2cIuGs TaFt 27IqR1D12.2 a3n adnCdN tThNeA cPh3r9) pericentromeric region. ty with cognitive performance in a large dementia-free elder population and Methods: We performed targeted sequencing of the multi-copy genes in SDs explored potential interactions with age and gender. ( , and single-copy genes in 279 ASD patients Methods: The AsIA-Neuropsychology Study included 747 Spanish subjects and 105 controls. To identify CNVs, SNVs and gene conversions, we mapped older than 50 (mean age=66.1±7.6) with a moderate-high vascular risk (as- the sequences to a single paralogous copy and integrated read depth and sessed by REGICOR score) and free of symptomatic vascular disease or de- relative paralogous sequence quantification. All results wereG eTxFp2eIrimentally mentia. Markers (SNPs) in 5 genes (APOE, BDNF, GCSF, VEGFA, and SDF1a) validatGeTdF b2yIR oDth2er methods in an extended case and control population. were genotyped. Neuropsychological assessment included tests in three Results: Copy-gains of a 7q11.23 block containing trunGcTaFte2dIR D2 and func- cognitive domains: visuospatial skills and speed, verbal memory, and verbal tional genes were identified in 1.8% ASD cases vs 0.45% controls. fluency. Linear regression models were controlled for gender, age, years of We also iddeen ntoifvioed d eal edtiisornuptive mutation (p.M1?) in a copy in two schooling, and metabolic syndrome. affected brothers, inherited from their father. In the chr9 pericentromeric Results: ApoE ε2 allele was associated with a better performance in the region, a was identified in a patient but the global distribu- memory and fluency domains (p=3•10-4 and p=0.01, respectively). A signi- tion of rearrangements and rare SNVs did not differ significantly between ficant interaction with gender revealed that these associations were present controls and patients. only in women (p=2.87•10-5 and p=0.0023, respectively) and not in men, Conclusions: GDTeFsp2iItReD t2h eir complex ge nCeNtiTcN aArPch3i tecture, our method suc- and were replicated for every individual neuropsychological test included cessfully identifies rearrangements and SNVs in SDs, such as copy-gains and in those domains. No other relevant associations or interactions were ob- mutations at or deletions of that could represent sus- served. ceptibility factors for ASD. Conclusions: Our results show a strong effect of the ApoE ε2 allele in women Grant support: FISPI1302481/PI1300823/FEDER, 2014SGR1468 and FI- in different neuropsychological assessments for both verbal memory and DGR/2013. fluency, suggesting a high protective effect. The ApoE ε4 allele did not have a substantial effect on cognition in our cohort. Grants: Spanish Ministry of Education and Science (SEJ2006-15399/PSIC). ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 181ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P09 .019 The power of New Generation Sequencing in identifying mutations in non-specific ASD-ID phenotypes: the example of SHANK3 p.Arg1715His, recurrent in three pedigrees, has conCseAqCuNeAn1cGes on the elec- A. Mosca-Boidron1,2, H. Poquet2, M. Willems3, J. Thevenon4,2, C. Redin5, C. Thauvin4,2, Y. trophysiological characteristics of the channel, driving lowered excitability. Duffourd2, S. Lumbroso6, B. Gérard5, J. Mandel5, F. Amsellem7, A. Beggiato7, R. Delorme7, N. This allows an interesting link with epilepsy, where gain-of-func- Marle1, P. Callier1,2, J. Rivière2, P. Kuentz2, A. Piton5, L. Faivre4,2; tion variants are risk factors. 1Cytogenetics, Dijon, France, 2Equipe Génétique et Anomalies du Développement, Dijon, We hence report an epidemiological study of an unprecedentedly large France, 3Département de Génétique médicale, Montpellier, France, 4Département ADCA cohort, which has direct clinical consequences; and a new causative de Génétique médicale, Dijon, France, 5IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 6Laboratoire de gene, confirming the prominence of ion channels in ADCA pathophysiology. Biochimie, Nimes, France, 7Psychiatrie de l’enfance et de l’adolescence, Hôpital Robert- Debré, Paris, France. This work was funded by the European Union, F.R.S.-FRNS, ANR and VERUM. 
P09 .021 Spinocerebellar ataxia type 37 (SCA37): first neuropathological Introduction: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are characterized by im- findings and molecular characterisation of the critical region on 1p32 pairments in reciprocal social communication and stereotyped behaviors. M. Corral-Juan1, C. Serrano-Munuera2, A. Rábano3, E. Gelpí4, L. Saiz3, M. Del Pozo- IntellectuaSlH DAiNsaKb3ility (ID) frequently coexists with these two core sym- Valero1, L. Ispierto5, R. Álvarez5, V. Volpini6, I. Sánchez1, A. Matilla-Dueñas1; ptoms. Monogenic causSeHs AarNeK r3are, among them, de novo or truncating mu- 1Health Research Institute Germans Trias-IGTP, Badalona, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan tations in concern almost one in 50 children with autism and mo- de Déu de Martorell, Martorell, Spain, 3CIEN Foundation, Madrid, Spain, 4Neurological Tissue Bank of the Biobanc-Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital derate to profound ID. haploinsufficiency is frequently associated Universitari Germans Trias, Badalona, Spain, 6IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. with neonatal hypotonia, moderate to severe ID, absent to severely delayed speech, ASD and moderate dysmorphic features (Phelan-McDermid syndro- me). Thus, the question arises to look for the presence of distinctive signs Introduction: We recently reported a new ataxia subtype, SCA37, characte- to identify a subgroup of individuals who could benefit from the sequencing rised by slow progressing ataxia and altered vertical eye movements in 2 of this gene. SHANK3 Spanish kindreds. Here we report the first neuropathological findings and Materials and Methods: Here we report on 2 boys with ASD and ID and a girl the studies aimed at identifying the SCA37 molecular deficit on 1p32. with severe ID associated with a mutation found by next generation Material and Methods: Neuropathology, WGS, and custom-aCGH studies sequencing (NGS) study (Illumina). were performed. Cerebellum-specific RACE and Purkinje cells (PCs) RNAseq Results: Two of these mutations are truncated and de novo involving the data from ENCODE were valuable to characterise putative cerebellar SCA37 exon 21 in the prolin-rich domain (NM_001080420.1:c.2955_2970dup transcripts. The SCA37 critical region was refined with WGS, SNPs, microsa- (p.(Pro992Arg*325) and NM_001080420.1:c.4381C>T (p.(Gln1461*)). The tellites, and long-PCR sequencing. third is a 3 bases deletion variant NM_001080420.1:c.5090_5092delACC Results: Marked neuronal loss was present in the cerebellar cortex and in- (p.(His1697del)) involving the exon 22 in the SAM (Sterile-Alpha-Motif) do- ferior olives. Extensive Bergmann gliosis and loss of calbindin immunoreac- main involved in multimerization of SHANK3 protein. tivity, with aberrant dendrite arborisation, nuclear lobulation, irregularity Conclusion: The retrospective clinical examination of these patientSs HdAidN nKo3t and hyperchromatism, and multiple small perisomatic ubiquitinated inclu- permit to distinct specific signs, which highlights the phenotypic hetero- sions were identified in cerebellar PCs. By WGS and genetic analyses, the geneity of these patients. Given the scarcity of variants involving , SCA37 critical region was narrowed to 1.742 Mb on 1p32. Two non-recom- the unsystematic presence of the distincStHivAeN cKli3nical features of Phelan Mc- binant SCA37-linked SNPs were useful to identify additional SCA37 index Dermid Syndrome, a NGS approach by panel or exome seems more justified cases. Cerebellar RACE and PC RNAseq studies identified new putative regu- than a targeted sequencing approach of in this phenotype. latory exons within the SCA37 transcript selectively expressed in Purkinje 
P09 .020 cells. Long-PCR sequencing for SNP-allele discrimination identified putative Next generation sequencing approaches in autosomal dominant structural regulatory candidate mutations in SCA37. cerebellar ataxias: from panel cohort study to new gene identification Conclusions: We report the first neuropathological findings showing diffuse M. Coutelier1,2, I. Blesneac3, G. Coarelli1, A. Monteil3, M. Monin4, K. Ando1, E. Mundwiller5, cortical cerebellar degeneration in SCA37. Two linked-SNPs prove useful to A. Brusco6, I. Le Ber1, M. Anheim7, A. Castrioto8, C. Goizet9, C. Duyckaerts1, P. Lory3, A. identify additional SCA37 cases. RACE and RNAseq studies reveal expres- Brice1, A. Durr1, G. Stevanin1; sion of a specific SCA37 transcript in Purkinje cells. We propose that a re- 1INSERM U1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Paris, France, 2Laboratory gulatory structural mutation altering the proper temporal and/or spatial of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 5203 and INSERM expression of the SCA37 gene underlies cerebellar neurodegeneration in U 1191, Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, SCA37. Project funded by Spanish ISCIII. France, 4Centre de Référence de Neurogénétique, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
P09 .022 Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 5Plateforme de Génotypage et Séquençage, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Paris, France, 6Department of Rare copy-number variations are associated with specific clinical Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Medical Genetics Unit, Città della Salute e della manifestations in children with autism spectrum disorder Scienza University Hospital, Torino, Italy, 7Département de Neurologie, Hôpital de I. Shtein, I. Menashe; Hautepierre, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Strasbourg, Institut de Génétique et Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, INSERM U964, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR7104, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 8Unité Troubles du Mouvement, Pôle de Neurologie et Psychiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complex heritable neu- Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 9Université de Bordeaux, Laboratoire Maladies Rares : rodevelopmental condition characterized by social, and communication Génétique et Métabolisme, EA4576, Bordeaux, France. disabilities. However, children with ASD manifest additional symptoms that further complicate the clinical picture of this disorder. Rare copy number va- riations (CNVs) play a significant role in ASD susceptibility. Here, we ask wh- Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias (ADCA) are heterogeneous neuro- ether rare CNVs are associated with specific clinical manifestations among degenerative diseases, associating a cerebellar syndrome to various other children with ASD. manifestations. They are frequently caused by polyglutamine expansions. Methods: We studied seventy clinical characteristics in 1115 children that Intronic repeat expansions, and conventional mutations, come next. Though are diagnosed with ASD and have CNV data from the Simons Simplex Coll- 30 genes have been identified, the causative mutation is still unknown in ection (SSC). Associations between these characteristics and total burden of 40% of patients. CNVs as well as specific CNVs, were determined at P<0.01. We explored ADCA aetiologies, combining whole genome linkage analysis Results: Rare CNVs were more prevalent among African-American females. and exome sequencing in large families, to amplicon panel sequencing of Interestingly, core ASD traits (i.e. communication and social difficulties) known and candidate genes in 412 patients. were associated with genomic burden of duplications whereas severity of Sequencing a large cohort allowed us to obtain valuable CinAfCoNrmA1aAtion regar- clinical comorbidities (e.g. IQ, irritability, and pregnancy optimality scores) ding the not much known nosology of conventional ADCA. We identified 17 were associated with genomic burden of deletions. Further, we found asso- patients with convincing single nucleotide variants in (4.12%). ciations between several clinical characteristics and specific ASD-suscepti- These are classically associated to episodic ataxia 2, while small nucleotide bility CNV loci. Specifically, duplications in 15q11.2-q13.1, and in 16p11.2 expansions are linked to pSrPoGgr7essive ataxia. We hereby confirm that these were associated with a higher irritability, duplications in 22q11.21 were presentations are not genetically different. We also identified eight patients associated with a worse neonatal optimally score, and CNVs in 9p24.3 were with biallelic mutations in ; as well as eight carriers oCfA pC.NAAla15G10Val alo- associated with worse verbal ability. ne, whose pathogenicity we discuss. Conclusions: Our results suggests that rare CNVs contributes to the severity In this study, we also identified new candidate genes. encodes T1-t8y2pe Calcium channel Cav3.1. A variant of E itS s H voG lt a2 g0 e-1 se6 n s| iB ngA dR oC mE aiL nO , NoAf ,A SSDP AacIrNos s| WsevWeraWl c.lEinSicHalG an.Od bReGhavioral aspects.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P09 .023 Comparison of CRISPR-based methods for modeling loss-of-function in iPS cells variations (CNVs) are excellent candidate to mutually underlie these two di- C. M. Seabra1,2,3, P. Manavalan1, D. J. C. Tai1,3, M. Talkowski1,3,4, J. F. Gusella1,3,4; stinct conditions. 1Center for Human Genetic Research, Boston, MA, United States, 2GABBA Program - Methods: We studied the association between CNVs and savant skills among Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 1108 children diagnosed with ASD from the Simons Simplex Collection (SSC) 3Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, database. Savant skills were determined based on five designated questions Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Departments of Genetics and Neurology, Harvard from the autism diagnostic interview revised (ADI-R) questionnaire. CNVs Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. data were retrieved from a genome-wide analysis of CNVs in these children. Results: Savant skills were significantly more prevalent in our sample than in other children with ASD in the SSC cohort (42% vs. 29%; P<0.001). Child- Introduction: Given the rapid pace of discoveries that de novo loss-of-func- ren with savant skills had, on average, a higher IQ (93.0±24.2 vs. 79.1±25.5; tion (LoF) mutations in highly conserved genes represent penetrant sources P<0.001), and a larger head circumference (HC) (54.3±2.55 vs. 53.8±2.60; of genetic risk in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), it is imperative to gener- P = 0.003). Interestingly, savant skills were associated with a lower count ate robust models that recreate the human cellular landscape, particularly of rare CNVs among children with ASD (14.0±5.54 vs. 14.8±6.2 for children for neurological disorders where brain tissue is not readily available, and to with and without savant skills respectively; P = 0.03). In addition, children eliminate the confound of different genetic backgrounds. with exceptional computational ability had lower burden of rare deletions Methods: We used an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line from a compared to other children (203.46±164.25kb vs. 333.67±715.56kb; P = healthy male subject to perform dual-guide CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing of 9 6.8x10-5) even after accounting for IQ and socioeconomic status. We also independent genes for which LoF mutations represent strong risk factors examined whether certain talents are predisposed by specific ASD suscepti- for ASD. The efficiency of 30 dual guide-RNA combinations to generate dele- bility CNV loci, but no such associations were found. tions was then compared, using either FACS sorting or puromycin selection Conclusions: Our findings suggest that CNVs contribute to the presentation followed by serial dilutions to obtain single-cell derived colonies. of exceptional talents among children with ASD. Results: Dual guide CRISPR successfully generated deletions in all genes, however the efficiency varied widely by guide-RNA and cellular protocol. 
P09 .026 The overall efficiency of the FACS method was 3.4% to generate predicted Peculiar brain activity in autism spectrum disease due to 11p15.4- ablations, out of 1002 colonies screened (range = 0% - 10.6%). By contrast, 15.5 duplication the puromycin method had an average efficiency of 15.1% from 4437 colo- M. Szegedi1, G. Inczédy-Farkas1, Á. Szabó2, I. Haltrich3, G. Fekete3, G. Rudas2, L. R. Kozák2, nies (range =0% - 32%). M. J. Molnár1; 1Semmelweis University, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Budapest, Conclusions: This systematic survey of genome editing approaches suggests Hungary, 2MR Research Centre - Szentágothai Knowledge Center, Semmelweis University, that dual-guide deletion generation varies widely by guide-pair. We also find Budapest, Hungary, 32nd Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, that the increased certainty of deriving a single cell from FACS sorting comes Hungary. at a significant cost in terms of efficiency and cell viability compared to se- rial dilutions. Support: Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (SFRH/ Introduction: ASD is a neurodevelopmental disorder with multiple genetic BD/52049/2012), Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative, Autism and non-genetic causes. The 11p15.4-15.5 duplication can be associated Speaks with intellectual disability and dysmorphic features. The aim was to assess 
P09 .024 the neural networks involved in visual and verbal memory encoding and Resilience formation against chronic stress: the Tsc2KO mouse model retrieval in ASD due to 11p15.4-15.5 duplication. to study the involvement of the mTOR pathway Materials and methods: A woman with autistic features, macrocephaly and A. Arlt, J. Winter, S. Schweiger; body asymmetry due to 11p15.4-15.5 duplication and 7 healthy controls Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, were investigated. Six runs of BOLD fMRI data were collected to assess the Mainz, Germany. networks of the visual and verbal memory encoding and retrieval; a single run of encoding task was followed by 10 minute-retention period, then 2 runs of the retrieval tasks both for visual and verbal domain respectively. Characteristic for autistic children is their reliability on well-structured days During encoding participants were instructed to memorize the task stimu- and predictable procedures. Deviations of these cause stress in them and li, whilst during retrieval they were instructed to decide whether the given result in behavioural abnormalities. We therefore hypothesize that autistic image or word was presented during the encoding period. Data analysis was children have reduced resilience for chronic stress. In order to analyse me- performed using the SPM8 toolbox under Matlab, with standard processing chanism of stress resilience in autism we are using a Tsc2KO mouse model steps. for tuberous sclerosis. TS
C2  (together with TS
C1 ) is part of a complex that Results: In patient fMRI for visual memory encoding/retrieval showed hig- inhibits the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase. Mutations in her activation in the posterior insulae, and anterior and posterior cingulate either of the two genes result in increased mTOR activity and upregulated cortices compared to the controls where visual areas were predominant downstream signalling. mTOR signalling plays an important role in memory in these tasks. Verbal memory activation was higher in the hippocampi, formation. It also is supposed to be a key player in stress resilience. parahippocampal cortices, precuneus; and lower in the anterior insulae; According to these studies we have established a behaviour battery to ana- higher visual areas in our patient compared to the controls. lyse the consequences of chronic social defeat in Tsc2KO animals. After a Conclusion: The 11p15.4-15.5 duplication resulted in peculiar activity pat- 14-days’ period of chronic stress exposure mice are being analysed in this tern of the brain responsible for visual and verbal memory in ASD. This ob- battery, which consists of an object recognition test, an elevated plus-maze servation may help to understand the pathogenesis of ASD. test, a test of nest building, an evaluation of social interaction, sucrose pre- 
P09 .027 ference, spontaneous alternation in a Y-maze test, a tail suspension test and Association and functional significance of SNPs in the AVPR1A gene in the analysis of prepulse inhibition of startle response. autism spectrum disorder in Korean population First results show that non-stressed Tsc2KO animals have alterations in H. Yoo1,2, S. Kim3, S. Yang3, J. Park4, M. Park3; social behaviour and in nest building when compared to wildtype mice. Of 1Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea, Republic of, 2Seoul note, they also show an altered response to stress and changes in stress re- National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3Eulji University, Daejon, silience. These data will give us closer insight into specific problems in au- Korea, Republic of, 4National Institute of Animal Science, Wanju, Korea, Republic of. tism and will also gain our understanding of mechanisms underlying stress resilience. Objectives: The arginine vasopressin receptor 1A gene (AVPR1A) is related 
P09 .025 to social reciprocity in humans and animals. The objective of this study is to Association between copy-number variations and savant skills among evaluate the association of AVPR1A with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) people with autism spectrum disorder and the functional significance of the markers. H. Rosenthal, I. Menashe; Methods: 1) The probands with ASD and their biological parents were re- Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. cruited. Diagnosis was ascertained using ADI-R and ADOS. 2) Two micro- satellites (R
S3 , R
S1 ) in the 5′ flanking region and 2 SNPs in the promoter region of AVPR1A were genotyped. Transmission disequilibrium test and Background: Savant skills, are reported in 10%-30% of people with autism quantitative association test with behavior measures were performed using spectrum disorder (ASD). The co-exist Een Sc He o Gf t 2he 0s 1e 6tw |o B tr Aai Rts C su Eg Lg Oest Ns Aco ,m S- PAtIhNe F| BWATW pWack.EagSeH (vG.2..0O.2Rc)G. 4) For evaluation of the functional signific 1a 8nc 3e mon underlying mechanisms that require further exploration. Copy-number of the associated marker, luciferase assay was performed.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results: Total 212 family trios (9 multiplex families, 644 persons) partici- genes for ASD, and compared transmitting and non-transmitting parental pated. 1) One SNP (rs10877969) was strongly associated with ASD (addi- test scores using a t-test corrected for multiple testing by the Group Benja- tive p-value=1.62x10-6; dominant p-value=4.81x10-6). Haplotypes with mini-Hochberg Procedure. rs10877969 and rs72945336 revealed statistical significances at the mul- Overall, CNV-transmitting parents did not differ significantly in BAPQ and tiallelic mode (additive p-value=2.2x10-5; dominant p-value=1.43x10-5). 2) SRS scores from non-transmitting parents. However, independent analyses The rs10877969 was quantitatively associated with Social Responsiveness of relative pairs revealed a significant difference in BAPQ global (t=-2.18; ad- Scale and all subdomain scores of ADI-R (p<0.01). 3) In the luciferase as- justed P=.032), BAPQ aloofness domain (t=-2.61; adjusted P=.032) and SRS say with T98G cell line, the luciferase activity of rs7294536A promoter was scores (t=-2.03; adjusted P=.047) between mothers transmitting and mo- higher than that of rs7294536G, while rs10877969 allelic variants didn’t thers not transmitting etiological CNVs to their affected sons. Our findings influence to promoter activity. indicate that mothers presenting personality traits in the broader autism Conclusion: We observed significant association of an SNP of AVPR1A with phenotype are frequently carriers of pathogenic CNVs that they transmit to affection status and social phenotypes of ASD, accompanied with functional their ASD sons. The results from the analyses of maternal phenotype and activity of the marker. CNV transmission patterns to sons support previous reports of maternal Grant support: 1) Healthcare Technology R&D project (A120029), Ministry transmission bias to male offspring, and the prevalent hypothesis of a high- of Health and Welfare, 2) National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF- er genetic risk tolerance in females due to putative protective factors. (FCT 2014R1A2A1A11053289), Republic of Korea PD/BD/52485/2014) 
P09 .028 
P09 .030 Copy number variation in 19 Italian multiplex families with autism AUT
S2  syndrome: Further delineation of the phenotype in a 68-years- spectrum disorder: importance of synaptic and neurite elongation old female genes E. Sengun1, K. Yararbas2,3, Y. Alanay1; C. Picinelli1, C. Lintas2, I. Piras1, R. Sacco2, C. Brogna2, A. M. Persico1,3; 1Acibadem University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Maltepe University School of 1Mafalda Luce Center for Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Milan, Italy, 2Unit of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Duzen Laboratories Group, Istanbul, Turkey. Child and Adolescent NeuroPsychiatry & Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry and Neurogenetics, University „Campus Bio-Medico“, Rome, Italy, 3Unit of Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, “Gaetano Martino” University Hospital, University of Introduction: Genetic evaluation of individuals with neurodevelopmental Messina, Messina, Italy. disorders, with technical improvements in array based technologies and se- quencing, has yielded an abundance of new candidate genes for intellectual disability (ID), autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), and developmental delay. Autism Spectrum Disorder is endowed with impressive heritability estima- We report a 68 year old female with mild-moderate intellectual disability, tes and high recurrence rates. Its genetic underpinnings are very heteroge- behavioral findings suggesting ASD, developmental delay and dysmorphic neous and include many common and rare variants located in hundreds of features. The SNP array analysis demonstrated a 257 kb deletion comprising different loci, each characterized by variable levels of penetrance. Multiplex exon 6 of AUT
S2  gene. families from single ethnic groups represent a useful means to reduce hete- Case Report: The patient was born at term as the first child of an unrela- rogeneity and enhance genetic load. We screened 19 Italian ASD multiplex ted couple following an uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery. Mild motor families (3 triplets and 16 duplets, total N=41 ASD subjects), using array- and significant speech delay were evident during childhood. On her physical CGH (Agilent 180K). Certainly or probably causal CNVs, defined “clinical- examination at age 68, she had short stature, microcephaly and abdominal ly relevant CNVs”, were detected in 17/41 (41%) of ASD probands, corre- obesity. Mild facial findings and micrognathia were noted. She was followed sponding to 9/19 (47%) multiplex families with at least one affected sibling for scoliosis since early adulthood. Orthopedic findings were present. Her genetically positive. However only in 3/9 (33%) of these families, siblings intellectual disability was mild to moderate with behavioral problems. She share the same causal or highly causal CNV. Additional potentially relevant was noted to be a very friendly, active and girly person. She had limited eye- CNVs not shared by affected sib pairs were detected also in these three fa- contact, hyperverbality with limited vocabulary of 40-50 words. She had milies. 45 genes are located on the “clinically relevant” CNVs. Through an tics and obsessions, skin pricking, hyperorality and sound-sensitivity. She enrichment analysis, we found that 9/45 (20%) of these genes appear pri- was not schooled but her family made sure that she was involved in daily marily involved in neurite outgrowth and synapse formation/management. activities. Our results highlight the importance of synaptic and neurite elongation ge- Conclusions: This clinical report provides the natural history in the eldest nes in the pathogenesis of autism, despite genetic heterogeneity in ASD even patients yet to be reported and complements the existing evidence sugge- within multiplex families belonging to a single ethnic group. Differences in sting that disruption of the AUT
S2  gene leads to a recently delineated neu- CNV burden may likely contribute to the substantial clinical heterogeneity rodevelopmental phenotype with a wide spectrum, namely “AUT
S2  Syndro- observed between affected sibs. The genetic and epigenetic mechanisms un- me”. derlying genomic instability in these families deserve further scrutiny. 
P09 .031 
P09 .029 Targeted next-generation sequencing in search of monogenic causes Increased frequency of the autism broader phenotype in mothers of behavioural disturbance in children transmitting etiological CNVs to sons affected by Autism Spectrum K. Komlósi1, S. Diederich1, D. L. Fend-Guella1, O. Bartsch1, H. Hu2, T. F. Wienker2, H. H. Disorder (ASD) Ropers1,2, M. Huss3, J. Stewe3, U. Zechner1, S. Schweiger1; M. Asif1,2,3, I. Conceição3,2, K. Kwiatkowska3, C. Rasga3,2, C. Café4, L. Sousa5, G. Oliveira4,6, F. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University M. Couto7, A. M. Vicente3,2,8; Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Berlin, 1Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Biosystems and Germany, 3Center for Pediatric Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatic at the Integrative Sciences Institute, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Rheinhessen Clinic Mainz, Mainz, Germany. Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Unidade de Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo do Serviço do Centro de Desenvolvimento da Criança and Centro de Investigação e Formação Clinica, Pediatric Hospital, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5University of Lisboa, Faculty of Sciences, DEIO and CEAUL, Lisbon, Introduction: Behavioral disturbance can be the presenting symptom of ge- Portugal, 6University Clinic of Pediatrics and Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life netically determined cognitive deficiency caused by de novo dominant, rare Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Department recessive and pathogenic copy number variations (CNV). NGS has accelera- of Informatics, Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 8Instituto ted diagnosis in genetically heterogeneous disorders with common clinical Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Lisbon, Portugal. features. Patients and methods: 28 children with unclear developmental delay and behavioral disturbance seen at a joint clinical genetic and psychiatric out- Autism Spectrum Disorder is a frequent neurodevelopmental disorder with patient clinic underwent targeted NGS testing including over 1200 brain re- a high male to female ratio. An increased prevalence of autism-like perso- lated genes (MPIMG-1). Following enrichment 2x300bp paired-end sequen- nality traits is found in unaffected relatives of ASD children, suggesting a cing (Illumina Miseq Kit v3) was carried out on Illumina MiSeq and a mo- genetic liability of a broader autism phenotype. We therefore hypothesized dified Medical Resequencing Analysis Pipeline was used for variant calling. that the parents of ASD children who transmit etiological CNVs might exhi- Results: In 3/28 cases pathogenic or likely pathogenic CNVs, in 8/28 a mo- bit ASD traits more frequently than non-transmitting parents. To test this nogenic cause was identified. We found 6 cases with mutations in autoso- hypothesis, we analysed CNV inheritance and parental behavioral traits in mal dominant neurodevelopmental genes, either reported and matching families from the Autism Genome Project, assessed using the Broad Autism the patient’s phenotype (PTPN11, SETB
P1 ), or likely associated with the P 1h 8e 4notype Questionnaire (BAPQ) (N=341) anEdS thHeG S o2ci0a1l R6e s| pBoAnsRivCenEeLssO NpAh,e SnoPtAypIeN ( |D WYRWK1WA, .GERSINH2GB,. OASRXG
L1 , ZEB2) but previously unreported. Scale (SRS) (N=456). We selected CNVs spanning well-established candidateABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index In siblings with absent speech, intellectual disability, aggressive behavior 17:65026851(C/T), p=5x10-4, OR=9.52). Fluorescent activated cell sorting and seizures a homozygous ALG1 mutation was associated with a mild form analysis demonstrated that the risk allele of rs371128228 decreased cell of CDG1k. In a further 4 patients, likely pathogenic unreported variants in surface trafficking of AMPA-R1 (p=0.026). known disease-causing genes (ASX
L1 , BRCA2, MBD5) were identified. WGS analysis of CACNA1C intron 3 identified two BD associated (p=0.015, Conclusions: Targeted NGS can be effective in delineating monogenic causes OR=1.15) variants 105bp apart that were in complete LD. Both variants are of a common clinical symptom associated with behavioural abnormalities. predicted to create YY1 transcription factor binding sites. Luciferase repor- A definitive diagnosis helps the family come to terms with the condition ter assays show a significant decrease in gene expression in the presence of and enables personalized treatment and care. Subsequent functional cha- both variants (p=0.004). in racterization of gene products via patient-specific iPSC models may lead to vUistrinog. two different approaches this study identified four functional variants a better understanding of the mechanisms and open up future therapeutic in two genes previously associated with BD that have a functional effect possibilities. Grant Code 
P09 .032 MRC G1000708 Hyperkinetic movement disorders with pediatric-onset related to ADCY5 gene mutations: report of three Italian families 
P09 .034 E. Mantuano1, M. Carecchio2,3,4, N. E. Mencacci5, G. Zorzi3, F. Zibordi3, A. Iodice6, C. Fusco6, Unravelling the genetic basis of bipolar disorder through exome L. Veneziano1, C. Barzaghi2, C. Panteghini2, L. R‘Bibo5, N. Wood5, B. Garavaglia2, N. sequencing in extended families with multiple affected relatives Nardocci3; C. Toma1,2, A. D. Shaw1, R. Allcock3, A. Heath1, P. B. Mitchell4,5, P. R. Schofield1,2, J. M. 1Institute of Translational Pharmacology, National Research Council, Rome, Italy, Fullerton1,2; 2Molecular Neurogenetics Department, Movement Disorders Diagnostic Unit, IRCCS 1Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, Australia, 2School of Medical Sciences, Foundation C. Besta Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Child University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 3Lotterywest State Biomedical Facility Neurology, IRCCS Foundation C. Besta Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy, 4Department Genomics, Perth, Australia, 4School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, of Translational Medicine, University of Milan Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 5Department of Australia, 5Black Dog Institute, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia. Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 6Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Santa Maria Nuova Hospital, Reggio Emilia, Italy. Introduction: Bipolar disorder (BD) is a heritable illness, contributed to by common variants of small effect and rare variants of higher penetrance. Pa- thogenic single nucleotide variants (SNV) of moderate effect are likely to be Background: ADCY5 is a recently identified gene responsible for a wide present in the encoded gene fraction (exome) and shared amongst individu- spectrum of mixed hyperkinetic early-onset movement disorders including als with BD in extended families. chorea, myoclonus and dystonia. Similarly to benign hereditary chorea due Materials and methods: We selected 15 families (117 subjects), each con- to TITF-1 mutations, the disease course seems to be non-progressive, but taining 4 or more relatives with BD, to perform whole exome sequencing severe abrupt diurnal and nocturnal exacerbations of movement disorder (WES) on the IonProton platform and copy number variant analysis (CNV) are often present. To date, 7 mutations in 21 unrelated dominant families via CytoScanHD array (2 affected per family). and sporadic cases have been reported. We selected SNVs and CNVs shared across multiple affected subjects, but Methods: 35 Italian unrelated cases with pediatric onset hyperkinetic mo- also considered de novo variants. Linkage analysis using WES-derived geno- vement disorder featuring a combination of chorea, myoclonus and dystonia types refined family-specific linkage intervals. SNVs shared amongst affec- who tested negative for TITF-1 mutations were recruited. ADCY5 exons 2 ted and unaffected relatives were analysed combining all families for gene- and 10, in which mutations have been identified in ~86% of families pu- set enrichment, gene ontology and KEGG pathways. blished to date, were sequenced. Results: The pool of SNVs shared amongst affected relatives was enriched Results: 3/35 cases (8.5%) showed mutations in exon 10. Two sporadic in targets of the Fragile-X mental retardation 1 protein (FMRP) (P=8E-09) cases carried previously reported mutations (p.R418W, p.R418Q) and one and post-synaptic density (PSD) genes (P=8E-03). The X-linked IR
S4  gene familial case with autosomal dominant inheritance carried a novel mutation carried a truncating mutation in 5 affected siblings in one family. This candi- (p.R418G). date gene displays restricted expression in the amygdala, and IR
S4 -/- fema- All patients presented between 1 and 4 years of age with delayed milestones le mice show compromised maternal behaviours. Our study also implicates and a movement disorders characterized by generalized dyskinesias, myo- the protocadherin genes, which act to mediate neuronal connectivity, with clonic jerks and mild dystonia. One patient showed prominent pyramidal loss-of-function variants and deletions in several families. signs in the lower limbs and perioral dyskinesia. In two cases exacerbations Conclusions: Genetic approaches that combine WES, CNV and linkage analy- of hyperkinesias at night and during the day without specific triggers were ses in extended families is effective in pinpointing genes and pathways that described. In adolescence one patient switched from a choreic to a promi- may contribute to the pathophysiology of the disorder. nent myoclonic phenotype. NHMRC Grants: 1063960, 1037196 Conclusions: ADCY5 mutations are an important cause of early-onset, mixed hyperkinetic movement disorders. Paroxysmal worsening of movement dis- 
P09 .035 orders both during the day and at night seems to be a key diagnostic ele- Bipolar disorder genetic variation in the miR-708 gene and its ment in these cases. binding targets A. Fiorentino1,2, N. L. O‘Brien2, D. Curtis3,4, A. McQuillin2; 
P09 .033 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 2UCL Molecular Psychiatry Bipolar Related Functional Variants in Calcium Channel Genes Laboratory, London, United Kingdom, 3UCL Genetics Institute, London, United Kingdom, N. L. O‘Brien, A. Fiorentino, S. Sharpe, M. Way, M. Morgan, D. Curtis, N. Bass, A. 4Centre for Psychiatry, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, McQuillin; United Kingdom. University College London, London, United Kingdom. Introduction: rs12576775 has been found to be associated to bipolar disor- Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a highly heritable psychiatric illness. Members der (BD) in GWAS. Downstream from the variant there is a genomic region of the calcium channel gene family have been repeaCtAeCdNlyA i1mCplicated in BD with a high recombination rate that effectively restricts the size of asso- through genome wide association studCieAsC, NcaGs4e;- case meta-analysis and pa- ciated region and implicates genes for miR-708, miR-5579 and the first exon thway analysis. This gene family includes the genes ; encoding the of ODZ4. In this study the miR-708 gene, its surrounding region and its tar- α pore of L-type calcium channels, and encoding a transmembrane gets have been analysed for possible functional variants associated with BD. AMPA receptor regulator involved in trafficking AMPA receptors to the neu- Methods: The surrounding areas of miR-708 were screened for variation ronal post synaptic density. using HRM analysis in 1,099 BD cases. Whole genome sequencing data from High resolution melting curve (HRM) analysis and whole genome sequen- 99 BD subjects had been analysed for variation in potential miR-708 binding cing (WGS) methods were used to identify functional variants in these genes sites. in the UCL BD cohort. Variants predicted to impact gene regulation, tran- Results: A total of 3 variants were detected by HRM analysis across the regi- scription or to be damaging to protein structure were genotyped in a larger on selected to be analysed. Only variants with a MAF lower than 0.01 in the case/control cohort. For rare variants publicly available data, from healthy general population were considered for genotyping in our case-control co- volunteers and individuals with psychiatric illnesses, was utilised for a more hort. rs754333774 has been found in 3 bipolar cases, 2 schizophrenia (SCZ) accurate determination of allele frequencies. cases and no controls. This variant is 260bp upstream miR-708 and could HRM identified two rare non-synonymous CACNG4 variants asso- play a role in tuning the expression of the microRNA. ciated with mental illness (rs3711
E2 S82
H2G8, 2p0=11.065 |x 1B0A-4R, COERL=4O.3N9 Aa,n Sd PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 185 Four variants had been identified in miR-708 targets binding sites. None ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of Medical Genetics and Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, them had a markedly different allele frequencies in the BD compared to the 6Mental Health Department, University Regional Hospital of Málaga, Institute of general population. Biomedicine of Málaga, Málaga, Spain, 7Unidad de Gestión Clínica del Dispositivo de Cuidados Críticos y Urgencias del Distrito Sanitario Málaga - Coin-Gudalhorce, Málaga, Conclusion: We report a single recurrent BD and SCZ case only variant lo- Spain, 8Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Goethe University Hospital, cated in miR-708 gene that may have a role in the diseases susceptibility. Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 9Isar Amper Klinikum München Ost, kbo, Haar, Germany, These finding awaits replication in independent cohorts as does a functional 10University Regional Hospital of Málaga, Department of Mental Health, Instituto de analysis of the potential consequences of this variant.Grant references: MRC Biomedicina de Málaga (IBIMA), Málaga, Spain, 11University Hospital Reina Sofia, G1000708 Department of Mental Health, Cordoba, Spain, 12Hospital of Jaen, Department of Mental  P09
.036 Health, Jaén, Spain, 13Hospital of Jerez de la Frontera, Department of Mental Health, Exome sequencing of 81 individuals from 27 multiply affected Jerez de la Frontera, Spain, 14Hospital of Puerto Real, Department of Mental Health, families implicates the contribution of rare non-synonymous variants Cádiz, Spain, 15Hospital Punta de Europa, Department of Mental Health, Algeciras, to bipolar disorder Spain, 16Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Regional Universitario Carlos Haya Málaga, A. J. Forstner1,2, S. B. Fischer3, L. M. Schenk1,2, J. Strohmaier4, A. Maaser1,2, J. Hecker5, C. Málaga, Spain, 17Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Jülich, Reinbold3, F. Degenhardt1,2, F. Streit4, H. Thiele6, P. Nürnberg6, J. Guzman Parra7, G. Orozco Jülich, Germany. Diaz8, G. Auburger9, M. Albus10, M. Borrmann-Hassenbach10, M. José González11, S. Gil Flores12, F. J. Cabaleiro Fabeiro13, F. del Río Noriega14, F. Perez Perez15, J. Haro González16, F. Rivas17, F. Mayoral17, S. Herms1,2,3, P. Hoffmann1,2,3, M. Rietschel4, M. M. Nöthen1,2, S. Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe psychiatric disorder affecting about 1% Cichon1,3,18; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of of the world’s population. The highly heritable disease is characterized by Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Division of Medical recurrent episodes of mania and depression. Genetics and Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, As the cumulative impact of common alleles with small effect may only ex- 4Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental plain around 38% of the phenotypic variance for BD, rare variants of high Health, University Medical Center Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, penetrance have been suggested to contribute to BD susceptibility. Germany, 5Department of Genomic Mathematics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, In the present study we investigated 226 individuals of 70 large multiplex 6Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7Mental BD families of German and Spanish origin by whole exome sequencing (Il- Health Department, University Regional Hospital of Málaga, Institute of Biomedicine of Málaga, Malaga, Spain, 8Unidad de Gestión Clínica del Dispositivo de Cuidados lumina HiSeq2500 platform). For data analysis the Varbank pipeline of the Críticos y Urgencias del Distrito Sanitario Málaga - Coin-Gudalhorce, Malaga, Spain, Cologne Center for Genomics was used. We filtered for rare (minor allele fre- 9Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Goethe University Hospital, quency <0.1%) and non-synonymous variants that are shared within each Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 10Isar Amper Klinikum München Ost, kbo, Haar, Germany, family and are predicted to be damaging by at least four of five different 11University Regional Hospital of Málaga, Department of Mental Health, Instituto de bioinformatics tools. Biomedicina de Málaga (IBIMA), Malaga, Spain, 12University Hospital Reina Sofia, So far, we identified 955 rare, segregating and potentially damaging variants Department of Mental Health, Cordoba, Spain, 13Hospital of Jaen, Department of Mental in 889 different genes. Pathway analysis of 269 genes with a Residual Va- Health, Jaen, Spain, 14Hospital of Jerez de la Frontera, Department of Mental Health, Jerez de la Frontera, Spain, 15Hospital of Puerto Real, Department of Mental Health, riation Intolerance Score <25% showed a significant enrichment (p<0.001) Cádiz, Spain, 16Hospital Punta de Europa, Department of Mental Health, Algeciras, for 37 pathways including neuron differentiation and axon development. In Spain, 17Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Regional Universitario Carlos Haya Malaga, addition, 58 genes were implicated by rare variants in at least two unrela- Malaga, Spain, 18Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Jülich, ted families. These comprise NRXN2 which encodes a synaptic cell-adhesion Jülich, Germany. molecule connecting pre- and postsynaptic neurons and mediating synaptic signaling. Our preliminary results suggest that rare and highly-penetrant variants in Bipolar disorder (BD) is a highly heritable mood disorder with a lifetime genes involved in synaptic signaling and neuron development contribute to prevalence of about 1%. Models of illness are most consistent with a poly- BD. Further investigation of the remaining families and follow up analyses genic contribution of common and rare variants to disease susceptibility. As are currently underway and will be presented at the upcoming conference. the cumulative impact of common alleles may only explain around 38% of  P09
.038 the phenotypic variance, rare variants of high penetrance have been sugge- CADASIL: Variants of unknown significance (VUS) may affect mRNA sted to contribute to BD susceptibility. splicing of the NOTCH3 gene In the present study we investigated the role of rare variants in BD by con- H. Vlaskova1, M. Hruba2, H. Treslova1, M. Hnizdova Bouckova1, L. Dvorakova1, R. Matej3, ducting whole-exome sequencing of 81 individuals from 27 large multiply J. Sikora1, H. Hulkova1, V. Kozich1; affected Spanish and German families. In each family 3 genetically distant 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, University Hospital and 1st Faculty of affected individuals were selected for exome sequencing. For variant calling Medicine, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Department of Genetics and data analysis, the VARBANK pipeline of the Cologne Center for Geno- and Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, mics was used. We focused on rare non-synonymous variants (minor alle- 3Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Thomayer Hospital, Prague 4, Czech le frequency <0.1%) that were shared among all three affected individuals Republic. and predicted to be potentially/probably damaging by at least 3 of 5 applied bioinformatics tools. Segregating variants in genes affected in at least two independent families were validated using Sanger sequencing. Background: Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical Among all families we identified 404 rare non-synonymous and potential- infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is characterized by migrai- ly damaging variants spanning 393 genes. 8 genes harbored rare segrega- ne, recurrent stroke, and dementia. CADASIL is caused by mutations in the ting variants in at least two independent families including RG S12
 which NOTCH3 gene. Typical NOTCH3 mutations result in the the addition or the is known to play an important role in promoting and maintaining neuro- loss of a cysteine residue. Nonetheless, other types of NOTCH3 mutations nal differentiation. Pathway analysis of all genes with a Residual Variation were recently identified to also associate with CADASIL. Intolerance Score <10% revealed significant enrichment for 18 pathways Patients and Methods: In a cohort of 220 patients suspected of having CADA- after correction for multiple testing including synaptic membrane and axon SIL, we detected by Sanger sequencing typical mutations in 70 individuals guidance. with 24 different alleles. In addition, we observed 7 variants of unknown AJ.Forstner&SB.Fischer contributed equally to this work. significance (VUS) in the other 11 patients (p.G73V, p.R374=, p. S497
L, p.T575=, p.R607H, p.V644D, c.2410+97A>T). In this study we examined the  P09
.037 effects of 3 of these VUSs on mRNA splicing by analysing cDNA. Nucleid acids Exome sequencing of European families densely affected with bipolar were isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes. disorder reveals rare variants in synaptic genes contributing to Results: The variants p.G73V and p. S497
L did not exhibit any effect on struc- disease etiology ture alteration or mRNA stability. However, in-silico analyses predicted that A. Maaser1,2, J. Strohmaier3, K. U. Ludwig1,2, F. Degenhardt1,2, F. Streit3, L. M. Schenk1,2, A. a novel variant (c.1725G>A, p.Thr575=) generates a new donor splice site C. Koller1,2, S. B. Fischer4, H. Thiele5, P. Nürnberg5, J. Guzman Parra6, G. Orozco Diaz7, G. Auburger8, M. Albus9, M. Borrmann-Hassenbach9, M. José González10, S. Gil Flores11, F. J. in exon 11 with subsequent missplicing. Indeed, the sequencing analyses Cabaleiro Fabeiro12, F. del Río Noriega13, F. Perez Perez14, J. Haro González15, F. Rivas16, F. revealed a deletion of 120 nucleotides (r.1607_1726del120) that putatively Mayoral16, S. Herms1,2,4, P. Hoffmann1,2,4, S. Cichon1,4,17, M. Rietschel3, M. M. Nöthen1,2, A. J. causes an inframe deletion of 40 amino acids including 6 cysteine residues. Forstner1,2; This abnormality is expected to lead to uneven disulfide pairing and conse- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of quently to abnormal folding of the Notch3 protein. Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Conclusions: Our study demonstrates that non-typical NOTCH3 variants Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, University such as synonymous or missense mutations not affecting directly cysteine Medical Center Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 4Division residues may be a potential molecular cause of CADASIL. 186 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONSAu,p SpoPrAt: IMNH |- CWZ-WDRWO-V.EFSN6H4G16.O5 aRnGd PRVOUK- P24
/LF1/3.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.040 University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 5Department of Pathology, Copy number variations in psychiatric patients with intellectual University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. disability and catatonia: an exploratory study A. M. L. Vogels; Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. Introduction: Cerebellar dysfunction has a large impact on both cognitive and motor behavior and mounting evidence implicates the cerebellum in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). However, the impact of ASD genes on ce- Introduction: Catatonia is a motor dysregulation syndrome co-occurring rebellar development and function is largely unknown. Here, we defined the with a variety of psychiatric and somatic disorders. The good response to 15 post-conception week (pcw) human fetal cerebellar transcriptome and treatment with benzodiazepines and electroconvulsive therapy indicates a hypothesized that ASD genes have neuron-type specific expression. neurobiological background. Environmental factors as well as genetic fac- Materials and Methods: Laser capture microdissection (LCM) of intact tors play a role in the etiopathogenesis. Research on the genetic aetiology cerebella from two 15 pcw fetuses enabled isolation of Purkinje cell (PC) is limited. We hypothesize that copy number variations known to be risks and granule cell (GC) progenitor neurons. High-quality RNA was isolated factors for neurodevelopmental disorders may play a role in the aetiology (RIN>8), sequencing libraries using TruSeq RNA Access kit were construc- of catatonia. The aim of this study is to describe the CNVs in a population of ted, barcoded, and sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq 2000. Paired end psychiatric patients with an intellectual disability and catatonia. Methods: reads were aligned to the human genome HG19 using Tophat2, genes and Fifteen intellectually disabled adults admitted to a psychiatric inpatient unit counts were summarized using HTSeq. Gene-level differential expression and diagnosed with catatonia were selected for genetic examination. Me- was analyzed using DESeq2. dical files were analysed retrospectively to collect data on cognitive func- Results: On average, RNA-seq generated 18 million high-quality reads per tioning and psychiatric diagnosis. A clinical genetic examination was per- sample, 96% of which mapped uniquely. Hierarchical clustering using the formed. Blood samples were taken for molecular karyotyping (Comparative most variable genes within the dataset distinguished LCM-isolated PC and Genomic Hybridisation). Results: CNVs, including 5 duplications and 3 dele- GC samples, including several known PC- or GC-specific genes. ASD genes tions, were detected in 8 of the 15 patients (53%). In 2 of these patients a generated from exome sequencing studies were expressed either throug- microdeletion including SHANK3 was found. Psychiatric diagnoses in these hout the cerebellum or restricted to PC neurons. patients are autism, psychotic and affective disorders. Intellectual disability Conclusions: LCM is an effective method to enrich for developing PC and GC ranged from borderline to severe disability. Conclusion: CNVs occurred in neurons in human fetal cerebellum. ASD genes are expressed throughout half of intellectually disabled psychiatric adults with catatonia. These fin- mid-gestation cerebellum or restricted to PC neurons, further substantia- dings suggest that SHANK3del may play a role in the aetiology of catatonia ting cerebellar neuroimaging and neuropathological findings in ASD, and in intellectually disabled patients. Cognitive functioning ranged from bor- providing a potential neuronal therapeutic target. derline to severe intellectual disability. Genetic research in children as well Grant references as in adults with intellectual disabilities and psychiatric comorbidity is im- NICHD; R24HD000836-47R24HD000836 portant and meaningful. NINDS; 2RO1N S050375
  P09
.041  P09
.043 Our experience in Genetic testing of Cerebrous Cavernous Expert recommendations for the laboratory diagnosis of neuronal Malformations: Revisiting indication criteria ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2 disease): diagnostic algorithm and M. Borregán, A. Esteve, A. Cueto, T. Vendrell, I. Valenzuela, J. Vilalta, A. Outerial, A. Tenes, best practice guidelines for a timely diagnosis E. Tizzano, O. Diez; E. Izzo1, M. AlSayed2, D. Burke3, J. Cohen-Pfeffer1, J. D. Cooper4, L. Dvořáková5, M. Fietz6, R. Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Disease Unit, Hospital Vall Giugliani7, H. Jahnová5, Z. Lukacs8, S. Mole9, I. Noher de Halac10, D. Pearce11, A. Schulz12, N. d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain. Specchio13, W. Xin14, N. Miller1; 1BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, CA, United States, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Alfaisal University and King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, INTRODUCTION: Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCM) are vascular Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Chemical Pathology, Camelia Botnar Laboratories, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, abnormalities that occur mostly sporadically and associated with a single & Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Institute of lesion. CCM can also be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern charac- Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague terized by the presence of multiple lesions, but much less frequently. Three and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 6Department of known genes KRIT1, MG C4607
 and PDCD10 are usually studied when mul- Diagnostic Genomics, PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA, Nedlands, Australia, 7Serviço tiple cavernomas are found. When a single abnormality is found the yield of de Genética Médica HCPA, Departamento de Genética UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, the molecular study is very low, but little is known when lesions are descri- 8Newborn screening and Metabolic Diagnostics unit, Hamburg University Medical bed as suggestive and/or not clearly quantified as multiple but as discrete. Center, Hamburg, Germany, 9Molecular Cell Biology, MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 10Universidad Nacional de We aimed to analyse our casuistic to update recommendations for testing Córdoba, Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Córdoba, Argentina, 11Sanford Children’s Health and counselling of families. Research Center, Sioux Falls, SD, United States, 12Department of Pediatrics, University MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted a detailed clinical molecular Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 13Department of Neuroscience, analysis (sequencing and MLPA of KRIT1, MG C4607
 and PDCD10) in 63 Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 14Neurogenetics DNA Diagnostic Lab, CCM patients referred from the Neurosurgery Department of our Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. in an effort to analyze the correlation of clinical and RMN findings with the molecular results. RESULTS: We identified mutations in 35% of cases, which was increased up Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs), a heterogeneous groTuPpP 1o/f ClyLsNo2somal to 75% when only multiple lesions (n=28) were considered. No mutation storage disorders, include the rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative was revealed in patients with a single cavernoma (n=9) neither in those disorder CLN2 disease (CLN2). CLN2 is due to mutations in gene with 2 lesions (n=18). Only one from 8 patients with more than two and causing tripeptidyl-peptidase-1 (TP P1
) enzyme deficiency. Classic late-in- up to four discrete number of lesions showed a mutation correlating with a fantile CLN2 has pediatric onset with initial symptoms of seizures and lan- positive family history. guage delay followed by progressive dementia, motor and visual deteriorati- CONCLUSIONS: Patients with a discrete number of malformations should be on and early death. Variant phenotypes occur more rarely. CLN2 diagnosis is settle apart from the recognized familial multiple CCM to optimize GT yield based on laboratory testing following clinical suspicion. Early diagnosis is and establish clear recommendations for clinical management and assess- key to optimizing clinical care and future therapies outcomes, yet delays in ment of these families. diagnosis are common due to low disease awareness, non-specific initial symptoms and limited diagnostic testing access in some regions.  P09
.042 In May 2015, international experts met to recommend best laboratory prac- Autism-related gene expression is spatially restricted in mid- tices for early CLN2 diagnosis. When clinical signs suggest NCLs, TP P1
 acti- gestation human fetal cerebellum vity should be the first test performed (along with palmitoyl-protein-thioe- I. A. Glass1, K. Aldinger2, A. Timms3, M. Deng4, T. Naluai-Cecchini4, D. O‘Day4, M. Weaver5, sterase-1 to exclude CLN1). However, since reaching initial suspicion of M. O. Dorschner5, W. B. Dobyns1, K. J. Millen1; CLN2 and NCLsT iPs Pc1h/aCllLeNng2ing, where available, use of epilepsy gene panels 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington; Center for Integrative Brain to investigate unexplained seizures in childhood is endorsed. These panels Research, Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 2Center for should include besides genes for other NCLs lacking biochemi- Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Seattle, Seattle, WA, cal tests. United States, 3Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Seattle Children’s Research Institute,, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Department of Pediatrics, Diagnostic TP P1
 enzyme test in leukocytes is well established and robust and in DBS is considered diagnostic if followed by molecular testing. Futu- ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPArIeN m | eWthoWdsW to. EmSeHasGur.eO TRPG P1
 activity via MS/MS may improve DBS-b1a8se7dABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.046 Structural chromosome 21-specific instability in the diseased brain TP P1
 testing sensitivity allowing also future newborn screening. To confirm Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova2,1,3, T. Liehr4, A. D. Kolotii2,1, I. Y. Iourov1,2,5; clinical suspicion of CLN2, theT PrPec1o/mCLmNe2n ded .gold standard for laboratory 1National Research Center of Mental Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research and diagnosis is demonstrating deficient TP P1
 activity and/or detecting causati- Clinical Institute for Pediatrics named after Y.E Veltishev at the Pirogov Russian National ve mutations in each allele of gene Research Medical University, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow  P09
.044 State University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute Novel frameshift mutation in CHD8 causes familial autism spectrum of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Russian Medical disorder with intrafamilial clinical variability Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation. T. Reimand1, K. Noormets2, I. Talvik3, S. Pajusalu4; 11. Department of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia 2. Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Introduction. Chromosome 21 aneuploidy has been shown to affect the di- Tartu, Estonia 3. Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tartu,, Tartu, seased brain especially in individuals with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Howe- Estonia, 2Department of Neurology, Children’s Clinic of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, ver, structural chromosome 21-specific instability has never been a target Estonia, Tartu, Estonia, 3Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 41. Department of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia 2. Department of Biomedicine, for molecular (neuro)cytogenetic studies of the diseased brain. Here, we Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, have addressed chromosome 21 structural variations in single cells of the Tartu, Estonia. AD, schizophrenia and autism brain as well as in the unaffected brain. Materials and Methods. Ten AD, 18 schizophrenia, 12 autism and 20 age- CHD8 and sex matched samples of the postmortem brain (frontal cortex, Brod- Recently disruptive mutations in chromodomain helicase DNA-binding mann area 10) were studied by interphase chromosome-specific multicolor domain 8 ( CH) Dg8ene were shown to cause neurocognitive syndrome in- banding (ICS-MCB) and NeuN- immunohistochemistry. volving autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and macrocephaly. We describe a Results. We were able to show that rare recurrent rearrangements of chro- familial case of -related syndrome showing variable clinical phenotype mosome 21 or structural chromosome 21-specific instabilities are found al- among three affected family members. most exclusively in the AD brain. These were isochromosomes 21q, 21q22- The proband was a girl, first referred to clinical geneticist at the age of 2y5m >qter losses and chromosome 21 breaks at 21q21 and 21q22 affecting 0.6- due to global developmental delay and facial dysmorphism. Her occipito- 3.7% of cells. NeuN immunohistochemistry has indicated that the instability frontal circumference (OFC) was +2 SD. At the age of 6y she had mild in- randomly affects NeuN-positive and NeuN-negative cell nuclei in contrast to tellectual disCaHbDil8ity, ASD, and epilepsy. Her communication skills improved chromosome 21 breaks, which were more prevalent in NeuN-positive cell with initiation of antiepileptic treatment. Novel heterozygous frameshift nuclei. mutation in was detected by next generation sequencing panel (4800 Conclusions. Our data suggests that chromosome 21-specific instability is genes): NM_001170629.1:c.2423_2424del, p.(Arg808Lysfs*12). able to contribute to the AD pathogenesis. One can hypothesize chromoso- Her brother had congenital heart defect, bilateral inguinal hernias, and fa- me 21 breaks confined to NeuN-positive cells of the AD brain to result from cial dysmorphism. He started to walk at the age of 2y. At 3y10m his OFC was the dysregulation of DNA replication/reparation or DNA damage response +1.75 SD. He had no speech, and the developmental delay and ASD pheno- pathways. Supported by the Russian Science Foundation (Grant #14-35- type were more severe than in his sister. Their father had inguinal hernia, 00060) and ERA.Net RUS Plus Programme. problems with making friends during childhood, and some learning difficul-  P09
.047 ties. ACt HthDe8 age of 29y he has facial dysmorphism, and poor eye contact but Population genetics of SNPs, associated with cognitive traits and no remarkable communication problems. His OFC is 61 cm (> +2 SD)C. HTDh8e Alzheimer’s diseases, in populations of Russia same mutation was confirmed in both brother and father. M. Swarovskaya, 6340501, V. Stepanov1,2, A. Bocharova1, A. Marusin1, K. Vagaitseva1,2; In conclusion, our study suggests that the clinical picture caused by 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Tomsk State University, mutations can vary significantly between family members. The most pre- Tomsk, Russian Federation. valent feature is ASD, but macrocephaly is not present in every individual.  P09
.045 Case report: exome sequencing of a family with childhood Introduction. Cognitive functions in normal population and in various forms disintegrative disorder. of dementia, the main of which is Alzheimer‘s disease (AD), demonstrate a F. Ceroni1, M. Absoud2, G. Baird2, A. Velayos-Baeza1, D. Newbury1; high level of heritability as well as considerable individual variability. Popu- 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Guy‘s & St lation background appears to be an important factor in personalized health Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. care and predictive medicine directed to prevention of common diseases, including AD. The aim of this study was to estimate the variability of genetic markers strongly associated with cognitive performance (CP) and AD across Childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD) is a very rare but devastating neu- the multiple Eurasian populations. rodevelopmental condition characterised by rapid and severe decline in Methods. We selected 53 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) repor- developmental skills (communication, play, self-care, cognition) in children ted in recent GWAS as highly significantly associated with AD and CP, and with apparently normal previous development for the first 2 years of life. investigated the population variability of these markers in 20 populations The regression results in significant long-term impairments in social com- of Russia representing Eastern Europe, Caucasus, Central Asia, North Asia munication skills, similar to features of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and Siberia. with severe intellectual disability. Extensive neurometabolic investigations Results. Considerable between-population variability in allele frequencies usually do not reveal an underlying aetiology. We report an exome sequen- was found. Average genetic diversity ranged from 0.34 in Belorussians to cing study of a family with two affected children and neurotypical parents. 0.39 in Kazakhs. Population differentiation measured by Fst varied wide- Pathway analyses of rare and potentially damaging variants highlighted two ly across the loci studied (from 0.005 to 0.144). Mean Fst for all SNPs was variants in genes involved in intracellular trafficking and recruitment of pro- 0.048. Mean Fst for AD (0.033) proved to be substantially lower than po- teins to the centrosome: both children carry a maternal stop codon in PCM1 pulation differentiation for CP (0.053). Allele frequencies tend to correlate (NP_006188, p. E1912
X) and a paternal nonsynonymous change in ALM S1
 between populations according their geographical locations. (NP_055935, p. S763
N). PCM1 is an essential component of the centriolar Conclusion. Our data indicate wide inter-population variation in the fre- satellites and interacts with several proteins, including DIS C1
 (disrupted in quency of alleles associated with cognitive functions in norm and patho- schizophrenia 1) and BB S4
 (Bardet-Biedl Syndrome 4). Mutations in ALM S1
 logy. This variability may contribute to variation in genetic predisposition can cause Alström Syndrome, a rare recessive multi-system ciliopathy, clo- to dementia in ethnically different populations and to population-specific sely related to the Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS). The biological functions patterns of associations. of ALM S1
 are still being elucidated, but roles in cilium function and mainte- This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (project # 16- nance, intracellular trafficking, signaling pathways and cell cycle regulation 14-00020). have been suggested. Although the functional interaction between ALM S1
 and PCM1 needs to be further investigated, the participation of the two pro- teins to the same cellular network, which has been previously implicated in other neurodevelopmental disorders, led us to hypothesize a possible com- pound effect of the two identified variants. 188 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.048 Steinfeld4, I. Kern1, S. E. Antonarakis1,3, S. Fokstuen1; Moroccan patient with CCD C88
C related congenital hydrocephalus: A 1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2The Johns Hopkins School of case report Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 3University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, W. Smaili1,2, I. C. Jaouad1,2, A. Baumer3, A. Rauch3, A. Sefiani1,2; 4University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. 1Centre de Génomique Humaine – Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie- Université Mohamed V, Rabat, Morocco, 2Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d’Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, 3Institute for Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a group of autosomal recessive Switzerland. neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorders. Neuronal ceroid lipofus- cinosis-10 (CLN10 – OMIM #610127) due to cathepsin D deficiency is the most severe form, characterized by prenatal onset, and presents at birth Nonsyndromic congenital hydrocephalus is a rare condition characterized with congenital microcephaly, extensive neuronal loss, neonatal seizures by abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid that leads to in utero onset and early death. Few cases have been reported to date. of ventricles enlargement. We report on a female baby, born at 37 4/7 gestational weeks to consan- TheL d1iCsAeMase etiology is poorly clarified and the most frequent monoge- guineous parents after an uneventful pregnancy. Apgar score was 2/2/3. At nic form of congenital hydrocephalus is due to hemizygous mutations in birth the neonate did not have sufficient spontaneous breathing and needed tLh1eC AM, gene. This form is X-linked and cliniCcCaDllyC 8c8hCaracterised by a com- intubation. In addition, she developed neonatal seizures. Brain MRI revealed bination of hydrocephalus in association with adducted thumbs. Besides severe and diffuse atrophy on both the brain and the cerebellum. The signal autozygosity mapping revealed that mutations seem to on the thalami was decreased on T2 and increased on T1. The spectroscopy cause a distinct non-syndromic complex hydrocephalus inherited in autoso- showed an important deficit of NAA and elevated lactate. Support was with- mal recessive way, with apparently normal psychomotor development de- drawn 5 days after birth, given the poor prognosis. Based on the neuroima- spite the impressive prenatal cerebral phenotype. This gene was identified ging findings, a neurodegenerative disease with prenatal onset, like CLN10, as a further essential component of the Wnt signalling pathway in human was suspected. brain development. We performed exoCmTeS Dsequencing with targeted bioinformatic analysis of We hereby report the case of a Moroccan girl, born of consanguineous 225 genes responsibleC TofS Dprenatal/perinatal encephalopathy including the parents, with congenital nonsyndromic hydrocephalus. Fetal ultrasound at cathepsin D gene ( ). The results revealed homozygosity for a novel 3 27 weeks‘ gestation showed enlarged ventricles. Brain MRI at birth showed base-pair deletion in presumed to lead to the deletion of a phenyl- tCrCivDeCn8t8riCcular assymetric hydrocephalus with devided appearance of the alanine residue. Both parents were heterozygous carriers of the variant left lateral ventricle. The child had seizures with mild psychomotor delay. (NM_001909.4:c.686_688del). Functional studies were performed and de- gene sequencing found a homozygous mutation in the exon 30: monstrated absence of cathepsin D enzyme activity as well as undetectable c.5265_5266delCAC C(DpC. P8
h8e C1755
Leufs*4), parents were both heterozygous protein product in Western Blot, thus further suggesting pathogenicity of for this mutation. this variant. These results confirmed the diagnosis of CLN10. Identification of autosomal recessive congenital hydrocephalus  P09
.051 allowed us to offer adequate support to the patient and to provide genetic Mutations of the mTOR C1
-regulating complex GATOR1 in focal counseling to parents. epilepsies  P09
.049 S. Baldassari1, L. Licchetta2, C. Marconi1, C. T. Myers3, F. Palombo1, P. Magini1, H. C. Severe neurodegenerative phenotype associated with progressive loss Mefford3, M. Seri1, LICE NFLE Study Group, P. Tinuper2, F. Bisulli2, T. Pippucci1; of myelination caused by a homozygous nonsense mutation in CSTB 1Medical Genetics Unit, Dept of Medical and Surgical Siencies, University of Bologna - A. O‘Brien1, C. R. Marshall2,3, S. Blaser4, P. Ray2,5, G. Yoon1,6; Sant‘Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 2IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche 1Division of clinical and metabolic genetics, department of paediatrics, Hospital for Sick di Bologna - Dept of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department of paediatric laboratory medicine, Hospital Bologna, Italy, 3Dept of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The centre for applied genomics, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Division of paediatric neuroradiology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Department of molecular genetics, University Focal epilepsies (FEs) account for nearly 60% of all epileptic syndromes and of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Division of neurology, Department of paediatrics, are characterized by epileptic discharges originating from a limited area Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. of the brain with heterogeneous etiologies. The most genetically characte- rized forms of FEs are Nocturnal Frontal Lobe Epilepsy (NFLE), Epilepsy with Auditory Features (EAF) and Familial Focal Epilepsy with Variable Foci Introduction: Mutations of the cystatin B gene (CSTB; OMIM 601145) are (FFEVF). The genes associated with these conditions cumulatively explain known to cause Unverricht-Lundborg disease, or progressive myoclonic a low percentage of the cases. We performed Whole Exome Sequencing epilepsy-1A (EPM1A, MIM #254800). Most patients are homozygous for an (WES) analysis on a cohort of patients with FE, including 60 NFLE pro- expanded (>30) dodecamer repeat in the promoter region of CSTB. Some bands and 25 EAF probands, together with their healthy parents in the case patients are compound heterozygotes for the dodecamer repeat and a point of sporadic patients (trios) or affected relatives when available. The gene- mutation, and these patients generally have an earlier age of onset and more tic analysis revealed 7 variants in the known gene DEPD C5
 and 1 NPR L2
 severe phenotype. Case Report: Two sisters born to consanguineous parents variant, which encode two components of the GATOR1 complex, together of Sri-Lankan descent presented with profound global developmental de- with NPR L3
, negatively regulating mTOR C1
 signaling cascade. Our findings lay, microcephaly, cortical blindness, and central hypotonia with periphe- contributed to the discovery of the involvement of all the GATOR1 complex ral hypertonia. Neither sibling ever developed head control, independent genes in the pathogenesis of up to 9% of FEs, in contrast to the concept that sitting or ambulation, and never developed speech. The elder sister had specific seizure semiologies point to the main involvement of specific brain a seizure disorder while the younger one had multiple electroencephalo- areas. We therefore screened for mutations in GATOR1 encoding genes in grams which failed to detect seizures. Clinical examination of both sisters an additional cohort of 65 patients with FEs using Multiple Inversion Pro- revealed profound microcephaly, beaked nose with overhanging columella, be technology, finding a novel nonsense variant in NPR L3
 in one additional supernumerary teeth, and short neck. On serial brain imaging, they had pro- patient. The deregulation of GATOR1 in FEs have important implications for gressive atrophy of the corpus callosum, and diffuse hypomyelination with patients’ diagnosis and treatment, suggesting GATOR1/mTOR signaling as a progressive loss of myelination. Results: Exome sequencing revealed both potential key target for effective anti-epileptic drugs. siblings to be homozygous for a c.218dup (p.His75Serfs*) mutation in exon 3 of CSTB. Their mother was a confirmed carrier of the mutation; the father  P09
.052 was unavailable for testing. Conclusion: The neuroimaging features of our DHCR7 mutations causing Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome in a patient patients are consistent with those observed in Cstb-knockout mice, which cohort from Balkan region supports the hypothesis that disease severity is inversely correlated with A. V. Kirov1,2, T. Todorov2, V. Plaiasu3, K. Kovacheva4, A. Todorova1,2; the amount of residual functional cystatin B protein. To our knowledge, this 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Mother and Child’s Care Institute IOMC “Prof.dr. Alfred is the first report of a homozygous nonsense mutation in CSTB in humans. Rusescu”, Bucharest, Romania, 4UMBAL “Dr, G. Stranski”, Pleven, Bulgaria.  P09
.050 Further case of the rare congenital neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis form confirmed by targeted exome sequencing showing a novel Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a rare metabolic disorder inheri- cathepsin D mutation ted in an autosomal recessive pattern. Clinically it is characterized by de- K. Varvagiannis1, J. Fluss1, A. Poretti2, M. H. Billieux1, R. De Luca1, P. Rimensberger1, S. velopmental abnormalities, such as psychomotor retardation, craniofacial Hanquinet1, M. Guipponi1, E. Hammar1, P. Makrythanasis1,3, M. Lidgren1,3, J. L. Blouin1, R. anomalies, limb malformations, pre- and postnatal failure to thrive, genital particularities and variable structural anomalies of internal organs. From ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 189 biochemical point of view this condition is characterized by low plasma cho-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index lesterol levels and high concentrations of the cholesterol precursor 7-dehy- tabase of WES variants. We identified a predicted damaging mutation resul- drocholesterol (7DHC) due to the deficient activity of 7DHC Δ7-reductase ting in a p.R C2
E2 P96
L3  substitution in the centrosomal protein 63kDa (CE
P63 ) re- encoded by the DHCR7 gene. quired for normal centriole duplication and cell cycle progression. Further, Here we report 8 unrelated patients from Romanian and Bulgarian ori- a common varianDt YsXh1oCw1e d sig KnIiAfiAc0an31t 9association with white matter gin with different mutations in the DHCR7 gene. We identified the fol- volume partly overlapping with regions influenced by polymorphisms in the lowing mutations: c.278C>T; p.(Thr93Met) - allele frequency 18,75%; DD susceptibility genes and , consistent with previous re- c.293A>C, p.(Gln98Pro) - 6,25%; c.355delC, p.(Val126*) - 6,25%; c.452G>A; ported roles in neuronal migration. p.(Trp151*) - 37,5%; c.964-1G>C - 6,25%; c.976G>T; p.(Val326Leu) - Preliminary confocal imaging showed localisation of both endogenous wild 12,50%; c.1295A>G; p.(Tyr432Cys) - 6,25%; c.1315delC; p.(Leu439Cysfs*2) type CE
P63  and exogenous p.R229L CE
P63  to the centrosome in RP
E1  - 6,25%. The mutations were detected by Sanger sequencing (using BigDye cells suggesting a potential dominant negative effect of the mutant protein. terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit). The DNA sequencing results were Further studies may reveal the impact of p.R229L CE
P63  on cellular func- compared to NCBI Reference Sequence: NM_001360.2. The genetically con- tion and brain development. firmed diagnosis allowed genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis in the We acknowledge grants from the Karolinska Institutet, the Magnus Bergvall affected families. Foundation, the Swedish Research Council, Swedish Brain Foundation, the Generally the incidence of SLOS is not known accurately. The relative fre- Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation and the Bank of Sweden Tercente- quencies of SLOS mutations differ among populations. The estimate range nary Foundation. may vary due to different criteria used in the selection of the patients. Alt- 
P09 .056 hough the absolute incidence in some countries is uncertain, it’s clear that Mono-allelic and bi-allelic variants in EM
C1 , implicated in ER- there are different incidences among various ethnic groups. mitochondria communication, are associated with neurodegeneration 
P09 .054 Y. Bayram1, T. Harel1, G. Yesil2, Z. Coban-Akdemir1, W. L. Charng1, E. Karaca1, A. A. Molecular profile of neurodevelopment in trisomy 21 using iPS cells Asmari3, M. K. Eldomery1, J. V. Hunter4, S. N. Jhangiani1,5, J. A. Rosenfeld1,6, D. Pehlivan1, M. Sobol1, J. Klar1, J. Nordlund2, G. Annerén1, A. Falk3, N. Dahl1; A. W. El-Hattab7, M. A. Saleh3, C. A. LeDuc8, D. Muzny5, E. Boerwinkle5,9, Baylor-Hopkins 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2SNP&SEQ Technology Platform, Uppsala, Center for Mendelian Genomics, R. A. Gibbs1,5, W. K. Chung10, Y. Yang1,6, J. W. Belmont1, J. Sweden, 3Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. R. Lupski1,5,11; 1Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Bezmialem University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Section of Medical Genetics, Children‘s Specialist Hospital, King Fahad Medical We have created an in vitro system for the recreation of key events during City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Department of Pediatric Radiology, Texas Children‘s early stages of neurodevelopment in Down syndrome (DS) using induced Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 5Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. Fibroblasts from two non-related DS patients College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 6Baylor Miraca Genetics Laboratories, with trisomy 21 and from two healthy control individuals were reprogram- Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 7Division of Clinical Genetics med to iPS cells followed by differentiation to early neuronal progenitor and Metabolic Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Tawam Hospital, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 8Departments of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New cells (NPCs) and further into neurons. York, NY, United States, 9Human Genetics Center, University of Texas Health Science Transcriptome profiles were obtained from total RNA of NPCs and neurons. Center, Houston, TX, United States, 10Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia We used the Illumina platform (SNP&Seq platform, SciLifeLab, Uppsala Uni- University Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, 11Department of Pediatrics, versity) and the TopHat and Cufflinks workflow (reference GRCh37). Over Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. 50000 mapped transcripts were identified for each RNA sample. Data were analysed for differentially expressed transcripts in DS vs. control cells using Cuffdiff and FDR-adjusted p-value of the test statistic (q-values) Introduction: The paradigm of a single gene associated with one specific with a significance cut-off q<0.05. We detected 541 and 277 transcripts that phenotype and mode of inheritance has been repeatedly challenged. Geno- were differentially expressed in NPCs and neurons, respectively. Moreover, type-phenotype correlations can often be traced to different mutation types, 221 differentially expressed transcripts were “shared” between both cells localization of the variants in distinct protein domains, or the trigger of or types. To clarify pathways and molecular networks in neuronal cells asso- escape from nonsense mediated decay. ciated with trisomy 21 we used PANTHER and GO analysis. Top GO mole- Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was applied to four cular function clusters were extracellular matrix structural constituent affected individuals in two unrelated families with reported consanguinity, (GO:0005201), receptor activity (GO:0004872) as well as transmembrane and two other families were sequenced with WES by a trio (proband and transporter activity (GO:0022857) in both NPCs and differentiated neuronal parents) approach. cells. Results: We identified homozygous variants in EM
C1  that segregated with Our preliminary data suggest that both NPCs and neurons with trisomy 21 a phenotype of developmental delay, hypotonia, scoliosis and cerebellar show similarities in their transcriptome aberrations when compared to con- atrophy in three families. In addition, a de novo heterozygous EM
C1  vari- trols. Data are being validated and integrated with genome-wide methylome ant was observed in an individual with a similar clinical and MRI imaging as well as proteome data in search for markers suitable for rescue-screening. phenotype. Conclusions: EM
C1  encodes a member of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)- 
P09 .055 membrane protein complex (EMC), an evolutionarily conserved complex Mutation in CE
P63  co-segregating with developmental dyslexia in a which has been proposed to play multiple roles in ER-associated degrada- Swedish family E. Einarsdottir1,2, I. Svensson3, F. Darki4, M. Peyrard-Janvid1, J. M. Lindvall1,5,6, A. Ameur7, C. tion (ERAD), ER-mitochondria tethering, and proper assembly of multi-pass Jacobsson8, T. Klingberg4, J. Kere1,2, H. Matsson1; transmembrane proteins. Perturbations of protein folding and organelle 1Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden, crosstalk have been implicated in neurodegenerative processes including 2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, and Molecular Neurology Research Program, cerebellar atrophy. University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Psychology, Linneaus University, Monoallelic and biallelic inheritance have previously been associated Växjö, Sweden, 4Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden, with different genes in which either de novo mutations (i.e., GJB2, KIF1A, 5Bioinformatics Infrastructure for Life Sciences, Stockholm University, Stockholm, MAB21
L2 , and NALCN) or recessive mutations (i.e., AARS, CLCN1, CO
L6 A1, Sweden, 6Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden, 7Uppsala Genome Center, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 8Department of DEAF1, EGR2, ENP
P1 , KRT14, and ROR2) may cause more severe pheno- Pedagogy, Linneaus University, Växjö, Sweden. type. We propose EM
C1  as a novel gene in which either biallelic or monoal- lelic variants may lead to a syndrome including intellectual disability and preferential degeneration of the cerebellum. Genetic studies of developmental dyslexia (DD) have presented candidate 
P09 .057 genes based on mapping of chromosomal translocations, genome-wide lin- Novel mutation in CACNA1A gene expressed as myoclonic epilepsy kage and association, and sequencing. Although genome-wide association with drop attacks associated with mild cerebellar signs studies have pinpointed new loci for DD, potential functional gene variants G. Larom-Khan, A. Peleg, A. Harari-Shaham, L. Shamer-Meiri, N. Zelnik; are missing. In contrast, family-based studies continue to be informative in Carmel medical center, Haifa, Israel. DD, where the full set of variants from individuals can be ascertained in fa- milies with a dominant inheritance pattern. Recently, we used whole exome sequencing (WES) on DNA from seven affec- Introduction: A toddler with global developmental delay and ataxia presen- ted and three unaffected individuals from a Swedish pedigree segregating ted at two months of age with myoclonic jerks which later on evolved into DD. High quality single nucleotide variants were filtered to retain rare non- drug- resistance myoclonic epilepsy with drop attack. s1y9no0nymous variants segregating with DD butE aS bsH enG t f2 ro0 m1 a6 n | i nB -hA oR usC eE dL aO - N MA e, tS hoP dA s:I N W h| oW le W exoW m. eE sS eH quG en.O cinR gG was employed and revealed one hete-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index rozygous mutation. This alternation was not present in the DNA samples of tified variants, 26 were associated to a gene with an autosomal-dominant her parents. inheritance pattern, 5 of which were confirmed as “de novo”. Furthermore, a Results: We detected a novel missense mutation (C.678G>T) in the CACNA1A combined analysis of genes related to other neurodevelopmental disorders gene. No single nucleotide polymorphisms were found in this region and its as autism was performed on 8 cases. probability score was nearly 1.0. The CACNA1A gene encodes the alfa1-sub- Conclusions: Epilepsy panels based on WES provide a cost effective and unit A, a transmembrane pore-forming subunit of the P/Q or CaV2.1 voltage comprehensive strategy, that accelerates the identification of a definitive gated calcium channel which mediated entry of Ca(2+) ions into excitable clinical diagnosis, decreasing the familial anxiety, improving the prognosis cells and also involved in a Ca(2+) dependent processes, including muscle accuracy and facilitating the therapy selection. contraction, hormone or neurotransmitter release and gene expression. Conclusion: CACNA1A mutations were previously reported in Episodic ata- 
P09 .060 xia type2, Familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 and in Spinocerebellar ataxia Detection of genetic heterogeneity in Bulgarian patients with epilepsy 6. It was also recently associated with epileptic encephalopathy. The pre- L. T. Balabanski1, S. Ivanov1, R. Vazharova1, A. Savov2, M. Malinov1, D. Toncheva1,3; sent report expands the clinical spectrum of CACNA1A-associated neurolo- 1Malinov Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, gic and particular epileptic disorders, and suggests that early disturbance 3Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. of the voltage-gated calcium channel activity may underlies neuronal insult which lead to ataxia to myoclonic epilepsy. Background: Epilepsy encompasses a group of related neurological disor- 
P09 .058 ders characterised by recurrent seizures due to abnormal electric activity in Epileptic seizures associated with chromosomal abnormalities the brain. The genetic basis of the disease is complex with defects in more M. Budisteanu1,2,3, A. Tutulan-Cunita1, S. Papuc1, C. Iliescu2, C. Burloiu2, I. Focsa1, D. than 200 genes predisposing to it. The aim of our study was to perform tar- Craiu2, I. Minciu2, D. Barca2, B. Budisteanu2, M. Cristea1, I. Borcan1, A. Arghir1; geted next-generation sequencing and detect gene defects in 12 Bulgarian 1Victor Babes National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Prof. Dr. Alex. Obregia” Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania, 3Titu Maiorescu patients with either primary (6) or secondary epilepsy as part of another University, Bucharest, Romania. undetermined condition (6). Methods: After DNA was extracted from blood, NGS libraries were prepared using either TruSight One or Trusight Inherited Disease gene panels. Se- Many chromosomal abnormalities are associated with different neurologi- quencing was performed on an Illumina MiSeq system. Variant filtering and cal conditions, including epilepsy. There are about 400 different chromoso- downstream analysis was done using Variant Studio and GenomeBrowse mal imbalances described with seizures or EEG abnormalities. In this paper softwares. we present our experience regarding epilepsy associated with chromoso- Results: We detected pathogenic mutations in 6 of our patients (50%). mal abnormalities. Three of those with primary epilepsy carried missense mutations in Methods: 125 children with epileptic seizures, other neurological features, SCN8A (p.Arg1872Gln), EFH
C1  (p.Phe229Leu) and a deletion in CLCN1 and/or dysmorphic features were evaluated by clinical, dysmorphological, (c.1436_1449delTACCCTGCGGAGGC). The genes affected in the patients neurological, psychiatric and psychological examinations, EEG, neuroimagi- with secondary epilepsy were RNASEH2B (p.Ala177Thr), IDS (p.Pro408Ser) stic studies (CT, MRI), biological studies, genetic investigations (karyotype, and A
P1 S2
 (p.Tyr86Ter), and their carriers were respectively diagnosed FISH, array CGH). with Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome, mucopolysaccharidosis and X-linked syn- Results: In 42 cases with epilepsy a chromosomal syndrome was identified, dromic mental retardation. including Down syndrome (4 children), trisomy 18 (1 child), partial trisomy Discussion: The genetic heterogeneity in our cohort was expected bearing 13 (1 child), 1p36 deletion syndrome (3 children), Angelman syndrome (20 in mind the wide variability in severity and penetrance of the disorders children), Miller-Dieker syndrome (2 children), Pallister-Killian syndrome from the epileptic spectrum. This underlines the need for using large gene (3 children), Williams-Beuren syndrome (1 child), Wolf-Hirschhorn syndro- panels in order to successfully detect defects in patients with epilepsy as a me (1 child). We identified, also, some very rare chromosomal rearrange- symptom. The identification of the causative mutation could deliver crucial ments, with complex phenotypes associating epilepsy, which included 3p26 insights into the aetiology of the disease and potentially pave the way for a duplication; 8p21.2-p11.2 deletion; 3q26.31 duplication. personalised treatment. Discussion: Most of our patients presented chromosomal syndromes, either  P09
.061 known to associate epilepsy in most patients (such as Angelman syndro- Dogs Reveal a Novel Candidate Gene for Human Myoclonic Epilepsies me, Miller-Dieker syndrome, trisomy 13 and 18) or rarely presenting with R. Sarviaho1,2, F. Wieländer3, F. James4, M. Cortez5, G. Kluger6,7, M. Kornberg8, A. Bathen- seizures (such as Down syndrome, Williams-Beuren syndrome). Several Noethen9, T. Flegel10, S. Bhatti11, M. Arumilli1,2, M. Hytönen1,2, A. Fischer3, H. Lohi1,2; rare chromosomal rearrangements were detected; the genotype-phenotype 1Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology and Department of Veterinary correlations were difficult to establish in some cases (no specific genes for Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Folkhälsan Research Center, epilepsy are known to be located in the affected regions - 3p26.3, 3q26.31). Helsinki, Finland, 3Centre for Clinical Veterinary Medicine, LMU University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 4Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University Further studies are needed to understand the mechanism of epilepsy asso- of Guelph, Ontario, ON, Canada, 5Neurosciences & Mental Health Program, Peter Gilgan ciated with chromosomal abnormalities. Centre for Research and Learning, SickKids Research Institute, Ontario, ON, Canada, Acknowledgments: National Project PN 09.33.02.03. 6Department of Neuropediatrics, Epilepsy Center, Vogtareuth, Germany, 7PMU Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 8Veterinary Hospital Trier, Trier, Germany, 9Veterinary Practice  P09
.059 Bathen-Noethen, Cologne, Germany, 10Department of Small Animal Medicine, University Targeted gene testing of 50 patients with epilepsy-related of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 11Department of Medicine and Clinical Biology of Small neurodevelopmental disorder. Animals, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. M. Martinez-Garcia, M. Peña-Vilabelda, P. Maietta, J. Botet, S. Alvarez; NGS Laboratory. NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain. Introduction: Epilepsy is the most common chronical neurological disease in humans and dogs. Canine epilepsy resembles the human condition and Background: Epilepsy is a common clinical and genetic heterogeneous neu- provides opportunity for new gene discovery, functional characterization rological disorder, with a large number of cases caused by genetic factors. To and establishment of a therapeutic model. We previously identified young understand the molecular basis of epilepsy, 141 genes associated to neuro- dogs with myoclonic epileptic seizures in the Rhodesian Ridgeback (RR) metabolic disorders, syndromic and non-syndromic epilepsy were routinely breed (Wielaender et al., JVIM 2016; 30:444) and aimed here to further cha- analysed on 50 cases. racterize the clinical and genetic background. Methods: Genomic libraries were generated using the Ion AmpliSeqTM Exo- Materials and Methods: A study population of 17 RRs was established and me RDY as exome backbone, combined with an AmpliSeq panel design to the breed-specific myoclonic epilepsy was studied by a wide-scale medical improve gene coverage. Sequencing reads generated on the Ion ProtonTM examination and awake ambulatory wireless video-EEG. A GWAS was per- and Ion  S5
TM platform were analyzed using Torrent Suite software. Annota- formed to map the gene in a cohort of 10 cases and 18 unaffected RRs fol- ted variants using ION Reporter were prioritized with an in-house analytical lowed by whole exome sequencing of two cases. Candidate mutation was pipeline to identify the causative variants. This approach assures an average validated in a larger cohort (n=40) of cases and controls by TaqMan qPCR depth of 100X and an average 98.3% coverage in the selected genes. assays. Epileptic cases across breeds (n= 965) were also tested for the mu- Results: Among the 50 probands analyzed, 22 (44%) were referred as Ear- tation. The expression pattern of the candidate gene was established in 27 ly Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathies (EEIE). This approach allowed us to canine tissues including many brain regions by RT-PCR. identify potentially genetic causative variants on 40% of the cases. Among Results: Our clinical studies revealed a photosensitive myoclonic epilepsy EEIE patients 64% (14/22) were geneEtSicHallGy d 2ia0g1no6s e|d B. OAuRt oCf EthLeO 6N3 iAde, nS-PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 191 with a characteristic EEG pattern and age of onset in juvenile dogs. GeneticABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index studies identified a fully penetrant recessive breed-specific truncating mu- cessful treatment and care, especially at the evolutionary phases of the di- tation in a novel neuronal RasGTPase gene. sease.  P09
.064 Conclusions: Our study revealed a myoclonic epilepsy in juvenile dogs re- Exome sequencing for molecular analysis of early infantile epileptic sembling partially human JME. Canine gene discovery represents a novel encephalopathies (EIEE) candidate gene for human myoclonic epilepsies and unravels a new disease A. Marcé-Grau1, E. Cuenca-León1, A. Felipe-Rucián1, F. Lopez-Pisón2, M. Raspall-Chaure1, mechanism while establishing a clinically relevant animal model for further A. Macaya1; functional and therapeutic approaches. 1Vall d‘Hebron Institut de Recerca, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain.  P09
.062 Diagnostic targeted next generation sequencing in patients with epilepsy P. Rump1, Y. J. Vos1, D. R. M. Vlaskamp1,2, P. M. C. Callenbach2, R. J. Sinke1, C. M. A. van Introduction: Genetic variants causing EIEE are currently identified in only a Ravenswaaij1, O. F. Brouwer2; minority of cases. We explored the usefulness of Whole-Exome-Sequencing 1University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of Genetics, (WES) for both diagnosis and gene discovery in EIEE. Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Methods: Peripheral blood DNA was extracted from forty unrelated trios Department of Neurology, Groningen, Netherlands. (proband and unaffected parents). We used NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Exome v3.0 and Illumina TruSeq kits to generate libraries which were 30X sequen- ced in a HiSeq 2000 instrument. Exomes were aligned to NCBI build 37 refe- Introduction: Epilepsy has a heterogeneous aetiology with a substantial rence sequence. Variants were called with SamTools, annotated using SnpEff genetic component. We used a targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) and VarAnnot and classified according to predicted functional effect. Hard gene panel for clinical genetic testing in a heterogeneous cohort of 125 pa- filters and IGV inspection were used to eliminate artifacts. Analysis was two- tients with epilepsy. tiered and comprised evaluation of 169 epilepsy genes, followed by evalua- Materials and Methods: A gene panel, based on Agilent Sure Select Target tion of remaining WES variants. Selected variants were Sanger-validated. Enrichment®, including 144 genes was used. Within this panel, nine partly Results: A first-tier analysis revealed high-effect de novo mutations in EIEE- overlapping subpanels were designed based on different epilepsy pheno- associated genes in 45% of the cases. STXB P1
, KCNQ2, KCNT1 and SCN1A types, namely: benign familial neonatal/infantile epilepsy (5 genes), epilep- were the most commonly mutated genes in this cohort. In patients with neo- tic encephalopathy (39 genes), focal epilepsy (12 genes), fever related epi- natal presentation, WES displayed a higher diagnostic yield, 66% (12/18; lepsy (12 genes), progressive myoclonic epilepsy (19 genes), metabolic dis- p<.01). Second-tier analysis showed an excess of damaging mutations in se- orders with epilepsy (43 genes), generalized epilepsies (14 genes), epilepsy veral intolerant-to-variation genes, mainly related to synaptic function and in combination with other paroxysmal disorders (11 genes), and syndromes neural transmission. with epilepsy and intellectual disability (63 genes). Based on the phenotype Conclusion: WES analysis led to the identification of de novo disease-causing of the patient one or more of these subpanels were analysed. mutations in genes previously related to EIEE in 45% of our cases, showing Results: A (likely) pathogenic variant was identified in 12.6% of the pati- a better diagnostic yield in cases with neonatal onset. Among the remaining ents. All confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The yield was highest in patients undiagnosed cases, several de novo variants emerged as plausible candida- with benign familial neonatal/infantile epilepsy (23%) or fever related epi- tes to produce EIEE. Functional ongoing studies will help determining their lepsy (22%). The genes involved were: CACNA1A, CDK L5
, GRIN2A, KCNQ2, causative role in the disease. KCNQ3, MEC P2
, NHLR C1
, PCDH19 (n=3), PRRT2, RANB P2
 (n=2), SCN1A,  P09
.065 and SYNGA P1
. Using this approach we were also able to detect a mosaic pa- A novel mutation in PCDH19 enabled genetic diagnosis as Epilepsy thogenic variant in the PCDH19 gene in a male patient. A variant of unknown and Mental Retardation Limited to Females significance was reported in 11.8% of the patients. In most instances clinical F. N. Tuncer1, S. A. Ugur Iseri1, B. Kara2, H. Maras Genc2, E. Uyur Yalcin2, U. Ozbek1; relevance could be excluded. 1Istanbul University, Institute of Experimental Medicine Department of Genetics, Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that targeted next generation sequen- Istanbul, Turkey, 2Kocaeli University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, cing offers a quick, comprehensive and efficient molecular screening in pa- Division of Child Neurology, Kocaeli, Turkey. tients with epilepsy.  P09
.063 Identification of a de novo mutation in a patient with idiopathic Introduction: Epilepsy and Mental Retardation Limited to Females (EFMR) epilepsy by targeted exome sequencing is a rare encephalopathy associated with PCDH19 mutations affecting he- L. Rausell, M. Lazaro, L. Cabrera, M. Bermejo, M. Molero, A. Gomez, A. Arteche, P. Marín- terozygous females, sparing hemizygous males. EFMR is characterized by García, C. Ruiz, J. Garcia-Planells, M. Garcia-Hoyos; intractable, fever sensitive generalized or focal seizures initiating within the Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna, Spain. first year of life, and clustered brief seizures occurring repeatedly during several days. This study includes a 4-year-old girl, whose genetic evaluation aided differential diagnosis between EFMR and Dravet syndrome (DS). Introduction: NGS (Next Generation Sequencing) approach is revolutioni- Materials and Methods: A 4-year-old girl with prominent intellectual disa- sing our understanding in medical genetics and is increasingly allowing bility was recruited for this study. Her physical, neurological, neuroimaging us to achieve genetic diagnosis of complex disorders. One example of such and electroencephalography (EEG) examinations were performed with in- complex disorders is Epilepsy. Epilepsy is the most common neurological formation on family history. Her first seizure occurred at 8 months of age disorder in which nerve cell activity in the brain becomes disrupted, causing with fever, marking the beginning of neuromotor developmental delay. seizures or periods of unusual behaviour, sensations, and sometimes loss of Atypical absence seizures emerged when she was 1.5 years old. She is the consciousness. The genetic diagnosis of Epilepsy is usually very difficult be- only affected person in the family among 2 brothers and 1 sister. Illumina cause of the genetic heterogeneity and the high number of genes associated HiSeq2000 was utilized in whole genome exome sequencing of the subject. with the disease. Exome data was filtered to detect all genetic variants in DS related genes Objective: Genetic characterization of a patient with epilepsy by targeted including PCDH19. Candidate genetic variants were subjected to familial se- exome sequencing. gregation through PCR and direct sequencing. Methods: The targeted exome sequencing for Epilepsy is encompassing all Results: Genetic analyses revealed a novel nonsense mutation in PCDH19 the coding regions of 116 genes associated with the disease. Library was apparently occurring de novo. In silico evaluations supported mutation’s prepared using TruSight One (Illumina) and samples were ultrasequenced role in pathogenesis. using a NextSeq 500 sequencing system (Illumina). Conclusion: This study enabled genetic diagnosis of the case as EFMR, asso- Non-benign variants were confirmed and segregated in parental samples by ciating a novel PCDH19 mutation with the disease that provided the family Sanger sequencing. with genetic consulting. Results: The use of this targeted exome in a patient with idiopathic epilepsy Funds of Scientific and Technology Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) allowed us to identify a de novo probably disease-causing change in the (113 S331
) and Istanbul Development Agency (TR10/15/YNK/0093) sup- SCNA8 gene. ported this work. Conclusion: Targeted exome is a diagnostic alternative to Sanger sequencing for genetic heterogeneous diseases such as Epilepsy. This new strategy gi- ves us the possibility to simultaneously analyse several genes, reducing time and cost, and increasing the diagnostic yield.  E1
a9rl2y and accurate diagnosis of patients with EepSiHlepGsy 2 i0s e1s6se |n tBiaAl fRoCr sEuLcO- NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.066 Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. Progressive Cerebello-Cerebral Atrophy (PCCA) and Progressive encephalopathy with Edema, Hypsarrhythmia and Optic atrophy (PEHO) are allelic syndromes Introduction: MS is chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous sy- D. Lev1,2, R. Hady-Cohen1, H. Ben-Pazi3, E. Leshinsky-Silver1, T. Lerman-Sagie1; stem with important genetic contribution. Although familial contribution to 1Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, MS etiology is well established, much of genetic contribution still remains Tel- Aviv, Israel, 3Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. poorly defined. Several case reports reported comorbidity between diffe- rent types of genetic peripheral neuropathies and MS. Therefore we hypo- thesized that there is an increased mutation burden in genes related to peri- In 2003, a new syndrome was diagnosed in the Sephardic Jews population, pheral neuropathies among MS patients. it was named PCCA (Progressive Cerebello-Cerebral Atrophy) after its typi- Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing using Nextera Coding cal neuroradiological findings. There are two types: PCCA type 1 and PCCA Exome enrichment was performed in 48 patients with familial MS, 40 pa- type 2. Known causative genes are SEPSECS in type 1 and VP S53
 in type 2. tients with sporadic MS and 92 population-matched controls. Genotypes PEHO (Progressive encephalopathy with Edema, Hypsarrhythmia and Optic were called using GATK toolkit in multisample mode and only sites with va- atrophy) is a syndrome prevalent in Finland. It includes progressive micro- riant quality over 100.0 and genotyping rate of over 60% across all samples cephaly, profound mental retardation, marked hypotonia and dysmorphic were kept in downstream analyses. The selection of variants among bioin- features. MRI shows progressive cerebellar and brainstem atrophy. Recently, formatically focused panel of 52 peripheral neuropathy related genes was mutations SEPSECS were found in patients with PEHO. narrowed in accordance of functional impact predicted by snpEff - all trun- We diagnosed 2 siblings with PEHO. They have a developmental encephalo- cating variants and missense variants predicted as pathogenic by a majority pathy, limb and facial edema, infantile spasms and optic atrophy. MRI shows of in-silico predictors, were considered in further burden analyses. cerebellar and brainstem atrophy. Extensive workup did not reveal the cau- Results: We identified 8 candidate genetic variants (7 genes) that affect sative gene. Whole exome sequencing was performed. The first analysis that function in familial MS, and 11 candidate genetic variants (12 genes) in spo- was done 5 years ago did not reveal the causative mutations. Recently, a re- radic MS patients. Overall we detected a statistically significant 1.9-times analysis of the data revealed the 2 common Moroccan mutations in VP S53
 enrichment of mutations (p=0.004) in the familial MS cases compared to the (exon 19 c.2084A>G p.(Gln695Arg) and c.1556+5G>A. The parents were ExAC control samples. found to be carriers of the mutations. Conclusions: Exome sequencing of peripheral neuropathy causing genes Comparing both syndromes reveals clinical and radiological similarities. revealed an excess burden of deleterious coding variants in familial MS pa- Our revelation that VP S53
 mutations, previously described to be the cause tients which supports previous evidence of comorbidity among peripheral of PCCA1, and now are found as causative mutations is PEHO, actually put neuropathies and MS. these two syndromes on the same spectrum. Likewise, SEPSECS gene that is the cause for PCCA1 was also found recently as the causative gene in PEHO.  P09
.070 PCCA and PEHO share the same genetic and clinical spectrum and thus, are Familiality of cognitive performance: analysis in patients with allelic syndromes. psychotic disorders and their first degree relatives C. Prats1, P. Ferentinos2, J. Soler3, S. Miret4, S. Campanera5, M. Giralt6, M. Muñoz7, L.  P09
.067 Fañanás1, M. Fatjó-Vilas1; A polymorphism in CRAT is associated with HLA-DQB1*06:02 negative 1Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Biomedicine Institute of essential hypersomnia the University of Barcelona (IBUB). Centre for Biomedical Research Network on Mental T. Miyagawa1, S. Khor2, H. Toyoda2, M. Yamasaki2, M. Shimada2, K. Mishima3, Y. Honda3, Health (CIBERSAM), Barcelona, Spain, 22nd Department of Psychiatry, University K. Tokunaga2, M. Honda1; of Athens, Greece, Spain, 3Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona. Institut 1Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan, 2The University of Tokyo, de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain, 4Servei de Tokyo, Japan, 3Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan. Salut Mental, Psiquiatria i Addiccions, Hospital de Santa Maria. Institut de Recerca Biomèdica (IRB), Lleida, Spain, 5Centre de Salut Mental de Lleida, Servei de Salut Mental i Addiccions, Hospital Santa Maria, Lleida, Spain, 6Àrea d’Adolescents, Complex Assistencial en Salut Mental, Benito Menni. Sant Boi de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, Essential hypersomnia (EHS) is a sleep disorder characterized by excessive 7Àrea d’Adolescents. Complex Assistencial en Salut Mental, Benito Menni. Sant Boi de daytime sleepiness but no cataplexy, can be divided into two broad clas- Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. ses based on the presence or absence of HLA (human leukocyte antigen)- DQB1*06:02 allele. HLA-DQB1*06:02 positive EHS and narcolepsy are asso- ciated with the same susceptibility genes. However, there are fewer studies Background: Cognitive impairment can be observed not only in psychotic of HLA-DQB1*06:02 negative EHS. Therefore, we performed a genome-wide patients but also in their nonpsychotic relatives which highlight a familial association study in 119 Japanese patients with HLA-DQB1*06:02 negative component for the relationship between cognition and psychosis.However, EHS and 1,582 Japanese healthy individuals to identify susceptibility genes not many studies have explored the degree of intrafamilial resemblance of associated with HLA-DQB1*06:02 negative EHS. A replication study was cognitive deficits. Our aim was to examine the familial aggregation of several conducted on 191 Japanese patients with HLA-DQB1*06:02 negative EHS neurocognitive traits in a sample of patients with psychotic disorders and and 433 Japanese healthy individuals. SNP rs10988217 located in CRAT their first-degree relatives. (carnitine acetyltransferase) was found to be significantly associated with Methods: Familiality was explored in 71 patients and 153 healthy first-de- HLA-DQB1*06:02 negative EHS (P<5×10-8, OR=2.8). An eQTL analysis sho- gree relatives. All underwent a neurocognitive-battery (IQ-WAIS,phonemic/ wed that rs10988217 was significantly correlated with expression levels of semantic fluency,WCST).Family-level residual intraclass correlation coeffi- CRAT in various tissue or cell types, including brain tissue (P<0.05). CRAT cient (ICC) was calculated. Families were ranked according to the level of gene encodes the carnitine acetyltransferase protein, which is a key enzy- familiality (IRS) for each cognitive test.Analyses were implemented with me for metabolic pathways involved with the control of the acyl-CoA/CoA Stata v.13. ratio in mitochondria, peroxisomes and endoplasmic reticulum. In additi- Results: Significant familial aggregation was found for Intelligence quotient on, The Metabolomics GWAS Server (doi: 10.1038/ng.2982.) revealed that (IQ), phonemic and semantic fluency (executive function domain)(p<0.001). rs10988217 affected succinylcarnitine levels in blood (P<10-17). Individu- Significant IRS was obtained for IQ and phonemic fluency (p<0.001), classi- al acylcarnitines levels were measured in 36 Japanese patients with HLA- fying these families according to their familiality level.No correlation was DQB1*06:02 negative EHS and 68 Japanese healthy individuals. Levels of se- found between IRS and their neurocognitive scores (p>0.05), meaning that veral acylcarnitines showed significant differences between the two groups. familial similarities among families are independent of the neurocognitive The results provide evidence that HLA-DQB1*06:02 negative EHS may have performance. an underlying dysfunction in fatty acid oxidation pathway. Discussion: Despite that different studies have found that patients and rela- This study was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) tives display deficits on a variety of neuropsychological tasks, we detected (15H04709). that only IQ, phonemic and semantic fluency show a familial aggregation pattern. This is in line with the fact that even the cognitive heterogeneity  P09
.069 of the illness, executive dysfunction is one of the most marked cognitive Are rare coding mutations in the genes related to genetic peripheral impairments in SZ (Snitz et al.,2006).In this sense, stratifying families ac- neuropathies risk factors in multiple sclerosis (MS) A. Peterlin1, A. Maver1, A. Hodžić1, S. Šega2, J. Drulović3, I. Novaković4, T. Pekmezović3, S. cording their familiality levels may reduce heterogeneity and facilitate the Ristić5, M. Kapović5, B. Peterlin1; identification of shared genes/environmental factors involved. 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Clinical Institute of Medical Genetic, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Neurology Clinic, CCS, Beograd, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Institute of Human Genetics, MF Beograd, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Department of ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 193ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.072  P09
.075 FOXG1 and NOVA1 haploinsufficiency in an infant with microcephaly, Carriage of one or two FMR1 premutation alleles seems to have no seizures and severe neurodevelopmental delay effect on illness severity in a FXTAS female with an autozygous FMR1 H. Fryssira1, S. Psoni1, E. Tsoutsou1, S. Amenta2, E. Manolakos3, I. Papoulidis3, S. Kitsiou- premutation allele Tzeli1, N. Chaliasos4; L. Rodriguez-Revenga1, J. Pagonabarraga2, E. Granell2, M. Alvarez-Mora1, I. Madrigal1, 1Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, M. Mila1; “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2“Mitera” Maternity Hospital, 1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece, 3“Access to Genome” Clinical Laboratory Genetics, Athens, Greece, 4Child Health Department, University Hospital of Ioannina (UHI), Ioannina, Greece. Introduction: Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a late-onset neurodegenerative disorder that occurs in FMR1 premutation carriers. The prevalence of FMR1 premutation carriers in the general po- Introduction: FOXG1 gene mutations have been associated with the con- pulation is relatively high, and although rare, a premutation in both X chro- genital variant of Rett syndrome (RTT) since the initial description of two mosomes may occur in females inheriting a premutation allele from each patients in 2008. The ongoing accumulation of clinical data suggests that of both parent carriers. Here we report the first female with an autozygous the FOXG1-variant of RTT forms a distinguishable phenotype, consisting of (homozygous by descendent) FMR1 premutation allele, who fulfills neuro- mainly congenital microcephaly, seizures, hypotonia, developmental delay logical and radiological FXTAS findings/criteria. and corpus callosum agenesis. Material and Methods: Molecular characterization included CGG repeat Case Report: We report a 6-month-old female infant, born at 38 weeks of length, AGG interruption pattern, FMR1 mRNA, FMRP levels quantification gestation after in vitro fertilization, who presented with feeding difficulties, and SNP microarray. Neuroradiological assessment of 3T magnetic reso- irritability and developmental delay since birth. Microcephaly, a small fore- nance imaging, neurological and cognitive/neuropsychological evaluations head with bitemporal narrowing, dyspraxia, poor eye contact and strabis- were performed. mus were also noted. At 10 months the proband exhibited focal seizures Results: Neurological and neuroradiological examination of the female with and required valproic acid treatment. Sleep deprivation EEG showed signs the same FMR1 allele in the premutation range (77 CGGs) demonstrated of focal cerebral dysfunction. The MRI was normal. FXTAS features. Further familial evaluation showed a similar neuropsychia- The peripheral blood G-banding karyotype was normal (46, XX), as well as tric profile, with impairments in cognitive flexibility and visuospatial func- the DNA analysis of the MEC P2
 gene. Array-Comparative Genomic Hybri- tion, mainly. dization was performed (AGILENT Technologies, resolution 200 Kb) and Conclusions: A unique family with an autozygous FMR1 premutation female revealed a 4.09 Mb loss of the copy numbers in the spanning region 14q12, is presented. Neurological/cognitive and neuroradiological examinations encompassing the FOXG1 and NOVA1 genes. revealed FXTAS-specific findings in the female with the autozygous FMR1 Conclusions: The proband presented similar features with patients with premutation allele. The consistent molecular and cognitive/psychiatric phe- 14q12 deletions except for dysgenesis of corpus callosum. Disruption of the notype in family members suggests that carrying one or two FMR1 premu- NOVA1 gene, which promotes the motor neurons apoptosis, has not been tation alleles has no effect on illness severity. yet linked to any human phenotypes, but could act synergistically with the Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the Instituto de Salud Car- FOXG1 gene in our patient. los III (ISCIII; PI12/00879), cofinanced by the Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Since our patient is the first reported case with deletions of both the above Regional ‘una manera de hacer Europa’ and AGAUR from the Autonomous genes, the thorough clinical follow-up could further delineate the Congenital Catalan Government (2014 SGR603). The CIBER de Enfermedades Raras is Rett-Variant phenotypes. an initiative of the ISCIII.  P09
.074  P09
.076 Molecular diagnosis improvement in patients with frontotemporal Social anxiety and autism spectrum traits among adult FMR1 dementia using Next-Generation Sequencing premutation carriers A. B. de la Hoz1,2, E. Blanco3,1, N. Ibarluzea1, R. Bereincua3, A. Molano3, I. Ugarriza3, S. del M. Milà1, O. Lopez-Mourel2, E. Mur3, I. Madrigal1, M. Alvarez-Mora1, L. Rodriguez- Mazo3, M. A. López-Aríztegui3, M. Fernández3,1, M. I. Tejada1,3,2; Revenga1; 1BioCruces Health Research Institute, Barakaldo, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2PIC, Parc de Recerca Universitat Autònoma de 3Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo, Spain. Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3CSM Martí i Julià. Instituto de Neuropsiquiatría y Adicciones (INAD). Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the second most common form of young- Introduction: Behavioral symptoms and traits have been proposed as early onset dementia after Alzheimer’s disease and comprises about 10–20% of markers in neurodegenerative diseases. The aim was of this study was to all dementias worldwide. It is inherited in 30–50% of patients. It includes a evaluate social anxiety and autism in FMR1 premutation carriers and con- group of deMgeAnPeTraPtiGveR NdiseaseCs 9cohrafr7a2cterized by the atrophy of frontal and trols using the Social Phobia Inventory and the Autism-Spectrum Quotient. temporal lobes. Mutations in three main genes areF UcoSmVmCoPnlTyA aRsDsBocPiated Material and Methods: Fifty-nine premutation carriers (40 females; 19 ma- wCHitMh PF2TBD: , , and , but recent findings have identified les) (7 females and 9 males with FXTAS) were compared to 50 controls (32 rare and pathogenic variants in additional genes: , , and females; 18 males). . Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) is being used to identify new Results: Our results show that FMR1 premutation carriers have higher so- pathogenic variants. cial anxiety scores and autistic traits compared to controls. Indeed, the SPIN Material and Methods: MAPT PGRN, FUS VCP TARDBP CHM P2
B) scores were higher increased in women FMR1 premutation carriers compa- A total of 48 FTD patients were assessed by means of a NGS panel. Target red to men whereas the AQ scores were similar between the two genders. regions in the selected genes ( , , , and Finally, SPIN scores were correlated with the repeat size when the CGG num- were amplified using an Ion AmpliSeq™ custom Panel. It consists of 93 am- ber was greater than 100. plicons (17.21Kb), with coverage close to 99.5% on targeted sequence. Lib- Conclusions: Overall, these results indicate that social anxiety is greater in raries were sequenced on an IoTMn Torrent PGM platTfMorm. Data analysis was FMR1 premutation carrier women than in controls but not in men. In addi- performed using Torrent Suite and Ion Reporter software. All variants tion, both men and women with the FMR1 premutation have an increased were validated by Sanger. PGRN risk of autism traits. Our results suggest that a wide range of behavioral/ Results: Two known pathogenic mutatioFnUs S(c.709-1G>A and c.359C>A) and psychiatric traits should be included within the Fragile X Spectrum disorder a non-described missense variant (c.1604G>A) were found in . We and that the penetrance of these traits depends on the genetic background also detected a polymorphic variant in (3’-untranslated region [UTR], (CGG repeat number, gene modifiers, epigenetic, among others) as well as c.*41G>A), whose MAF is 0.005, in three of our patients. on gender. Conclusion: This approach shows the utility of the NGS technology to iden- Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the Instituto de Salud Car- tify both known pathogenic and low frequency variants likely associated los III (ISCIII; PI12/00879), cofinanced by the Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo with this disorder. It is a powerful and cost-effective tool to diagnose com- Regional ‘una manera de hacer Europa’ and AGAUR from the Autonomous plex disorders with genetic heterogeneity such as FTD. Catalan Government (2014 SGR603). Gobierno Vasco. 194 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.077 Skewed X inactivation in women carrying the FMR1 premutation and its relation with Fragile-X-Associated Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome type 4 is a rare inherited disease caused by a mutation in the neurotrophic M. Alvarez-Mora, L. Rodriguez-Revenga, A. Feliu, C. Badenas, I. Madrigal, M. Mila; tyrosine kinase receptor, type 1 gene located on chromosome 1. It is cha- Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. racterized by pain insensitivity, partialO abnjheicdtrivoesi:s and pressure sensitivity. Self-mutilation injury involving the teeth, lips, ears, eyes, nose, and fingers are invariable feature of this disorder. In this context, we report Introduction: Fragile-X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a aN TTRuKn1isian famPailtyie hnatvsi nagn dtw moe cthhiolddrse:n affected by HSAN4. Indirect genetic late-onset multisystem neurological disorder characterized by intention analyzes showed a transmission profile for the HSAN by mutation of the tremor and cerebellar ataxia. We hypothesized that in FMR1 premutation gene. It is about a Tunisian consanguineous females with FXTAS, a normal X chromosome might more frequently be in- family. It shows two boys aged 6 and 4 years respectively with convulsive re- activated; therefore, the aim of this study was to determine the relationship current seizures and significant self-harm injuries. A total anhidrosis,N inTsReKn1- between skewed X chromosome inactivation (XCI) and FXTAS. sitivity to pain and mental retardation were then highlighted. Genotyping Material and Methods: We studied the XCI patterns of cases of FMR1 premu- by analysis of four microsatellite markers surrounding Roer siunsltisd:e the tation in 10 women with FXTAS and 21 without FXTAS. gene, helped to establish the haplotype of each individual and to follow the Results: The distribution of XCI patterns in the FXTAS and no-FXTAS groups transmission of haplotype associated with the disease. the indirect showed differences regarding the allele presenting severe skewed XCI. In study by genotyping revealed the presence of a homozygous haplotype as- the FXTAS group, all cases preferentially inactivated the non-expanded X sDoicsicautesdsi wonit ha nthde Cdoisnecalsues iino non:e of the affected brothers. The second brother chromosome, whereas in the no-FXTAS group, all inactivated the expanded died three months later because of septicemia and malignant hyperthermia. X chromosome. As expected, we found statistically significant differences in The interest of the indirNeTctR Kdi1agnosis by ge- the skewed XCI on comparing FMR1 premutation women and controls. notyping is important to show the type of haplotype transmission among Conclusion: Although the reduced sample size and blood XCI patterns are patients. This should be followed by sequencing the gene looking two limitations of this study, our results suggest that the skewed XCI of the for variations. This genetic study of this disease is important for prenatal normal FMR1 allele may be a risk factor for the development of FXTAS. Fur- diagnosis because there is no cure. thermore, our findings also support the protective effect of the expression  P09
.080 of a normal FMR1 allele. Prevalence and clinical characterization of SPG31 in Spain Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the Instituto de Salud Car- A. Ordóñez-Ugalde1,2, J. Liñares-Blanco1,2, B. Quintáns1,3, P. Blanco-Arias1,4, M. Arias1,5, S. los III (ISCIII; PI12/00879), cofinanced by the Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Piñeiro1, F. Grandas6, I. Sanz7, I. Pascual-Pascual7, A. López de Munain8, J. Arpa7, M. J. Regional ‘una manera de hacer Europa’ and AGAUR from the Autonomous Sobrido1,4,3; Catalan Government (2014 SGR603). The CIBER de Enfermedades Raras is 1Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2USC, Santiago de an initiative of the ISCIII. Compostela, Spain, 3CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 4Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 5Complexo Hospitalario Universitario,  P09
.078 Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 6Hospital Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Neonatal onset epilepsy and polymicrogyria associated with GRIN1 Spain, 7Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 8Hospital Universitario Donostia, San Sebastián, Spain. mutation E. Banne1,2, L. Shemer- Meiri3, N. Zelnik3, V. Meiner1; 1Center for Clinical Genetics, Hadassah-Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Genetic Institute, Kaplan Medical Center, Clalit Health Services, Rehovot, Israel, 3The BACKGROUND: Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are genetically hete- Pediatric Neurology Unit, Carmel medical center, Haifa, Israel. rogeneous motor disorders, divided into pure (pyramidal syndrome) and complicated (additional manifestations). The prevalence and clinical spec- trum of SPG31, one of the autosomal dominant HSPs, has not been studied Introduction: Severe cases of polymicrogiria are linked with multiple neu- in Spain. rological abnormalities, and considered an epileptogenic malformation. We AIM: To analyze frequency and phenotype of SPG31 in Spanish HSP patients. present a child with severe psychomotor retardation, congenital progres- METHODS: Through an NGS panel of HSP genes complemented by Sanger sive microcephaly, intractable epilepsy presenting as early-onset neonatal sequencing, we analyzed REE P1
 in 104 index patients with HSP (51 pure, seizures, and generalized hypotonia. Brain MRI showed a migration and 50 complicated, 3 unknown) in whom SPAST (SPG4) and AT L1
 (SPG3) point sulcation defect with bilateral fronto-parietal and temporal polymicrogyria. mutations had been excluded. Neurological examination and pedigree data Methods: Chromosomal microarray and metabolic testing were normal. were obtained. In order to establish pathogenicity of the variants we chek- Whole exome sequencing followed by filtration of synonymous, dbSN P132
 ked the literature and variant databases, performed in silico predictions and and in-house database variants identified a de-novo pathogenic mutation. evaluated intrafamilial co-segregation. Result: We detected a novel de-novo heterozygous mutation (c.2365G>A; RESULTS: Probably pathogenic variants in REE P1
 were observed in 6 pati- p.D789N) in the GRIN1 gene. The gene encodes an NMDA receptor subtype ents (11.7% among pure HSP without point mutations in SPAST and AT L1
). of glutamate-gated ion channels with high calcium permeability and volta- Two were missense variants, two splicing variants, one nonsense, and a 9bp ge-dependent sensitivity to magnesium which is mediated by glycine. NMDA deletion involving REE P1
 first three codons. Only one of these variants had receptors play an important role in the development of the central nervous been previously reported. We also identified a rare, silent variant of uncer- system, processes of learning, memory and neuroplasticity and are crucial tain significance. All index cases had pure HSP, however cognitive and psych- for neuronal communication. iatric manifestations were present in affected relatives. Onset age was very Conclusions: The present report expands the clinical spectrum of GRIN1- variable. associated neurological disorders, and supports human NMDA receptors CONCLUSIONS: SPG31 represents ~12% of pure HSP patients in whom have an in-vivo role in neuronal migration. GRIN1 mutations were previous- SPG4 and SPG3 have been ruled out by sequencing. This frequency is similar ly reported in children with epilepsy, non-syndromic intellectual disabilities to other countries, and slighly lower than that of SPG3. The variable onset and recently with epileptic encephalopathy but not with malformations of age and clinical spectrum difficult genotype-phenotype correlation and ge- cortical migration. Experimental models of NMDA receptor unit-specific netic counseling. knock-down/knock-out show a role for NMDA receptors in cortical neuron FUNDING: P S09
/01830, P S09
/00839, P S09
/01685. migration. Whether the described mutation serves as a dominant negative  P09
.081 mutation, perhaps as a stereotactic disruption of the NMDA receptor hetero- Epidemiological, Clinical, and genetic study in a large cohort of dimerization, or as a toxic gain of function is yet to be investigated. patients with spastic paraplegia L. Pedace1, C. Montecchiani1, A. Casella1, F. Gaudiello1, M. Miele1, R. Massa2, C.  P09
.079 Caltagirone2,3, R. P. Munhoz4, J. L. Pedroso5, O. G. P. Barsottini5, T. Kawarai6, A. Orlacchio1,7; Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type V: study of 2 1Laboratorio di Neurogenetica, IRCCS Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy, 2Medicina dei cases Sistemi, Università di “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 3Laboratorio di Neurologia Clinica W. Manoubi1, A. Mili1, E. Achouri2, A. Gdissa1, J. Bouguila3, S. Haddad2, N. Souayeh3, S. e Comportamentale, IRCCS Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy, 4Movement Disorders Centre, Sassi1, A. Msakni1, R. Ben Sghaier1, A. Saad1, M. Gribba1; Toronto Western Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Department of 1Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology Neurology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 6Department of Clinical Farhat Hached Universi, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Pediatrics, CHU Fattouma Neuroscience, University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan, 7Dipartimento di Scienze Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia, 3Department of Pediatrics, Chirurgiche e Biomediche, Università di Perugia, Perugia, Italy. Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. SPAST Introduction: aE nS dH aG o2 n0 o1 m6 | nB eA urR opC aE thL yO (N HSA A, S PAIInNtr o| dWucWtioWn: .MEuStHatiGon.Os iRn Gthe SPG4/ gene are the major cause o 1f 9h 5e- Hereditary sensory ut ic N ) reditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs), a group of genetic disorders leading toABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index HTT HTT progressive spasticity and weakSnPeAsSsT of the lower limbs. This study includes cell-line DNAs, and two plasmids p (CAG)26 and p (CAG)33 were used the evaluation of a comprehensive spectrum of clinical features and the mu- to establish the threshold temperatures (TTs) distinguishing normal from tational screening of the SPG4/ gene in patients with HSP worldwide. expanded alleles. A blinded analysis was performed on 69 genotype-known Patients and Methods: A large cohort of patients were recruited from Italian, clinical samples. Potential effects of reagent variations and common PCR Brazilian, and Japanese populations in a period from 2008 to 2016. Clinical contaminants were also evaluated. and instrumental functional analyses consisted of neurological assessment Results: All 30 cell-line DNAs generated distinct melt peaks and Tms which and neuroimaging. Mutational screening was carried out by Sanger sequen- correlated well with each sample’s larger allele. The TTs accurately distin- cing and MLPA analysis. Haplotype studies were also performed. Results: guished between samples that carried normal-only, intermediate and ex- Our study highlights clinical and epidemiological differences among popu- panded alleles. A companion protocol allowed rapid sizing confirmation of lations, showing unique genotype-phenotype correlations. Genetic analysis screen-positive samples, including one carrying a ~175-repeat expansion. revealed a total of 52 different pathogenic changes in 284 patients: 21 spo- Blinded analysis demonstrated clear segregation between unaffected and radic cases and 263 from 96 families. Among them, six variants were novel affected clinical samples (100% analytical sensitivity and specificity). The and pathogenic. The analysis revealed a great portion of private mutations assay worked well with 10ng to 1ug of input DNA from blood, saliva or buc- worldwide and confirmed the founder effect for one recurrent variant in the cal swab. Sodium acetate contamination increased Tm, whereas glycogen Italian population. Interestingly, mutations were detected in 21% of spora- contamination had no effect. dic cases and in aS rPaAnSgTe from 16% to 100% of families, depending on the Conclusions: Rapid, accurate, and high-throughput detection/exclusion of number of affected in the family. Conclusion: This study represents the first HD for differentiation from diseases with similar phenotypes can be achie- worldwide SPG4/ geneticS sPcArSeTening on HSP patients. Epidemiological ved using this simple one-step screening assay, at one-third the cost of fluo- and clinical results broaden theS sPpAeScTtrum of the clinical presentations asso- rescent PCR and capillary electrophoresis (€1.2/sample). ciated with mutations in SPG4/ . Finally, our findings provide evidence  P09
.084 that the chance to detect SPG4/ mutations varies proportionally to the Predictive testing on adult onset neurodegenerative diseases on number of affected in the family. social and personal life - a pilot study  P09
.082 P. E. Cohn-Hokke1, J. C. van Swieten1,2, A. Tibben3, E. J. Meijers-Heijboer1, J. A. Kievit2; Whole exome sequencing data analysis in recessive hereditary spastic 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. paraplegia patients from Turkey B. Ozes1, A. Candayan1, O. Ari1, Y. Parman2, E. Battaloglu1; Background: 1Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. Follow-up studies on predictive testing for neurodegenerati- ve diseases mainly focussed on psychological outcome such as depression, Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HSP) is a group of clinically and genetical- aOnbxjeiecttyiv ea:nd distress. Studies addressing the impact of predictive testing on ly heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders. Lower limb spasticity and employment, financial issues, lifestyle, relations and family life are scarce. progressive weakness are observed in ‘pure‘ HSP patients. In ‘Complicated’ To investigate whether the course of life of mutation carriers of HSP, additional neurological and non-neurological symptoms are obser- aMdeuthlto-odns:s et neurodegenerative diseases differs negatively from non-carri- ved. HSP can be inherited in autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or ers and untested at risk individuals. X-linked manner. 49 loci and 43 genes are associated with autosomal re- Individuals, aged ≥35 years, tested while asymptomatic for cessive form of HSP (ARHSP). One patient from each of twenty ARHSP fa- Huntington’s disease, frontotemporal dementia or Alzheimer’s disease milies from Turkey is selected for whole exome sequencing (WES). After more than 2 years before the start of the study or at 50% risk for one of the determination of candidate variations, segregation analyses were per- these diseases, were invited to complete a questionnaire of 70 items. Within formed in the families to confirm that the variation might be responsib- a year, an additional questionnaire was completed, comprising 47 items le for the HSP phenotype. In three of the families variations were identi- with adjusted and additional questions. Of the 313 selected individuals, 17 fied in known HSP genes and segregation with the disease in the families cRaersruiletrs:s , 30 non-carriers and 27 untested persons responded, fulfilled the are confirmed for these variations. Two of them are identified in SPG11 criteria and completed both questionnaires. gene and they are c.1235C>G (p.Ser412Ter) variation in family  P463
 and We found no significant differences between carriers and non- c.6215_6219dupAGAT (p.Phe2074ArgfsTer15) variation in family H16. The carriers or untested individuals at risk in employment, financial situation other variation confirmed is c.825T>A (p.Y275X) in CY P7
B1 gene in fami- aCnondc lliufessiotynl:e or anxiety and depression. Carriers were more often single and ly H98. In eight of the families, various variations in HSP genes have been childless, though these differences were not significant. identified and in seven of the families, variations identified in the genes that Although the low response rate requires caution when interpre- are related to other neurological diseases. The segregation analyses are cur- ting our observations, the findings of this pilot study suggest that the outco- rently being performed for these families. For the remaining two families, me of predictive testing on adult onset neurodegenerative diseases does not WES data is still under analysis. With seven novel HSP gene candidates, our have a large negative effect on social and personal life. WES analysis gives promising preliminary data for identification of novel  P09
.085 genes in families from Turkey and it suggests evidence for further genetic Mutations in the ABC C6
 gene are associated with an increased risk for heterogeneity in ARHSP. ischemic stroke  P09
.083 O. M. Vanakker1, E. Y. G. De Vilder1, S. Cardoen2, M. J. Hosen3, D. Hemelsoet2; 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department Rapid and highly sensitive screen for HTT CAG repeat expansions in of Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Genetic Huntington disease using a one-step triplet-primed PCR and melt Engineering and Biotechnology, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology, Sylhet, curve analysis strategy Bangladesh. M. Zhao1, F. S. H. Cheah2, M. Chen1, C. G. Lee3,4,5, H. Law6, S. S. Chong1,2,7; 1Departments of Pediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2Khoo Teck Puat – National University Children’s Medical Institute, National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore, Background. Evidence is emerging that ischemic stroke (IS) results from a 3Departments of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of complex interplay between environmental and genetic risk factors. As he- Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 4Division of Medical Sciences, National Cancer Center, terozygous ABC C6
 mutations were shown to be associated with increased Singapore, Singapore, 5Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, cardiovascular risk, we evaluated the role of ABC C6
 in cryptogenic IS. 6Department of Pediatric Medicine, KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Singapore, Methodology. Direct sequencing of ABC C6
 was performed in 424 consecuti- Singapore, 7Department of Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, National ve cryptogenic IS patients and 250 healthy age- and sex-matched controls. University Health System, Singapore, Singapore. Allelic frequency differences were analyzed using a two-tailed Fisher’s Exact test. Logistic regression analysis assessed modification of mutation-stroke interaction by cardiovascular risk factors. In one familial case with an au- Introduction: Molecular diagnosis of HD can be performed confidently using tosomal dominant inheritance pattern of IS, segregation of the identified triplet primed PCR (TP-PCR) which detects all expanded alleles regardless ABC C6
 mutation was studied. of size. However, rapid high-throughput HD screening strategies currently Results. Eighteen carriers of one ABC C6
 mutation were identified compared rely on PCR using primHerTsT that flank the repeat, which may fail to detect to 2 carriers in controls (Odds Ratio 5.4975 [p =0.023; 95% CI 1.2-23.8]). large expansions and lead to false negative results. We describe an impro- No interaction with other CV risk factors was confirmed. In one family, we ved one-step screen for expansion mutations based on MCA of TP-PCR established segregation of an ABC C6
 mutation in 18 family members with products. 196 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONrAep, eStPitiAveI Nis c|h WemWic Wstr.oEkSe HanGd/.OorR caGrdiovascular disease at young age and Materials and Methods: The assay was optimized on 30 genotype-knownABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index simultaneously identified two novel PXE patients. nervous system. Recently, de novo missense KCNH1 mutations have been Conclusion. The segregation of an ABC C6
 mutation in affected members identified in six patients with Zimmermann-Laband syndrome and in four of a multi-generation family with cerebrovascular disease suggests ABC C6
 patients with Temple-Baraitser syndrome. These syndromes were histori- mutations to be significant risk factors for IS. This was confirmed by a high cally considered distinct. Here, we report three de novo missense KCNH1 incidence of ABC C6
 mutations in a cohort of cryptogenic IS patients com- mutations in four patients with syndromic developmental delay and epi- pared to controls. As also demonstrated by the diagnosis of two novel PXE lepsy. Two novel KCNH1 mutations (p.R357Q and p.R357P), found in three patients, identification of ABC C6
 mutation carriers can have important im- patients, were located at the evolutionally highly conserved arginine in the plications for genetic counseling and follow-up of these families. channel voltage sensor domain ( S4
). Another mutation (p.G496E) was found in the channel pore domain ( S6
) helix, which acts as a hinge in activation  P09
.086 gating and mainly conducts non-inactivating outward potassium current. A A new phenocopy of Kabuki syndrome previously reported p.G496R mutation was shown to produce no voltage- C. Lintas1, I. S. Piras2,3, M. Verdecchia4,1, C. Picinelli3, R. Sacco1, G. Merla5, M. Canali1, A. M. Persico1,3,6; dependent outward current in CHO cells, suggesting that p.G496E may also 1University Campus Bio-Medico of Rome, Rome, Italy, 2The Translational Genomics disrupt the proper function of the Kv channel pore. Our report confirms that Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 3Mafalda Luce Center for Pervasive KCNH1 mutations are associated with syndromic neurodevelopmental dis- Developmental Disorders, Milan, Italy, 4Azienda socio sanitaria G Mancinelli, Montelparo order, and also support the functional importance of the  S4
 domain. (FM), Italy, 5IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, Acknowledgements: Saitsu H, Tsurusaki H, Sakai Y, Haginoya K, Takahashi K, 6University of Messina, Messina, Italy. Hubshman MW, Okamoto N, Nakashima M, Tanaka F are highly appreciated for their contribution to this study. We report on a 14 year old man who had received a clinical diagnosis of Ka-  P09
.089 buki syndrome when he was six. No mutations in the two associated Kabuki Phenotypic characterisation of a recurrent homozygous deleterious genes, KMT2D and KDM6A, were found by direct sequencing and Multiple variant in the KCTD3 gene Ligation Probe Amplification. Array CGH revealed a de novo 5 Mb deletion E. A. Faqeih1, A. A. Alfares2, M. M. Saleh1; 1King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Department of Pediatrics, College of on chromosome 10p11.22-11.21 encompassing 15 genes. Enrichment ana- Medicine, Qassim University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. lysis by Gene Ontology showed that some of the deleted genes (as ZEB1, NR P1
, FZD8, PARD3 and ITGB1) play an important role in neurodevelop- ment whereas others are implicated in chromatin remodeling. Particularly, Introduction: An association between KCTD3 and multiple congenital ano- the histone modifier EP C1
 gene falls within the same “epigenetic functional malies has previously been published; here, we expand the phenotype asso- classes” of the two candidate Kabuki syndrome genes and it is functionally ciated with deleterious variants in KCTD3. linked to these by means of H2A histone. Consistent with this finding we de- Case series: Six patients (one monozygotic twin) from three consan- monstrated a significant reduction in EP C1
 transcript which should functio- guineous families presented with early-onset severe psychomotor retardati- nally equate the loss of function mutations associated with the two Kabuki on (100%), epilepsy (100%), hypotonia (100%), spasticity (33%), and dys- candidate genes. morphic features (33%). Brain MRI revealed Dandy-Walker malformation  P09
.087 (84%) and hydrocephalus (33%). Abdominal ultrasound revealed unilateral Recurrent mutation in the KCN C3
 gene causes strikingly different multicystic kidney disease (33%). Basic metabolic, biochemical, haematolo- clinical picture of SCA13 in a single family gical work up and aCGH were unremarkable. Whole exome sequencing iden- A. Todorova1,2, T. Todorov2, P. Palaima3, E. De Vriendt3, V. Bojinova4, M. Koleva4, T. tified previously described homozygous likely pathogenic variant in KCTD3 Chamova5, V. Mitev1, A. Jordanova1; c.166C>T (p. (Arg56*) by the same research group in a one-year-old patient 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory with a similar presentation. Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4MHATNP “St. Discussion: KCTD3 belongs to a family of accessory subunits that regulate Naum”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria. the biophysical properties of ion channels. The disruption of this gene has been associated with autism and renal aging in mice. It is highly expressed in the kidney and brain. Complete loss of this gene in the six patients resulted in specific clinical phenotypes mainly affecting brain and kidney develop- We report a family with autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia affec- ment. ting two sibs and their mother. The clinical onset of the mother was around Conclusion: We report on six patients with recurrent deleterious variants the age of 18-19 years with scanning speech and gait ataxia. Brain MRI de- in KCTD3. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest case series of monstrated cerebellar atrophy at the age of 23 and she has been clinically a similar presentation and provides additional observations regarding the diagnosed as spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA). The clinical onset of the sons was role of KCTD3 in brain and kidney development. The universal involvement much earlier at the age of 2 and 1 years respectively with gait instability. The of cerebellum in those patients with the KCTD3 homozygous mutation make motor development of the second boy was delayed and independent inassi- it a new member to the expanding lists of cerebellar hypoplasia-associated sted gait has not been achieved since the age of 2.5 years. Neuropsychologi- genes. However, its exact neurocerebellar role, function and phenotypic ef- cal development in both children was normal. The neurological examination fects need extensive functional study. revealed ataxia of stance and gait, intention tremor, scanning speech. Con- vergent strabismus was present in the elder brother. Their brain MRI at the  P09
.090 age of 2 showed cerebelar hypotrophy. A de novo KIF1A mutation in a patient having epileptic The following dominant spinocerebellar ataxias SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, encephalopathy with PEHO-like features SCA7, SCA8, SCA10, SCA12, SCA17, DRPLA were excluded. The genes TTBK2 A. Laari1,2,3, M. Muona1,3,4, C. Courage1,2,3, M. Somer5, A. Lehesjoki1,2,3, A. Anttonen1,6,7; for SCA11 and PRKCG for SCA14 were tested negative by Sanger sequen- 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Neuroscience Center, University of cing. The NGS (WES) revealed the mutation c.1268G>A, p.Arg423His in the Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University KCN C3
 gene for SCA13. The mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing, of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Norio Centre, Rinnekoti Foundation, Helsinki, Helsinki, it segregated with the disease in the family. Finland, 6Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, SCA13 accounts for less than 1% of SCAs. This mutation has been previous- Finland, 7Laboratory of Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. ly published. Typically it is associated with early onset, but in our family the mother showed weaker and late onset manifestation in comparison to both sons. SCA13 shows wide spectrum of phenotypes even in the frame of PEHO syndrome (Progressive encephalopathy with Edema, Hypsarrhyth- a single family. mia and Optic atrophy; MIM 260565) is an autosomal recessively inheri-  P09
.088 ted progressive infantile encephalopathy. A significant number of patients De novo KCNH1 mutations in four patients with syndromic presents with many of the clinical features of PEHO syndrome but do not developmental delay, hypotonia and seizures show typical neuroradiological findings or progression of cerebellar atro- N. Matsumoto, R. Fukui, N. Miyake; phy and are classified as having PEHO-like syndrome. We recently identified Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. the recessive founder mutation responsible for PEHO syndrome in Finnish patients (Anttonen et al., in revision). Langlois et al. (Eur J Hum Genet 2015) reported that PEHO syndrome is caused by de novo dominant variants in The voltage-gated Kv10.1 potassium channel, also known as ether-a-go-go- the motor domain of the KIF1A gene. In our exome study of 33 PEHO-like related gene 1, encoded by KCNH1 (poEtaSsHsiuGm 2vo0lt1a6ge |-g BatAedR cChaEnLnOelN, suAb,f aS-PApINat ie| nWtsW neWgat.iEvSe HforG t.hOe RPEGHO founder mutation we identified one pa 1ti 9en 7t mily H [eag-related], member 1) is predominantly expressed in the central with a de novo missense variant (c.757G>A;p. E253
K) affecting the motorABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.093 Combined genetic and neuroradiological assessment of neuronal domain of KIF1A. The variant has been published earlier (Lee et al., Human migration disorders Mutation, 2014) in two patients with intellectual disability, cerebellar and U. Hehr1, S. Hinreiner1, T. Geis2, G. Schuierer3, S. M. Herbst1; optic atrophy and axonal neuropathy. Our patient presented with progressi- 1Center for and Department of Human Genetics, University Regensburg, Regensburg, ve cerebellar atrophy, optic atrophy and dysmorphic features quite similar Germany, 2KUNO Children´s University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, to PEHO syndrome. In thorough evaluation of the imaging findings in diffe- 3Division of Neuroradiology, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. rent time points, the dysmyelination was more severe in this patient than in typical PEHO patients. Thus, the patient was concluded to have PEHO-like features. Introduction: Neuronal migration disorders (NMD) are a clinically and ge- Our findings, combined with analysis of data on patients reported in the lite- netically important cause of early developmental delay, cognitive impair- rature to have likely pathogenic variants affecting the motor domain coding ment and seizures. A substantial proportion of practically all morphologi- region of KIF1A imply that de novo mutations in KIF1A are associated with cal forms has been associated with a wide variety of isolated or syndromal a PEHO-like phenotype rather than PEHO-syndrome. monogenic disorders.  P09
.091 Method: Conventional Sanger sequencing and CNV analysis by MLPA, more Kleefstra syndrome and infantile spasms: a rare association recently massive parallel NGS gene panel sequening (MGPS), additional neu- S. Dimassi1, N. Soyah2, A. Labalme3, D. Sanlaville3, L. Boughammoura2, A. Saad1, S. roradiological assessment of available cerebral MR (cMR) imaging. Mougou-Zerelli1; Results: Conventional Sanger sequencing with MLPA in our laboratory al- 1Department of Cytogenetics and Reproductive Biology, Farhat Hached University Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Pediatrics, Farhat Hached University lowed a genetic classification (mutation class VU S4
 or VU S5
) for 21.6% Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Department of Genetics, Lyon University Hospital, of our overall NMD patient cohort (981 independent patients with lissen- Lyon, France. cephaly/pachygyria/polymicrogyria, double cortex, periventricular nodular heterotopia or complex NMD; 1.53 genes per patient). For a subgroup of 146 patients with cMR imaging available for pretest reevaluation causal muta- Kleefstra syndrome is characterized by moderate to severe intellectual disa- tions were identified in 30.8%. bility (ID), childhood hypotonia and distinct facial features. Additional fin- Implementation of an individual combined diagnostic strategy including dings can also be observed including heart defects, renal/urologic defects, massive parallel NGS gene panel sequencing MGPS (45.8 genes per patient) genital defects in males, severe respiratory infections, autistic-like features and neuroradiological assessment of patients with NMD now allows not in childhood, epilepsy,... The syndrome can be caused either by a submicro- only a substantially faster and more cost-effective workup, but also further scopic 9q34.3 deletion or an intragenic haploinsufficiency mutation of the increases the diagnostic yield through detection of mutations in genes with euchromatin histone methyltransferase 1 (EHMT1) gene. small contribution (e.g. DYN C1
H1 or TREX1) and by screening for copy We report here, the first 3-years old boy of non consanguineous parents, number variations (e.g. LI S1
) for all tested genes within the known current with severe ID, hypotonia, facial dysmorphism, cardiac defect, severe respi- technical limitations. Furthermore, sufficient MGPS coverage also increases ratory infection and infantile spasms (IS). Standard Karyotype was normal the sensitivity to detect somatic mosaicism (e.g. DCX). and array chromosome genomic hybridization (array CGH) showed a 826 kb Summary: Our preliminary findings indicate a benefit of diagnostic MGPS 9q34.3 deletion ranging from 139,970,775 to 140,796,632 pb (hg19). The for NMD, when combined with critical data assessment and interpretation 9q de novo telomeric deletion was confirmed by FISH using 9q telomeric in the context of individual clinical and neuroradiological findings. probe.  P09
.095 Epilepsy and Seizures of various types occur in 25 to 35% of patients. Only Genetic studies of multiple consanguineous families with primary two cases of kleefstra syndrome associated to IS have been published to microcephaly revealed pathogenic variants in ASPM and CDK6 date. We described the third case of epileptic IS, an age related seizure type, M. A. Khan1,2, M. Z. Ali2, M. Kuster3, N. Ahmad4, V. Rupp3, H. Gul2, S. Abbas2, V. Kumar1, F. A. occurring usually in clusters and characterized by a typical electrodecre- Mir1, S. Khan1, R. M. Mohammad1, C. Windpassinger3, Z. Nawaz1; mental pattern and various interictal electroencephalographic abnormali- 1Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 2Gomal University, D.I.Khan, Pakistan, ties. EHMT1, encoding a histone H3 Lys 9 methyltransferase and involving 3Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 4Hazara University, Mansehra, Pakistan. in chromatin remodeling, accounts for the majority of features in Kleefstra syndrome and is probably responsible of the epilepsy phenotype.  P09
.092 Background: Primary microcephaly is a rare genetic disorder that is charac- Novel mutation in POLR1C in RNA polymerase III-related terized by reduced head circumference and intellectual disability. Genetic leukodystrophy with myoclonus studies have identified 15 (MCPH) causative genes which include MCPH1, A. Karkar1, I. Kraoua2, C. Drissi2, S. Samaan3, F. Renaldo3, M. Elmaleh3, I. Dorboz4, O. Boespflug-Tanguy3; WDR62, CDK5RA P2
, CAS C5
, ASPM, CENPJ, STIL, CE P135
, CE P152
, ZNF335, 1Genetics and Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Casablanca, Morocco, 2National Institute PH C1
, CDK6, CENPE, SAS S6
 and MFSD2A. Physiologically, most of the prote- Mongi Ben Hamida of Neurology, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, in products of these MCPH genes are involved in cell cycle and its regulation. 4INSERM, Paris, France. Methods: The genomic analysis was performed through whole exome se- quencing, while co-segregation of the identified pathogenic variants in the corresponding family members was carried out by sanger DNA sequencing. RNA polymerase III (POLR3)-related leukodystrophy is an autosomal reces- Results: In the present genetic study, we present three consanguineous sive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by childhood onset of pro- Pakistani families segregating primary microcephaly that are ascertained gressive motor decline manifest as spasticity, ataxia, tremor, and cerebellar from the rural area of Khyber-Pukhtunkhwa province of Pakistan. Sequence signs, as well as mPilOdL cRo3gAnitive rPeOgLreRs3sBion. Other features may includael h. ypo/ analysis of two families revealed one novel [NM_018136.4: c.10013delA oligodontia and hypogPoOnLaRd1oCtr opic hypogonadism. This disorder is caused (p.Asp3338Valfs*2)] and a previously reported [NM_018136.4: c.9730C>T by mutations in and gene. Recently Thiffault et have (p.Arg3244*)] mutation in ASPM gene. The novel frame-shift mutation identified a new gene related to this disorder. This gene is also mu- (p.Asp3338Valfs*2) in ASPM presumably truncate the protein synthesis that tated in some Treacher Collins syndrome cases. Here we describe a novel result in loss of armadillo type fold domain. The third family showed the mutation in a 23 year-old girl from a consanguineous Tunisian family. At same missense mutation [NM_001259.6: c.589G-A (p. Ala197Thr)] in CDK6 the age of 5 years, she developed unsteady gait, hand tremor, dysarthria and gene as recently identified in a single Pakistani family. movement disorders. The first examination at 13 years of age showed cere- Conclusion: ASPM is the most prevalent gene for MCPH in south Asian po- bellar syndrome, pyramidal signs in upper and lower limbs and generalized pulations, and our study also expanded its mutational spectrum. The repor- myoclonus. Brain MRI showed diffuse hyperintense signal of the supraten- ted CDK6 gene has previously been mapped in a consanguineous Pakistani torial and cerebellar white matter, cerebellar atrophy and hypointensity on family, and here we are reporting the second family. These results further the T2-weighted images of the ventrolateral thalamus. The corpPuOsL cRa3llAosum extend the evidence of CDK6 gene implication in MCPH and suggest its foun- iPsO sLliRg3hBtl y thinned. She was negative for NGS leukodystrophy-panel contai- der effect in the Pakistani population. ning twenty six most frequently involved genes incluPdOinLRg 1tChe and genes used by the routine molecular diagnostic lab of Robert Debré HPOoLspRi1taCl. Sanger sequencing of the coding regions of P OgLeRne1 Crevealed a homozygous mutation (c.863T>C/ p.Phe288Ser). This mutation is a novel mutation. This result confirms that the analysis of gene is an additional way for POLR3-related leukodystrophy diagnosis in which se- vere non epileptic myoclonus and T2 hypointensity of the thalamus were not reported. 198 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.096  P09
.098 2002-2016: What is known about reported MCPH patients? Exploring Allele Specific Methylation (ASM) in drug dependence P. Létard1,2,3, P. Gressens1,4,5, A. Verloes5,6, S. Passemard1,5,6; susceptibility 1INSERM U1141 PROTECT, Paris, France, 2Service d‘anatomie et cytologie pathologiques L. Pineda-Cirera1,2,3, J. Cabana-Domínguez1,2,3, C. Roncero4,5,6, L. Rodríguez-Cintas4,5, L. - CHU Jean Verdier, Bondy, France, 3Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Bobigny, Grau-López4,5,6, N. Martínez-Luna4,5, A. C. Abad4,5, M. Sorribes4,5, M. Casas5,6,7, J. A. Ramos- France, 4Center for developing brain, King‘s college, St. Thomas‘ Campus, London, United Quiroga5,6,7, M. Ribasés5,6,8, B. Cormand1,2,3, N. Fernàndez-Castillo1,2,3; Kingdom, 5Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 6Département de 1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. Spain, 2Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 4Addiction and Dual Diagnosis Unit, Psychiatric Services, Hospital Introduction: Microcephaly primary hereditary (MCPH) is a rare autosomal Universitari Vall d’Hebron-ASPB, Barcelona, Spain, 5Biomedical Network Research Center on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a reduction in 6Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, brain growth, associated with an intellectual disability. MCPH is genetically 7Department of Psychiatry, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, heterogeneous with fifteen genes identified (MCPH1-15), coding proteins 8Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, related to the centrosome. Here, we review clinical, molecular and radiolo- Barcelona, Spain. gical findings of reported MCPH patients and highlight prognostic factors. Materials and methods: We have performed an online literature research in PubMed database to identify any patient with mutations in MCPH genes. Introduction: Drug addiction is a neuropsychiatric disorder in which both Results: 722 patients (326 families) have been reported, with a high rate of environmental and genetic factors are involved. Work over the past decade consanguinity. 44% are of Pakistani origin. In Europe, there are 41 families, has demonstrated a crucial role of epigenetic mechanisms in driving long- often not-related. Mutations in ASPM represent the most frequent cause lasting changes in gene expression in several tissues, including the brain. of MCPH (63% of families), followed by mutations in WDR62 (14%) and Material and methods: Starting from a previously reported list of 2,878 MCPH1 (6%) genes. 234 MCPH mutations have been reported, with a ma- SNPs that correlate with differential levels of methylation at CpG sites jority of nonsense and frameshift mutations. Intellectual disability is mild (allele-specific methylation), we obtained a sub-list of 88 SNPs using the to moderate but neuropsychological assessment was almost never carried following selection criteria: R2>0.5, only one SNP for each CpG site. Subse- out (4% of reported patients). When performed, CDK5RA P2
 patients have quently, we evaluated the possible contribution to drug dependence predis- a better IQ than ASPM patients. A brain MRI was performed in 16% of pa- position of these SNPs in a sample of 697 drug-dependent patients and 656 tients: it was abnormal in 84%, and frequent abnormalities include: gyral sex-matched controls from Spain and in a replication sample. simplification, corpus callosum abnormality and pachygyria. Results: A single SNP, rs3766612, was found associated with drug addiction Conclusion: 722 patients have been reported with mutations in one of the (p-value=0.00071; OR-95%CI=1.41 (1.16-1.69)) and survived the Bonferro- 15 MCPH genes but clinical, neuropsychological and radiological data are of- ni correction for multiple testing. We then aimed at replicating this finding ten lacking, which makes genotype-phenotype correlations or genetic coun- in a follow-up sample of 740 drug-dependent patients and 771 sex-matched seling still difficult. How these mutations alter brain structure and cognitive controls, but rs3766612 was not found associated with drug addiction. Fi- functions are major questions that we have now to solve in MCPH field. nally, we performed a pooled analysis including the discovery and replica- tion samples where the SNP rs3766612 remained associated with drug ad-  P09
.097 diction in the combined dataset (p-value=0.00655; OR-95%CI=1.19 (1.05- MEC P2
 duplication: genetic and clinical study in Spanish patients L. Blasco Pérez1, S. Vidal Falcó1, E. Gean Molins2, N. Brandi Tarrau2, P. Pacheco 1.35)). Fernandez2, M. del Campo3, V. Català4, E. Guillén5, P. Lapunzina6, E. Lloveras7, H. Conclusion: We detected a potential association between drug addiction and Maortua8, F. Martinez9, A. Mesas10, J. Nevado6, M. Obón11, C. Orellana9, A. Plaja12, M. SNP rs3766612, which correlates with differential levels of methylation at Rosello9, M. I. Tejada8, E. Tizzano12, J. Armstrong Morón13; the CpG island cg23166289. Interestingly, this CpG site is located in a ge- 1Fundació sant joan de deu, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario San Juan de Dios, nomic region that contains several genes belonging to families previously Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Valle Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, 4Universidad Autónoma de related to drug dependence, such as SYT14, LAMB3 or CAMK1G. Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 6Instituto Funding: Grant SAF2015-68341-R de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 7LABCO-  P09
.099 Iberia, Barcelona, Spain, 8Hospital Universitario de Cruces, Bilbao, Spain, 9Hospital MSTO1 is a cytoplasmic protein involved in mitochondrial fusion Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 10Hospital Xanit, Málaga, Spain, dynamics and its human mutation is associated with mitochondrial 11Laboratoris ICS, Girona, Spain, 12Hospital Universitari Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, myopathy 13Hospital sant joan de deu, Barcelona, Spain. A. Gal1,2, P. Balicza1, D. Weaver2, S. Naghdi2, J. K. Suresh2, G. Inczedy-Farkas1, V. Reményi1, P. Várnai3, T. Gyuris4, A. Farkas4, L. Nagy4, M. J. Molnar1, G. Hajnóczky2; 1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Introduction: The MEC P2
 duplication syndrome (OMIM_300260) is a neu- Hungary, 2MitoCare Center for Mitochondrial Imaging Research and Diagnostics, rodevelopmental disorder X-linked characterized by severe to profound Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, intellectual disability, early infantile hypotonia, autistic traits, seizures and Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Department of Physiology, Semmelweis University, recurrent respiratory infections. It usually affects boys, but also there are Budapest, Hungary, 4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Debrecen,, Debrecen, Hungary. girls affected. Duplication could be de novo or inherited from asymptomatic carrier mother. It has been reported about 120 cases all over the world, wi- thout a known incidence. Introduction: MSTO1 protein has been localized to mitochondria and linked The aim of the study is to characterize a Spanish cohort with MEC P2
 dupli- to mitochondrial morphology but its specific role remained unclear. In this cation syndrome to improve our knowledge of the disease and perform a study, we investigated the role of MSTO1 on mitochondrial dynamics and genotype-phenotype correlation. bioenergetics in patient-derived fibroblasts and HeLa cells. Material and Method: The cohort consists in 13 patients of both sexes dia- Methods: The whole exome-sequencing was performed a Hungarian family gnosed in different Spanish hospitals. The duplications were detected by with mitochondrial disease resulting in myopathy, hypoacusis and psychia- MLPA and/or CGH-array. The clinical characterization was carried out using tric symptoms. The mitochondrial fusion-fission and bioenergetics in both a checklist designed for the project. The molecular characterization is di- patient-derived cells and cell lines using genetic rescue and gene silencing vided into several steps: 1) Checking the duplication by qPCR-doses, stu- were investigated by live cell imaging, fluorometric measurements and im- dy XCI and FISH; 2) If FISH shows tandem duplication, we narrowed the munoblotting. breakpoints through qPCR, PCR-long and Sanger sequencing; 3) Analyze the Results: In this study, we identified a c.22 G>A, (p.Val8Met) mutation of expression of the two MeC P2
 isoforms by RT-qPCR. MSTO1 in our patients. In the patient fibroblasts, the MSTO1 mRNA and pro- Results: In this collaborative study has been characterized a heterogeneous tein abundance is decreased, mitochondria show fragmentation, aggregati- cohort, with both sexes, with different phenotypes (Rett-like and duplicati- on, decreased network continuity and fusion activity. These can be reversed on patients) and inherited or de novo duplication located in different regi- by genetic rescue. Short term silencing of MSTO1 in HeLa cells reproduced ons (tandem, other region of ChrX or ChrY). However, this information is not the impairment of mitochondrial morphology and dynamics observed in the enough to create a clear genotype-phenotype correlation. patient fibroblasts without impairing bioenergetics. Contrary to a previous Conclusions: We suppose MEC P2
 duplication syndrome is an underdia- report, MSTO1 is mainly localized in the cytoplasmic area and shows only gnosed disease that needs further characterization studies in order to give a partial colocalization with the mitochondria. After plasma membrane per- better genetic and clinical diagnosis. meabilization, MSTO1 is released to the cytoplasm. Conclusions: Our findings indicate that MSTO1 has a role in mitochondri- al morphogenesis and quality control by supporting mitochondrial fusion. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAMINST |O W1 lWikeWly .iEntSerHacGts. OwiRthG the mitochondrial fusion machinery as a s1ol9ub9-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index le factor at the cytoplasm-mitochondrial outer membrane interface. Loss- hemochromatosis proteins seem to play a key role. The aim of study was to of-function mutation in MSTO1 is could be associated with mitochondrial investigate weather HFE ( C282
Y, H63D), TF ( P570
S) and transferrin recep- disorders. tor (TFRC- S142
G) gene variants contribute to MS development. This study was supported by Hungarian Brain Research Program (KTIA_13_ Materials and Methods: We genotyped 455 patients diagnosed with MS NAP-A-III/6 -V.A-V.) and NIH grant (AA017773) according to the revised McDonald criteria and 400 healthy controls from  P09
.100 Croatia and Slovenia by PCR-RFLP or Real-time PCR method. ML C1
 mutational analysis in Korean patients with megalencephalic Results: A significantly higher frequency of the  C282
Y carrier mutation was leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts observed in MS patients (6.3%) than in controls (3.1%) (P=0.033). Allele B. Lim, H. Cheong; Seoul National University Children‘s Hospital, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. and genotypes frequencies for other polymorphisms did not differ sig- nificantly (P>0.05). A three year earlier onset was found in carriers of the  C282
Y mutation (P=0.106), and significantly earlier onset in TF- C2
 homo- zygotes (P=0,016). Disease began eight year later in H63D homozygotes but Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC) is a statistical difference show borderline significance (P=0.056). Progression rare inherited disorder characterized by macrocephaly, slow neurologic index of MS was higher in carrier of TFRC-  S142
G A allele also with border- deterioration and seizures. Brain MRI shows extensive white matter signal line significance (P=0.051). abnormalities with subcortical cysts in the anterior temporal regions. The Conclusions: Our results indicate that HFE- C282
Y mutation may be risk first causative gene, ML C1
 is mutated in approximately 75% of patients and factor to MS susceptibility. Variants  C282
Y and TF- C2
 are possible predic- inherited as autosomal recessive trait. The defect in ML C1
 has been known tors for early onset of MS, while HFE-H63D prolong disease onset. Polymor- to hamper the ion and water homeostasis and osmotic balance in astrocytes, phism TFRC- S142
G might have influence on disease progression. Polymor- resulting chronic brain white matter edema. In this study, we present the phisms in HFE, TFRC and TF genes coding for iron binding and transporting clinical manifestation, neuroimaging and mutational analysis in the MLC pa- proteins might contribute to pathogenesis of MS. tients first to be described from Korea. All of the four MLC patients had early onset macrocephaly, delay in the motor skills with a gradual onset of motor  P09
.103 deterioration. Brain MRI showed typical MLC features. Two types of mutati- Genetic basis of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation in ons were identified. p.A275D mutation was most commonly observed, six of Spanish population eight (75%) alleles in Korean patients with MLC. Homozygous p.I113Gfs*4 C. Tello1, V. Lupo1, A. Darling2, B. Pérez-Dueñas2, C. Espinós1; frameshift mutation was identified in only one patient while patient’s mo- 1Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, ther was heterozygous state. By MLPA and CGH + SNP microarray analysis, Barcelona, Spain. segmental loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 22 including ML C1
 region was confirmed indicating maternal uniparental disomy.  P09
.101 Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous Sequencing in patients with familial and sporadic multiple sclerosis group of inherited neurologic disorders characterized by progressive move- reveals the possible etiological role of rare and highly penetrant ment disorders and abnormal accumulation of iron in brain, specifically in genetic variation the basal ganglia. Mostly affected are children in whom the progress of the A. Maver1, A. Hodzic1, S. Šega2, J. Drulović3, I. Novaković4, S. Ristić5, M. Kapović5, T. disease is devastating and includes progressive slurred speech, dysphagia, Pekmezović3, B. Peterlin1; 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Neurology, dystonia, spasticity, parkinsonism, pure akinesia, oculomotor dysfunction, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Neurology Clinic, CCS, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Institute loss of vision and neuropsychiatric symptoms. There are 10 genes causing of Human Genetics, MF Beograd, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Department of Biology and Medical NBIA that resolve 80% of cases; the remaining patients are cataloged as Genetics, School of Medicine Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. idiopathic cases. The NBIA-causing genes play a role in multiple biological processes such as iron metabolism, mitochondrial dynamics, reactive oxy- gen species (ROS)-induced damage, lipid metabolism and autophagy. Our Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic autoimmune neurological disorder with aim is the genetic characterization of patients with NBIA in Spanish popu- complex genetic architecture. Despite efforts, even large genome-wide asso- lation. PANK2 PLA2G6, WDR45  C19
orf12 ciation studies (GWAS) failed to completely explain heritability of MS based To establish the genetic basis of these patients we have analyzed the most on common genetic variation. common genes ( , and ) responsible for the To characterize the possible role of rare, highly penetrant genetic variants in disease by Sanger sequencing and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Am- MS, we performed whole exome sequencing in 48 patients with familial MS, plification (MLPA) in a clinicPaAl NseKr2ies of 57 patients diPaLgAn2oGse6d. with NBIA. 40 patients with sporadic MS and 92 population-matched controls. We have To date we have achieved the molecular diagnosis for 40 NBIA patients : 31 focused the analysis to rare (<5%) and predicted pathogenic variants (trun- patients carry mutations in , and 9 patients in EleveCn1 9oof rthf1e2- cating or predicted pathogenic missense variants) in 102 genes associated se mWuDtRat4i5ons are novel and functional studies are in progress with the aim to with MS in the most recent GWAS performed to date. demonstrate its pathogenicity. No mutations were identified in the In the subset of patients with familial MS, we identified two novel truncating or genes. We currently study the remaining six NBIA genes in the variants of high impact in MME L1
 and ALPK2 genes. Truncating variants in patients who remain undiagnosed by targeted next generation sequencing. two further GWAS genes - I L7
R and AHI1 were also identified in sporadic MS  P09
.104 cases. Several predicted pathogenic missense variants were also identified Copy number variants identification and clinical correlation in in MS associated genes: 18 variants in familial MS cases and 27 in spora- an adult population with intellectual disability and psychiatric/ dic cases. Finally, we could also demonstrate an increased burden of rare behavioural disorders predicted pathogenic variants in GWAS genes in both familial (OR=1.77, M. Viñas-Jornet1, S. Esteba-Castillo2, N. Baena1, N. Ribas-Vidal2, A. Ruiz1, D. Torrents- p=0.048) and sporadic MS cases (OR=2.5, p=0.0003), when comparing this Rodas2, E. Gabau3, C. Aguilera1, R. Novell2, M. Guitart1; load to the population of healthy controls. 1Genetic Laboratory. Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 2Specialized Our results suggest the possible role of rare pathogenic variants in genes Service in Health Mental and Intellectual Disability, Parc Hospitalari Martí i Julià, Salt previously associated with MS in association studies. Furthermore, we re- (Girona), Spain, 3Paediatric Service. Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain. port an increased overall burden of pathogenic variants within these genes in familial and sporadic cases with MS.  P09
.102 Adults with unexplained intellectual disability (ID) have not been systema- Effect of genes in iron metabolism on multiple sclerosis development tically addressed for genetic analysis. The goal of this study is to establish N. Starcevic Cizmarevic1, L. Lovrecic2, B. Curko-Cofek3, V. Barac-Latas3, M. Kapovic1, B. Peterlin2, S. Ristic1; the genetic aetiology of 100 adult patients affected by dual diagnosis of mild 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia, (IQ=75-50) or moderate (IQ=50-35) ID and psychiatric/behavioural disor- 2Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, der. Different tests were used to evaluate cognitive and psychiatric profile. 3Department of Physiology,immunology and Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, Patients were analyzed with a sequential genetic workflow, including mole- Rijeka, Croatia. cular karyotype (array-CGH Agilent Technologies, 400K). Customized MLPA and FISH analyses were used to validate and determine the inheritance of pathogenic copy number variants (pCNV) and variants of unknown signi- Introduction: Increased local iron concentration in brain parenchyma of ficance likely pathogenic (VOUSp). multiple sclerosis (MS) patients is documented by magnetic resonance im- We identified a genetic abnormality in 38 patients: 14 well known specific aging, but role of iron in MS etiopathogenesis is still debated. Brain iron ho- syndromes, 4 cases with chromosomal rearrangements and 20 cases with m2e0o0stasis is regulated by different factors, amoEnSg HwhGic 2h 0th1e 6tr a|n BsfAerRriCn EanLdO NCAN,V Ss P(8A pINCN |V W anWd 1W2 V.EOSUHSpG). .AO 2RpG16.2 deletion is the genetic basis in twoABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index unrelated cases, describing a common cognitive, psychiatric and dysmor- of neuroticism personality. phic phenotype. Three unrelated patients present a 7q31 deletion as the This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea putative genetic cause. A 15q14q15.1 duplication and an homozygous 3q29 (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2013R1A1A2062702) and duplication were identified in two independent siblings suggesting that Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2014R1A2A2A04006291).  P09
.107 both regions could be dosagNeR sXeNn1si,t IivMeM.  P2
L, MSRA, SL C1
A1, CTNNA3, SOX5, Exome sequencing identifies rare pathogenic NGLY1 mutations EUlBeEv3enA ,g CeHnResN Ain7c,l SuPdRedE Din1 ,p PCRNKVC Ao r VOUSHSlApN hKa3d. been related to a wide range in a patient with developmental delay, seizures and hyperkinetic of psychiatric phenotypes: movement disorder and The CNVs contribute equally H. Daoud1, J. Wagner2, O. Jarinova1, K. Boycott1,2, H. McMillan3, D. A. Dyment1,2; to both mild and moderate ID as well as to different psychiatric disorders 1Department of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, even though the odds of having psychiatric co-morbidity was 4.22 times hig- 2Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 3Division her in patients with a causative CNV. of Neurology, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada. This work was supported by FIS(PI080778) and CIR(2010,2013,2014) grants. Background: N-glycanase 1 is a conserved cytosolic enzyme that catalyzes  P09
.105 the deglycosylation of misfolded N-linked glygoproteins, an essential step Diagnosing Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis with Next-generation in the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation pathway (ERAD). N- sequencing, an example G. J. Braathen1, S. Slinde2, Ø. L. Busk1, K. Tveten1, Ø. L. Holla1, H. T. Hilmarsen1, J. R. Helle1; glycanase 1 deficiency, caused by loss-of-function mutations in the NGY L1
 1Section of Medical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Skien, Norway, gene, is an extremely rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by 2Department of Pediatrics, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway. global developmental delay, movement disorder, hypotonia, liver dysfunc- tion, and alacrima. To our knowledge, a total of 14 patients have been repor- ted in the literature thus far. Introduction: The incidence of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL; CLN) in Methods: We investigated a 23-month-old girl who presented with seizures, different countries vary between 0.5-3.9/100.000. NCLs are characterized developmental delay, hypotonia, and hyperkinetic movement disorder. We by the intracellular accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigment storage performed whole Exome Sequencing (WES) in the patient and her parents material in different patterns ultrastructurally. using the Nextera Rapid Capture Exome kit (37 Mb) and the NextSeq 500 NCLs are clinically and genetically a heterogeneous group of neurodegene- platform (Illumina). rative disorders. Originally, they were classified broadly according to age at Results: We identified compound heterozygous mutations in the NGLY1 onset. However with the identification of molecular defects, the NCLs are gene: a nonsense mutation c.A1201A>T (p.Arg401*) inherited from the mo- now classified numerically according to the underlying gene defect. NC L2
 ther, and a splicing mutation c.1150-1G>C (p.?) inherited from the father. refers to NCL caused by mutation in the CLN2 gene (TP P1
), regardless of The nonsense mutation c.A1201A>T is the most common deleterious allele the age at onset. identified in patients with N-glycanase 1 deficiency. The splicing mutati- Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) is fairly quick and to a low cost compa- on c.1150-1G>C is novel and we show that it leads to an in-frame deletion red with old methods when sequencing many genes simultaneously. Exome (p.Asp335_Val384del) that removes part of the transglutaminase-like (cata- sequencing is a technique for sequencing all the protein-coding genes in a lytic) domain of the protein. genome. It is also possible to filter out and investigate for only the genes of Conclusion: We report here an additional patient with compound heterozy- interest. gous mutations in the NGLY1 gene detected by WES. The phenotype of our Methods: A five year old girl developed early sleep problems that abated and patient is consistent with the previously reported cases and further support during second year of life speech problems having only few words. From that mutations in the NGLY1 gene lead to a recognizable disorder. three years of age she had seizures, frequent falls, sleep problems and emo-  P09
.108 tional stress. Her 14 months old brother had sleep problems and cries. Next Generation Sequencing in Parkinson‘s disease - our experience Results: Filtered NGS exome for CLN genes identified a compound hete- I. Novakovic1, V. Dobricic2, M. Jankovic2, M. Svetel3, A. Maver4, B. Peterlin4, A. rozygous mutation in the TP P1
 gene, i.e. NM_000391.3 c.509-1G>A and Westenberger5, C. Klein5, V. Kostic1; c.622C>T p.(Arg208*) consistent with the disorder NC L2
. 1Faculty of Medicine, Univesrity of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Neurology Clinic Conclusion: These two variants have never been described together causing CCS, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, NC L2
. Serbia, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, CC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 5Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany. Filtered NGS exome is a powerful, cost- and time-effective tool to investigate all known genes causing NCLs. Thus, MRI and eye investigation have been postponed. Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the most common movement disorder, clinical-  P09
.106 ly characterized by resting tremor, bradykinesia and muscle rigidity. Key Genetic Contributions to Neuroticism-Related Brain Structures neuropathological substrate of PD is loss of dopaminergic neurons in basal H. Kim1, H. Kang2, S. Kim1, Y. Chang3, S. Ryu3, H. Shin3, D. Lee2, H. Kim1; ganglia and presence of intraneuronal Lewy bodies. Vaste majority of PD 1Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Seoul National University, Seoul, cases have multifactor etiology but in 10-15% patients monogenic pattern Korea, Republic of, 3Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. of inheritance is noticeable, with familiar occurrence and/or early onset of disease. In the past decades at least 18 PARK disease causing and suscepti- bility loci have been identified, but genetic basis of PD is not fully clarified. Introduction: Neuroticism is a moderately heritable personality trait consi- Recent Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) methods have their application dered to be a risk factor for stress and impaired health as well as psychiatric in this field also. We describe here results of NGS implementation in five disorders. Our aim in this study is to test whether neuroticism is associated PD families from Serbia. These patients have been previously screened for with brain volumes and to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) the most common mutations in PARK loci (LRRK2, PARKIN, PINK1, DJ1, associated to the neuroticism-related brain volumes. GBA, VP S35
) by direct sequencing of target regions and MLPA method. NGS Materials and Methods: In this study, we combined genetics, imaging and was performed on Illumina MiSeq platform using TruSight One panel. Af- personality data obtained from 123 women between the ages of 21-64 from ter bioinformatic analysis of NGS data we detected novel TGM6 c.1076C>T Kangbuk Samsung Cohort Study. A total of 5,862,302 SNPs were tested for (p.Pro359Leu) variant in early onset PD family with three affected members association with brain volume in a genome-wide association study. We also in two consecutive generations. Mutations in TGM6 usually cause spinoce- investigated if the identified SNPs are operating as a eQTL and in which rebellar ataxia type SCA35, but it has previously been shown that mutations brain region using Braineac web-based resource. in other SCA genes are clinically present with PD. In another PD family NGS Results: High neurotic individuals showed increased volumes in precuneus, revealed previously detected susceptibility variant N370S in GBA gene. In superior pAarDieStSal lobule, middle frontal gyrus, andR sBuFpOeXr1ior frontal gyrus. the remaining PD families NGS did not reveal significant pathogenic vari- None of the geneKtiCcN mHa8rkers reached genome-wide significance. However, ants. Our results support complexity of PD genetics, and illustrate power SNPs near for superior parietal lobule, within for middle fron- and challenges of NGS methods in this field. tal gyrus, within -5 for superior frontal gyrus were showed suggestive p-values (< 1*10 ). The genes were previously reported to be associated with neurological phenotypes. Furthermore, allelic differences in the SNPs were associated with differential mRNA expression in the cis-acting region. Conclusion: Our results could improve our conceptual framework of proces- ses related to brain volume reductionE aSnHd fGac i2li0ta1te6 a |b BetAteRr uCnEdLerOstNanAdi,n Sg PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 201ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.109  P09
.112 Screening for Niemann-Pick type C disease among adult patients with Deconstructing obsessive-compulsive disorder by whole exome neurodegenerative disorders of unknown etiology sequencing and rare variant association study C. Castro-Fernández1,2, P. Blanco-Arias1,3, C. García-Sancho4, R. Rodríguez5, V. Rodríguez- L. Domenech1, R. Rabionet1, G. Escaramís1, E. Real2, D. Trujillano1, H. Susak1, M. Bosio1, S. Sureda6, C. Pérez-Sousa4, M. J. Moreno-Carretero7, S. Mederer8, M. Alberte-Woodward9, M. Ossowski1, A. Carracedo3, P. Alonso2, X. Estivill1; Guijarro9, A. Sesar10, M. Arias1,10, M. J. Sobrido1,3; 1Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Universidad de Technology, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Fundación Pública Galega de Llobregat, Spain, 3Santiago de Compostela University, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4Complexo Hospitalario Universitario, A Coruña, Spain, 5Complexo Hospitalario Universitario, Ourense, Spain, 6CIBBIM – Nanomedicina, Vall d‘Hebron Institut de Recerca, Barcelona, Spain, Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a neuropsychiatric condition that 7Complexo Hospitalario Universitario, Vigo, Spain, 8Complexo Hospitalario, Pontevedra, Spain, 9Hospital Universitario Lucus Augusti, Lugo, Spain, 10Complexo Hospitalario affects 1-3% of the population worldwide. It is listed as the tenth most Universitario, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. disabling illnesses of any kind. Family and twin studies demonstrated that OCD involves both environmental and polygenic risk factors. However, de- spite an abundance of candidate genes, linkage studies and GWAS, there has Introduction: Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) is an autosomal recessive lyso- been very little progress towards elucidating the genetic causes of this dis- somal disorder resulting from mutations in the NP C1
 or NP C2
 genes. Adult order. This project represents a novel strategy that will contribute to explain onset NPC has neuropsychiatric manifestations that can mimic several neu- the aetiology of OCD. rodegenerative diseases. Aim: Multicenter, transversal study to screen for We performed whole exome sequencing of 306 unrelated OCD cases follo- NPC in adult patients with undiagnosed neurodegenerative disorders. wed by a rare variant association study. Specifically, we aggregated exonic Materials and Methods: 1) Patient selection through retrospective revision non-synonymous and splicing variants into genes and tested for association of clinical records in neurology departments from Galicia (Spain). 2) Major with OCD using a group of control exomes from our in-house database. We inclusion criteria: progressive gait disorder, involuntary movements, su- accounted for minor allele frequencies (prioritizing rare variants) and pa- pranuclear gaze palsy and cognitive decline. Secondary criteria: prolonged thogenicity score. After implementing this study, we identified a list of genes neonatal jaundice, visceral involvement, psychiatric symptoms, epilepsy, harbouring a higher number of mutations in cases compared to controls. We cataplexy and family history. 3) A Next Generation Sequencing panel was then implemented a partial least square analysis to identify combinations designed for Ion PGM® using AmpliSeq® Designer program with 99.8% co- of mutated genes that can distinguish between OCD cases and controls. We verage of NP C1
 and NP C2
. 4) Biochemical and cellular tests were performed also performed a pathway enrichment analysis with the significant genes, in patients with suspected genetic variants. finding enriched pathways related with brain neurodevelopment or func- Results: Eighteen patients (13 men, 5 women, ages 22-66) were included. tion. Finally, we selected some of these genes for further analysis, including Altogether, we identified five potentially pathogenic variants in NP C1
 and functional studies of the identified variants. one in NP C2
. The diagnosis of NPC was confirmed in two cases with homo- Stronger evidence of association for the significant genes identified will be zygous NP C1
 mutations). One patient carrying only one splicing variant had obtained through replication in larger cohorts of OCD. a late disease onset and intermediate Filipin test result. Two patients had This work was supported by MINECO project SAF2013-49108-R. L.D. is sup- variants of as yet uncertain significance. ported by the Severo Ochoa program.  P09
.113 Conclusions: NPC should be considered in adults with neuropsychiatric Analysis of the role of copy number variation in Obsessive-compulsive disorders of unclear etiology. Analysis of gene panels via NGS provides an disorder efficient diagnostic strategy. Genetic confirmation facilitates detection of D. Sanchez Chinchilla1, L. Domenech1, R. Rabionet1, G. Escaramís1, E. Real2, D. additional family cases, allows early treatment and genetic counseling. The Trujillano1, H. Susak1, M. Bosio1, S. Ossowski1, P. Alonso2, X. Estivill1; Filipin test aids in the interpretation of variants of uncertain significance. 1Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Funding: PI12/00742, Actelion Pharmaceuticals, Innopharma Project (MI- Technology, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Universitary Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet NECO-FEDER). de Llobregat, Spain.  P09
.111 The evolving NRXN1 deletion syndrome; reduced penetrance, variable Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a neuropsychiatric disorder ranked expressivity and complex counselling by the World Health Organization among the 10 most debilitating disorders. M. M. Al Shehhi1, J. E. Fitzgerald2, V. McInerney3, S. Shen3, D. R. Betts1, L. Mc Ardle1, K. Gorman4, M. King4, A. Green1, L. Gallagher2, S. A. Lynch4,5; The lifetime prevalence of OCD has been estimated to approximately 2% 1Department of Clinical Genetics, OLCHC, Dublin, Ireland, 2Trinity Centre for Health and, despite molecular studies have identified several relevant genes, much Sciences, St. James‘s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 3Regenerative Medicine Institute, School additional research is needed to establish definitive causes of the condition. of Medicine,NUI, Galway, Ireland, 4Children‘s University Hospital, Temple St., Dublin, In this study we tried to identify copy number variations (CNVs) conferring Ireland, 5Academic Center on Rare Diseases, School of Medicine and Medical Science, risk of OCD. University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. We have performed exome-sequencing on 306 OCD cases and more than 1000 non-OCD samples (control as well as other non-psychiatric disorders). Both NimbleGen and Agilent commercial exome capture kits were used for Background: Deletions or mutations of neurexin-1 (NRXN1) remain a dif- sequencing. In order to identify CNVs, we analyzed the data with ClinCNV ficult counselling issue because of reduced penetrance and variable expres- (an in-house pipeline for CNV detection from exome data). Currently, we sivity. We have reviewed 33 families known to our center to estimate pen- have performed the CNV calls in the OCD samples and are analyzing the re- etrance and document the phenotype. maining samples. Method: Cases were identified by database review within our center or In the OCD cases, we identified an average of 33 CNV per individual, ran- through collaboration with colleagues. Genomic data, clinical phenotype ging in size from 1 kb to 3,5 Mb. Some of the detected variants were over- & family history information was extracted and analyzed. Penetrance was lapping with known common CNVs. Some rare variants included relevant calculated using the method proposed by Kirov et al, 2014. The unaffected genes involved in psychiatric disorders. We will perform this analysis in the carriers were used as controls. non-OCD samples and follow-up with association analysis and validation of Results: We identified 53 NRXN1 deletion carriers and one individual with relevant regions by direct typing in these and additional samples. a point mutation of whom 37(69%) had a definite phenotype. 33 were pro- This work was supported by MINECO grant agreement SAF2013-49108-R. bands and the rest were first degree relatives. 87% of probands were in-  P09
.114 vestigated because of unexplained developmental delay mostly speech and Clinical and Genetic Features of PKAN Patients in a Tertiary Center in language or learning difficulties and 63% had Autism. 17/53 were intronic Turkey deletions. The overall penetrance was ~66% for any phenotype and 40% for N. H. Akcakaya1, S. U. Iseri1, E. Battaloglu2, P. Tekturk3, H. Hanagası4, M. Eraksoy3, U. Autism. Congenital anomalies were reported in 7 infants and seizures in 6. Ozbek1, Z. Yapici3; Conclusion: Our data suggest that neurexin-1 deletions present with a vari- 1Institute of Experimental Medicine (DETAE), Istanbul, Turkey, 2Bogazici University, Department of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, able phenotype and are not fully penetrant. Intronic deletions are patho- Department of Neurology, Division of Child Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul genic .Whilst, a parent that carries the deletion has a 50% risk of passing it University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology, Division of Movement on, the risk of a child with the deletion developing Autism is approximately Disorders and Behavioral Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey. 40%. Genetic counselling remains problematic as the additional factors that trig- ger the phenotype are unclear and impossible to predict. Larger studies will Introduction: Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN), help remove ascertainment bias. Further biological studies may help us un- d2e0rs2tand the variability observed. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONaAls,o S kPnAowINn a|s W neWuroWde.EgeSnHerGat.iOonR wGith brain iron accumulation 1 (NBIA1),ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index is caused by mutations of PANK2 gene. The major clinical types of PKAN’s Parkin and PINK1. Mutations in this gene have been associated to autoso- are early onset-rapid progressive form and late onset-slow progressive mal recessive Parkinson disease. In our group, genetic studies in a Basque form. population have shown a positive association of two single nucleotide poly- Purpose: We aim to discuss clinical and genetic findings of 19 PKAN pati- morphisms (SNPs) near an area of alternative splicing in the 5’-UTR of DJ-1. ents. Here we intend to determine how these SNPs affect the expression of the Method: Nineteen patients with prominent extrapyramidal symptoms and gene and if they affect the isoform ratio. “eye-of-the-tiger” sign on the MRI, with clinically diagnosed PKAN included Material and methods: We used the exon trapping assay modified for exon to the study. All patients were screened for PANK2 mutations. Medical hi- 1, which does not contains naturally a splicing acceptor site. The quantifica- story, neurological examination were documented. To predict the potential tion of the splicing forms was performed by RT-qPCR. To study the effect of effects of novel variations on the PANK2 protein structure or function soft- the variants of the 5’-UTR in gene expression regulation, we used constructs ware in silico tools; Mutation Taster, SIFT and Polyphen and GeneSplicer with luciferase under the control of SV40 promoter and the different forms were used. of the 5‘-UTR of DJ-1. All the plasmids were transfected in SHSY-5Y cell line Results: Twelve patients had early onset-rapid progressive form and seven differentiated to dopaminergic neuronal phenotype, checking the differen- patients had late onset-slowly progressive form. The presenting features tiation by determination of the expression of tyrosine hydroxylase and by were dystonia and gait disturbance in early onset patients whereas late on- cell morphology. set presenting symptoms were varied. Mutation screening reveals five novel Results: Preliminary studies show that the different alleles of these SNPs and six previously reported mutations. Beside exonic missense mutations affect the ratio of the different splicing forms, and therefore the expression and deletions; intronic mutations were also identified. Except one patient, of the gene. all cases harbored the mutations in homozygous state. Conclusions: Two SNPs were found as associated to Parkinson disease in Conclusion: The current report is first patient series of PKAN from Turkey this population and the genotypes associated to the disease alter the correct associated with five novel inherited PANK2 mutations and shows a clear-cut expression of DJ-1. genotype-phenotype correlation with a highest rate of homozygosity. Funding information: MINECO (SAF2015-59469-R) and Ciberned (group Funding: This work was supported by the grant of Scientific Research Pro- 209) jects Coordination Unit of Istanbul University, Project Number: 51985; Istanbul Development Agency, Project Number: TR10/15/YNK/0093.  P09
.118 Search for genetic markers involved in Impulse Control Disorder in  P09
.115 Parkinson‘s Disease: preliminary findings. Parkinson’s disease: identification of new variations in protein and X. H. Castro Martinez1, C. Martínez-García2, P. J. Garcia-Ruiz3, J. C. Martínez Castrillo4, L. antisense genes Vela5, M. Mata6, I. Martínez-Torres7, F. Palau1, J. Hoenicka1; M. Valente1, R. Zangaglia2, S. Gagliardi1, I. Palmieri1, I. Ricca1, S. Zucca1, C. Pacchetti2, C. 1Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de Cereda1; Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain, 3Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 1Center of Genomics and post-Genomics, C. Mondino National Institute of Neurology 4IRYCIS, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 5Hospital Universitario de Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 2Parkinson‘s Disease and Movement Disorders Unit, C. Mondino Alcorcón, Alcorcón, Spain, 6Hospital Universitario Infanta Sofía, Madrid, Spain, 7Hospital National Institute of Neurology Foundation, Pavia, Italy. Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. Background. Deep sequencing technologies have revolutionized genetic Introduction: Impulse control disorders (ICDs) comprise a wide spec- studies, prompting innovative theories for Parkinson’s Disease (PD). In ad- trum of impulsive/compulsive behaviors frequently found in patients with dition to canonical protein genes associated with PD, potentially relevant Parkinson’s disease (PD) receiving antiparkinsonian treatment. Here, we antisense (AS) genes have been discovered as PINK1-AS. Variations in AS studied in PD patients three genes that code for proteins involved in me- genes may interfere with protein gene regulation, affecting PD phenotype so-cortico-limbic circuit in the brain: i) ANKK1 for dopamine synthesis; ii) expression. DRD3 for the dopaminergic receptor D3 and iii) SC L6
A3 for the dopamine Objective. Identification of new genomic variants in both protein and AS ge- transporter. nes in PD patients and expression of sense and AS genes in peripheral blood Methods: Up to date, 33 early-onset PD patients (age below 45) have been mononuclear cells (PBMCs). recruited from the Spanish ICD Multicenter Study. ICD were assessed using Methods. Next Generation Sequencing analysis has been performed in a co- the QUIP questionnaire. This test has been validated for each ICD with a po- hort of 80 Italian PD patients. True Seq Custom Amplicon Illumina platform tentially addictive reinforcement (ICDARs) as well as for punding. was composed by PARK2, PINK1, DJ-1, LRRK2, SNCA, UCH L1
, EIF4G1, AT- Results: In the early-onset PD sample several tendencies were appreciated  P13
A2, VP S35
 and GBA genes. AS and protein coding gene expression was (Table): i) ANKK1, there is an overrepresentation of the A1+ genotype not verified via RT-PCR. only in the total sample (p=0.056) but also in ICD+, ICDAR and punding; Results. Data analysis showed the presence of new non-synonymous mu- ii) DRD3, the homozygous Ser9/Ser9 genotype seems to be protective fac- tations in PARK2, LRRK2, PINK1 and AT P13
A2. For mutations in PARK2 tor, and iii) SCLA3, the A9+ genotype seems to be a risk factor for ICD+ and (p.W447G, p.R191Q), LRRK2 (p.I1784F, p. L2425
V) and PINK1 (p.A124V) punding. By contrast, in the classical PD sample, none of the genes were as- the in silico prediction (PolyPhen2 and Mutation Tester) supported its pa- sociated with the exception of SCLA3 that showed the A9+ genotype overre- thological implication, while the mutation in AT P13
A2 (p.N1091S) resulted presented in the total sample (p=0.05). neutral. Regarding new AS genes, we found a not yet described SNCA-AS, Conclusion: Genetic factors associated with ICD in PD may be different de- aside from PINK1-AS and UCH L1
-AS. An increase expression of AS versus pending on the age of onset. sense genes was reported for SNCA-AS and UCH L1
-AS in PD patients; a simi- Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III PI11/0731 lar trend was observed in controls. Discussion. NGS data indicated variations both in protein and AS genes, ope- Gene/poly- Geno- Cont- Ge Pn De tics of early-o Pn Dse /t I CP DD - PD/ PD/ PD/ ning intriguing perspectives in PD genetics. In PBMCs, the expression of AS morphism type r %ols % (N) % (N) I %CD+ I %CDAR+ P diu nn g- + genes significantly increase respect to sense genes Moreover, variation in AS (N) (N) (N) (% N) genes are specific for antisense. ANKK1/ A1+ 28.6(82) 45.5(15) 33.3(5) 52.9(9) 54.5(6) 50.0(5)  P09
.116 TaqIA A1- 71.4(205) 54.5(18) 66.7(10) 47.1(8) 45.5(5) 50.0(5) Alteration of the splicing forms of the 5’-UTR of DJ-1 (PARK7) in SNPs D SeR rD 93 G/ ly TT 48(138) 60.6(20) 73(11) 50(9) 50(6) 50(5) related to Parkinson disease in Basque population C CCT 4 10 2( (1 31 90 )) 3 63 .0.3 (23 )(11) 2 07 (( 04 )) 3 19 1( (7 2) ) 4 82 (1(5 )) 4 10 0( (4 1) ) F. Cardona1,2, V. Andreu-Fernández1, J. Hernández-Baixauli1, A. Baquero-Vaquer1, I. S VC NL T6 RA3/ A9- 50.4(138) 45.45(15) 53(8) 39(7) 42(5) 30(3) Nebot1, J. Martí-Massó3,2, A. López de Munain3,2, J. Pérez-Tur1,2,4; A9+ 49.6(136) 54.54(18) 47(7) 61(11) 58(7) 70(7) 1Unitat de Genètica Molecular. Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia. Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Valencia, Spain, 2CIBERNED, Madrid, Spain, 3Instituto Biodonostia. Hospital Universitario Donostia, San Sebastián, Spain, 4Unidad Mixta de Investigación en Neurología y Genética Molecular. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria La Fe (IIS La Fe), Valencia, Spain. Introduction: DJ-1 (PARK7) codifies a chaperone with protease activity involved in stress response, particularly under oxidative conditions. This ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 203 protein is also involved in mitochondria homeostasis, in collaboration withABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.119 LRRK2, GBA and SMPD1 founder mutations and Parkinson’s ‎disease in Ashkenazi Jews ted as an autosomal dominant trait and it is caused by mutations in any of E. Dagan1, I. Schlesinger2,3, A. Kurolap4,3, M. Ayoub4, M. Nassar2, J. Peretz-Aharon2,3, R. three genes involved in vascular morphogenesis and/or remodelling: KRIT1 Gershoni-Baruch4,3; (40%), CCM2 (20%) and PDCD10 (10-20%). Up to date PDCD10 mutations 1Department of Nursing, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 2Department of Neurology include partial or whole gene deletion, nonsense and splicing mutations. and the Cognitive Neurology Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 3The Here we report the first case of a partial tandem duplication of PDCD10 cau- Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, sing familial CCM. Haifa, Israel, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel. Materials and methods: A 38-year-old male patient presented with pares- thesias/dysesthesias in the left hemibody and referred pain with crural predominance. Cranial MRI revealed multiple CCM with probable compli- Background: Parkinson’s disease (PD) has been associated with mutations cated right frontal cavernoma. After discarding a common small deletion in in leucine-rich ‎repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), glucosidase beta acid (GBA), and CCM2, we performed MLPA analysis of the three CCM genes. Findings were sphingomyelin ‎phosphodiesterase 1 (SMPD1), more so in the Ashkenazi confirmed by long-range PCR using primers designed to detect a tandem Jewish population. Here we ‎describe the clinical characteristics of 271 PD duplication of PDCD10 exons 6-7, followed by primer-walking sequencing patients and compare carriers of Ashkenazi ‎founder mutations in the afo- and analysis of mRNA expression. rementioned genes to PD patients who are non-carriers of such ‎mutations. ‎ Results: The patient carried a tandem duplication of PDCD10 exons 6-7, pro- Methods: The study cohort is composed of 271 Ashkenazi PD patients, bably in a mosaic state according to MLPA ratios. Primer-walking defined previously reported ‎by us (Dagan et al., 2015). Here we compare the cli- rearrangement junctions in introns 5 and 7, and identified the ends of the nical characteristics of PD patients ‎stratified according to their carriage of 7812-bp duplication. Consistently, an aberrant PDCD10 minor transcript founder mutations in the three causative genes ‎‎(namely, SMPD1, GBA and with a 245-bp insertion, corresponding to duplicated exons 6-7, was identi- LRRK2). PD patients, homozygotes for mutations in either GBA ‎or LRRK2 fied by cDNA amplification. and those who carried mutations in two causative genes were excluded. ‎ Discussion: Duplication of PDCD10 exons 6-7 causes a frameshift and a pre- Results: Six (2.2%), 54 (19.9%), and 22 (8.1%) PD patients carried muta- mature stop codon (p.Asp133Leufs*14) that results in a loss-of-function tion in SMPD1, ‎GBA or LRRK2, respectively. Post hoc analysis singled GBA allele. Therefore, this novel mechanism should be taken into account when carriers as having significantly ‎earlier age at onset and two-sided clinical performing mutation screening in CCM. manifestation at diagnosis compared to all other ‎PD groups - SMPD1 and LRRK2 carriers and non-carriers. Other clinical manifestations ‎were com-  P09
.122 parable between studied groups.‎ Novel PIGN mutations in a patient with multiple congenital anomalies Conclusion: The overall clinical characteristics of PD patients carrying hypotonia seizures syndrome SMPD1, GBA, and ‎LRRK2 mutations were similar to those of non-carriers. K. Stouffs1,2, S. Seneca1,2, A. Jansen3,2, A. Gheldof1,2, M. Bonduelle1, K. Keymolen1, L. De Although only GBA carriers ‎demonstrate statistically significant earlier age Meirleir3,2; 1Center for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Neurogenetics Research of onset compared to non-carriers, it appears ‎that LRRK2 and SMPD1 muta- Group, Reproduction Genetics and Regenerative Medicine Research Group, Vrije tion carriers may reach significance with larger group ‎numbers‎.  P09
.120 Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 3Paediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Association of functional RAGE gene polymorphisms in the Paediatrics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. pathogenesis of inflammatory with Parkinson’s disease in Turkish population H. Aslan1, O. Cilingir1, M. Ozdemir1, B. Durak Aras1, O. Kutlay1, E. Erzurumluoglu1, A. Introduction: Mutations in the phosphatidylinositol-glycan biosynthesis Afagh1, M. Akinci2, S. Ozkan2, S. Artan1; class N (PIGN) gene are causing defects in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, (GPI) anchor biosynthesis pathway. Problems in this pathway are associated Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of with multiple autosomal recessive disorders, often involving the central Neurology, Eskisehir, Turkey. nervous system. Mutations in PIGN are causing ‘multiple congenital anoma- lies hypotonia seizures syndrome 1’ (MACH S1
). Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing was performed in an 12-year old Parkinson Disease (PD) is a severe, progressive neurodegenerative disease. child from non-consanguineous parents from Belgian/Peruvian origin. The It is reported that genes responsible for the etiology of PD leads to the di- girl presented with early onset hypotonia and developmental delay. She had sease by the pathological mechanisms which cause neuron damages A large dysmorphic features including a flat nasal bridge and prominent nose. Over number of polymorphic genetic changes are also known to pose a risk for the years she remained severely delayed and hypotonic with choreo-atheto- Parkinson‘s disease. tic movements and generalized epilepsy, responsive to treatment. ERG was Receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) gene encodes a pro- abnormal. The MRI of the brain showed progressive cortical atrophy. tein which is expressed in microglial cells and this protein is also expressed Results: Exome sequencing showed the presence of biallelic variants, in the central nervous system. Two distinct polymorphisms (374T>A, c.1158delG, p.Leu386Phefs*17 and c.T956G, p.Val319Gly in the PIGN gene -429T>C and 63 bp Ins/Del polymorphisms) affect the RAGE expression. (RefSeq: NM_012327.5) as Sanger sequencing analysis of the parents sho- G82S polymorphism occurs as result of transition of serine in preference wed the independent segregation of the two observed alterations. to glycine at the 82nd of the RAGE gene. The resulting polymorphic changes Conclusions: Exome sequencing showed the presence of two novel changes show an increase in ligand binding and downstream signaling. in the PIGN gene causing MACH S1
. The c.T956G alteration is predicted to The present study aims to investigate the relationship of -429T>C, -374T>A, be pathogenic (SIFT score 0 and PolyPhen score 0.986); while c.1158delG 82G>S and 63 bp Ins/Del polymorphisms with PD. A total of 174 PD patients change is completely disrupting the protein. Consequently, MACH S1
 in this and 150 healthy-matched individuals in Turkish population were registe- patient has been confirmed. red. Herewith, PCR-RFLP and ARMS methods were employed in order to be able to determine polymorphisms. p P  P09
.123 429T>C, -374T>A, and 82G>S polymorphisms showed significant diffe- Primary microcephaly (PM) and primordial microcephalic dwarfism: rences between PD patients and controls ( <0.001, p<0.05, <0.001, re- screening for gene mutations in a large series of 450 patients spectively). However, no significant difference in the 63 bp Ins/Del polymor- S. Drunat1,2, S. Passemard3,2, Y. Vial1, N. Pouvreau1, H. Cavé1,4, A. Verloes3,2; 1Molecular Genetics-Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 2U1141, Paris, France, 3Clinical phisms could be seen between the groups. In conclusion 429T>C, -374T>A, Genetics-Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 4U1131, Paris, France. and 82G>S polymorphisms may be related with inflamatuary pathogenesis of PD. Since the analysis of these polymorphisms in PD is the first study in Caucasian population, the distribution of the alleles may shed light on future PMs are rare autosomal recessive disorders with a cumulate incidence from studies.  P09
.121 1/10.000 to 1/100.000 births, depending on geographic origin. Five groups Partial tandem duplication of the PDCD10 gene is a new mechanism of PM are usually distinguished: MicroCephaly, Primitive Hereditary, prima- of familial cerebral cavernous malformation ry microcephaly with chorioretinopathy, and primary microcephalic dwar- E. Borràs1, I. Hernan1, M. Gamundi1, B. Mañé1, B. Pascual1, M. Font2, D. Armengol3, M. fisms: Seckel syndrome, microcephalic osteodysplastic dwarfism type 2, and Carballo1; Meier-Gorlin syndrome. PMs are characterized by an occipito-frontal head 1Unitat de Genètica Molecular, Hospital de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain, 2Servei de circumference more than 2 SD below the mean for sex, age, and ethnicity at Neurologia, Hospital de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain, 3Servei de Medicina Interna, Hospital birth, and at least below - 3 SD after six months. PMs result from mutations de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain. in more than 30 genes, considerably complicating molecular diagnostics. Therefore, due to the great clinical and genetic heterogeneity, two third to I2n0tr4oduction: Familial cerebral cavernous maE lfS orH mG at i2 on0 1 ( C6
 C M| B ) A is R inC hE erL iO - NoAn,e S hPalAf oINf P M| W paWtieWnts. EhSavHe Gno. OideRnGtified gene mutation.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Mutation screening was performed in 450 patients with PM by targeted San- nally, increased branching of the mitochondrial network was observed in ger sequencing, panel gene NGS or exome sequencing. Causative mutations fibroblasts overexpressing mutated RAB12 (I196V>G13D) compared to WT. were found in 86 patients (19%).The majority of mutations were found in Conclusion: Mutations in RAB12 lead to an altered protein function as de- ASPM (34/86), followed by WDR62 (10/86) and MCPH1 (10/86). We also monstrated by changes in GTPase activity, subcellular localization of RAB12, identified mutations in a further 19 genes (CDK5RA P2
, CE P152
, CE P135
, and mitochondrial network. The mitochondrial integrity may be disturbed PCNT, STIL, CENPJ, TUBGC P6
, EFTUD2, TUBGC P4
, RNU4ATAC, CIT, WDR81, in mutant cells independently of TfR degradation. DYRK1A, LIG4, RECQ L3
, MEC P2
, TUBA1A, KIF11 and PHGDH ). Furthermo- This study was supported by the DFG (LO 1555/4-1). re, by exome sequencing, we highlight some unexpected diagnoses, missed  P09
.126 because the patient’s phenotype lacks the typical clinical picture. The role of MEI S1
 and SKOR1 in restless legs syndrome With mutations found in more than 20 genes, this study illustrates the ex- F. Sarayloo1,2, A. Grant2, H. Catoire2, D. Rochefort2, A. Dangoumau2, P. A. Dion2,3, G. A. treme genetic heterogeneity of PMs. Due to phenotypic heterogeneity and Rouleau2,3; atypical clinical presentation in some cases, exome sequencing for targeted 1Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Montreal gene panel negative patients is an efficient strategy to improve the diagnosis Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Department of yield. Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.  P09
.124 D178N-129Val genotype in a family with Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Restless legs syndrome (RLS), a sleep-related sensory-motor disorder, is Ö. Türedi1, O. Çilingir2, M. Aksu3, E. Gümüş2, H. Aslan2, S. Artan2, H. Karabulut1; 1Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Osmangazi University, Eskişehir, Turkey, 3Acıbadem characterized by an irresistible desire to move the legs because of abnormal Kayseri Hospital, Acıbadem University, İstanbul, Turkey. sensations, induced in the evening by rest or inactivity and are partially re- lieved by movement. This common disorder has a prevalence of up to 15% in western populations. A successful GWAS on RLS patients identified common Introduction: Prion diseases are a heterogeneous group of fatal neurological variants in intron 8 MEI S1
 and intergenic region between MA P2
K5/SKOR1 disorders which leads to rapid progressive neurodegeneration. 10-15% of genes associated with RLS. These results were also replicated by other inde- cases are caused by pathological mutations of the normal prion protein gene pendent studies. Our group subsequently showed that MEI S1
 risk haplotype (PRNP) and D178N- 129V haplotype determines Creutzfeldt-Jakob pheno- is associated with decreased mRNA and protein expression of this gene. We type. examined the SKOR1 mRNA expression in patient cells with the MEI S1
 risk Materials and Methods: We present here a 53-year-old woman whose di- haplotype using q-RT-PCR. A significant decrease in SKOR1 mRNA expres- sease started with memory deficits, difficulty in instrumental activities, pro- sion level was observed. A luciferase reporter assay using SKOR1 promoter gressive cognitive impairment and ataxia. The clinical picture slowly worse- region in HeLa cells with down regulated MEI S1
 expression (using siRNA), ned to a state of akinetic mutism in about 5 years. FLAIR and T2-weighted followed by an EMSA using three fragments of SKOR1 promoter region was magnetic resonance imaging documented signal hyperintensity in the head performed. The results suggest a direct interaction between MEI S1
 and of the caudate nucleus, inferior temporal lobe and insula. Testing for PRNP SKOR1. Given the transcriptional regulatory function of these genes, we are mutations was performed on genomic DNA sample. Since Huntington disea- overexpressing or knocking out MEI S1
 and SKOR1 genes, separately in hu- se has similar symptoms, HTT gene CAG repeat size was also investigated. man cell lines. Whole transcriptome of these sets of cells as well as control Results: The patient was found to be negative for HTT mutation. PRNP ana- cells with normal endogenous expression of the genes will be extracted to lysis revealed a GAC to AAC mutation at codon 178 resulting in aspartic acid perform RNA-Seq experiment. We believe that differential expression analy- to asparagine substitution, and homozygosity for valine at codon 129. The sis of RNA-Seq data will lead to identify the genes that are in fact regulated patient’s father and mother were third degree cousins and her father, uncle by these transcription factors, some of which might have direct roles in RLS and two aunts died a history of a neurological disorder very similar to that pathological pathways. of the proband, and her paternal and maternal grandmother died after a  P09
.127 rapidly progressive dementia. Molecular genetic data are not available for Genetic diagnosis of patients with overlapping clinic Rett-like by them. But the patient’s brother and three cousins had the same mutation targeted panel of genes with the patient. N. Brandi Tarrau1, P. Pacheco Fernández1, S. Vidal Falco2, L. Blasco Pérez2, A. García Conclusion: Clinical diagnosis of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is still challen- Cazorla1, M. o’Callaghan1, C. Ortez González1, M. Poo Arguelles1, E. Gean Molins1, M. ging for most clinicians and therefore genetic testing should be performed Pineda Marfa2, J. García Peñas3, M. Guitart4, J. Armstrong Morón1; where available for both diagnosis and genetic counselling. 1Hospital Universitario San Juan de Dios, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundación San Juan de Dios, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain,  P09
.125 4Corporación Sanitaria Parc Taulí, Barcelona, Spain. Mutations in RAB12 alter the TfR signaling pathway E. Koschmidder1, A. Rakovic1, F. Borngräber1, A. Schmidt1,2, I. Brænne3, S. Schaake1, D. Alvarez-Fischer1, A. Weissbach1, H. Jabusch4,5, E. Altenmüller5, C. Klein1, K. Lohmann1; Introduction: It has been studied patients with clinical Rett (RTT) without 1Institute of Neurogenetics, Luebeck, Germany, 2Kurt Singer Institute for Music genetic diagnosis using the Next Generation Sequencing (NGS). This type of Physiology and Musicians’ Health, Berlin, Germany, 3Institute for Integrative and Experimental Genomics, Luebeck, Germany, 4Institute of Musicians´ Medicine, Dresden, diseases requires clinical diagnosis. The finding of a mutation confirms the Germany, 5Institute of Music Physiology and Musicians‘ Medicine, Hannover, Germany. diagnosis, but not necessarily established it. NGS using targeted panel of genes facilitates the simultaneous study of cau- sative genes of RTT and others whose mutation produces a similar or over- Introduction: We recently identified two missense mutations (p.I196V; lapping clinic, such Pitt Hopkins and Ohtahara syndromes. p.G13D) in RAB12 in patients with musician’s dystonia (MD) by exome and Material and Methods: It has been designed a gene panel of 17 genes related genome sequencing. to the clinical RTT-like presentation by HaloPlex Target technology. Enrich- RAB12 encodes a small GTPase that has been linked to lysosomal degra- ment System, for Illumina Sequencing. dation of the transferrin receptor (TfR). TfR regulates the mitochondrial Sanger sequencing was used in exons not well covered. If do not find any network integrity via a signaling pathway involving Mitofusin 2 (Mfn2). We change, MLPA was done by causative RTT genes. investigated the effect of RAB12 mutations on this pathway. Results: We have detected mutations in genes that do not cause RTT patho- Materials and methods: For functional characterization of RAB12 mutants, logy in 14 of 187 studied patients with clinical Rett-like. A total of 8 patients we used three different cellular models: 1) fibroblasts of two MD patients presented mutations in STBX1 gene, related with Ohtahara syndrome and 6 carrying I196V, 2) fibroblasts of healthy subjects overexpressing RAB12 patients were redirected as a Pitt-Hopkins, finding mutations in causative wildtype (WT), G13D, and I196V, and 3) SH-SY5Y cells also overexpressing TCF4 gene. RAB12 WT, G13D, and I196V. GTPase activity, subcellular RAB12 localiza- The database HGMD-professional, dbSNP, 1000 G and predictions pathology tion, TfR degradation, Mfn2 protein levels, and the mitochondrial network programs (Polyphen 2.0 and SIFT) were consulted. were investigated. NGS variants have been verified by Sanger sequencing and studied the ori- Results: Elevated GTPase activity was detected in both mutants. Immu- gin of the mutation in the parents. nofluorescent staining revealed colocalization of ectopically expressed Conclusion: The genetic study by NGS allows to study a larger number of RAB12 with lysosomes and an altered subcellular distribution of both genes associated with RTT simultaneously, redirecting genetic diagnosis RAB12 mutants. There was no significant effect on TfR degradation or Mfn2 to other syndromes. Significantly reduce response time and the cost of the levels under basal conditions. However, we detected a reduction of Mfn2 in study. the G13D mutant compared to WT uEpoSnH iGnd u2c0ti1on6 o |f BoxAidRaCtivEeL sOtrNesAs. ,F Si-PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 205ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.128 and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Near East University, Department of Histology and Discovery of new genes in Rett syndrome patients by WES Embryology, Nicosia, Cyprus, 9Uludağ University, Department of Histology and S. Vidal Falcó1, M. Lucariello2, E. Vidal Ocabo2, N. Brandi Tarrau3, E. Gerotina Mora1, P. Embryology, Bursa, Turkey. Jurado2, M. Esteller Badosa4,2, M. Pineda Marfa1, J. Armstrong Morón3; 1Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Universitari Sant Joan de Déu, Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia-16 (SCAR16) is a rare progres- Barcelona, Spain, 4Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Barcelona, Spain. sive neurologic disorder characterized by truncal and limb ataxia resulting in gait instability. We studied a consanguineous family with three affected siblings presenting with cerebellar ataxia as the main and initial features Introduction: Rett syndrome (RTT) is a developmental disorder of early on- plus variable other features. The age of onset was 57 years for the male and set, genetic basis, dominant inheritance and X-linked. There are described 31 and 37 for the females. All patients showed marked cerebellar atrophy three genes that cause RTT: MEC P2
, CDK L5
 and FOXG1. However, the etio- on MRI. Further, clinical signs of pyramidal tract damage with increased lo- logy of 15% of RTT patients still remains unknown. Thus, the aim of this wer limb tendon reflexes were observed, but no Babinski response, ankle project is to identify new candidate genes in a cohort of patients with RTT clonus, lower limb spasticity or hypogonadism was evident. The females phenotype without genetic diagnosis by Whole Exome Sequencing (WES). were unable to walk whereas the male had only moderate walking disabili- Material and Method: The patient and healthy parents without genetic dia- ty. One of the females had a relatively more progressive disease course and gnosis and negative CGHarray Cytoarray Plus (180K) (Agilent Microarrays) additionally cognitive impairment and nystagmus. Homozygosity mapping were analyzed by WES with TruSeq Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina). The on three patients followed by exome sequencing on one patient revealed a filtering criteria used were: search mutations with 1000g MAF below 0.05 novel homozygous c.*240T>C variant in the 3’ UTR of STUB1 gene. The vari- in genes with dominant inheritance, de novo, X-linked, autosomal subject to ant is absent in all public databases, is highly conserved among species and imprinting and/or with functional impact in the CNS. For the validated mu- most likely disrupts the polyadenylation signal in the mRNA, as indicated by tations in genes related with gabaergic pathways (SL C6
A1 and GABBR2), we online tool DNA Poly(A) Signal Miner. In contrast to the previous reports, performed RT-qPCR (TaqMan Gene Expression) and Western Blotting assay our findings show that STUB1-ataxia can start even after age 50, and neit- of RNA and protein extraction from peripheral blood. her hypogonadism nor spasticity is an obligatory feature. Also, the family Results: Most of the validated mutations are genes expressed in the cen- is a rare example of a neurologic disease with more severe manifestation tral nervous system: ion channels and GABA/glutamate/acetylcholine pa- in females. Functional studies are ongoing to investigate the mechanism of thways. The preliminary studies of the SL C6
A1 and GABBR2 expression pathogenicity resulting from the mutation. were not conclusive. TÜBITAK Grant 114Z829 and Boğaziçi Research Fund 15B01M5 Conclusions: We do not only identify 1 gene which causes RTT-like pheno- type. Pathway of genes has to be address to understand overlapping pheno-  P09
.131 type, instead to one disease only. Although blood tissue has convenient ex- Neurodevelopmental copy number variants are enriched for novel traction, we cannot detect RNA and protein of these genes. Our next studies schizophrenia risk factors are performing RT-qPCR and Western Blotting assays with RNA and protein E. Rees, K. Kendall, V. Escott-Price, A. Pocklington, P. Holmans, M. O‘Donovan, M. Owen, G. Kirov, J. Walters; extraction from fibroblasts.  P09
.129 Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Study the effect of Melilotus officinalis extract on expression of Daxx, Nfkb, Vegf, Syp, Psen1, Mapk3, Mtap2 and Tnf genes in the streptozotocin-rat model of sporadic Alzheimer‘s disease Introduction: At least 11 rare copy number variants (CNVs) have been N. -. Bazazzadegan1, P. Daneshmand1, M. Dehghan Shasaltaneh2, K. Saliminejad3, K. shown to be major risk factors for schizophrenia. These CNVs also increase Kamali3, M. Banan1, H. Khorram Khorshid1; risk for other early onset neurodevelopmental disorders (NDs). We hypo- 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, thesised that additional CNVs associated with NDs are likely to be hitherto Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Laboratory of Neuro-organic Chemistry, Institute of undiscovered schizophrenia risk factors. Biochemistry and Biophysics (IBB), University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Reproductive Biotechnology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR, Methods: We analysed 50 ND CNVs that have not been associated with schi- Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. zophrenia in a new sample of 6,934 schizophrenia cases and 8,751 controls, combined with previously published datasets, for a total of 20,403 schizo- phrenia cases and 26,628 controls. Sporadic Alzheimer’s disease (SAD) is a multi-factorial disease caused by Results: Collectively, these ND CNVs were significantly enriched for schizo- genetic, epigenetic, environmental and metabolic factors. Current under- phrenia. (P=1.01 × 10-6, OR=1.90). 19 CNVs have increased ORs for schi- standings of the possible mechanisms of AD such as inflammation and zophrenia, compared to only 4 with ORs < 1, and no observations were oxidative stresses iMn etlhileo tbursa oinff ihcainvael ilsed us to investigation of potential AD made among cases or controls at the remaining 27 loci. For individual loci, therapeutics. Currently herbal medicines with few side effects are in the 16p12.1 deletions are significantly associated with schizophrenia risk af- point of attention. is a herbal extract with possible role ter correction for multiple testing (case rate=0.16%, control rate=0.045%, as an anDti-aixnxf,l aNmfkmba, tVoergyf ,a Snydp ,a nPtsie-no1x,i dMaanpt ka3g,e Mntt athpa2t can iTmnpf-rαove the blood q-value=0.017, OR=3.3). Two additional new loci reached nominal le- circulation. Among genes that have been implicated in SAD, eight genes in- vels of statistical significance (deletions at 2q11.2 and duplications at cluding and have shown 10q11.21q11.23). Our results suggest a large proportion of the 50 loci are significant statistical diveMrseitlyil ointu As lozfhfeiciimnaelri shuman brain and STZ rat model. likely to be novel risk factors for schizophrenia, but due to their rarity, the With this knowledge these genes have been chosen to be investigated for available sample size precludes statistical confirmation. Additionally, ana- neuroprotective effect of extract. This study was perfor- lysis of our new dataset alone provides independent support for the 11 med by comparing the expression level of genes in the hippocampus of SAD known schizophrenia risk loci. rat model using qPCR in treated and untreated groups. The therapeutic ef- Conclusions: We provide evidence for the existence of additional schizo- fect was studied at the behavioral, learning and memory level using MoSryrpis, phrenia CNV loci, identify deletions of 16p12.1 as a novel schizophrenia risk TWnaft, eMr aMpakz3e (MWM) test as well. AfterD daextxe,r mNfiknba,tiVoeng fofP gseenne1 ,exMptraeps2sion in factor, and strengthen the support for an aetiological overlap between neu- the mentioned groups using qPCR technique, the higher expression in rodevelopmental disorders. and lower expression in , were  P09
.132 identified in SAD rat’s model treated with herbal extract. To determine the The neurodevelopmental mechanisms of schizophrenia: input of significance of changes, using statistical analyses is underway. In MWM, the maternal genes significant changes in spatial learning that had been observed in rat’s model I. Halayenka1, N. Danilenko1, E. Aksyonova1, A. Liaudanski1, V. Objedkov2, A. group did not show any alteration in the herbal-treated group. Kandratsenka1, N. Drobot1, M. G. Siniauskaya1, O. Levdanskaya1, O. Davydenko1;  P09
.130 1Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Minsk, Belarus, 2Belarusian Medical State University, Identification of a possibly polyadenylation mutation in STUB1 Minsk, Belarus. in SCAR16 without hypogonadism and spasticity by combining homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing B. Turkgenc1,2, M. Ozkilinc3, B. Sanlidag4, A. Eker5, M. C. Yakicier6, A. Tolun7, &. G. Temel8,9; Introduction: According to the hypothesis of neurodevelopment of schi- 1Acibadem Genetic Diagnostic Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul Technical zophrenia, the causes of the pathology are hidden in early stages of brain University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Near East development, long before the disease manifestation. The idea that mother University, Department of Pediatrics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 5Near East University, Department bears genetic predisposition to the development of different fetal anoma- of Neurology, Nicosia, Cyprus, 6Acibadem University, Department of Molecular Biology lies due to various complications of pregnancy can explain the link between and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Boğaziçi University, Department of Molecular Biology these unfavorable maternal situations and development of schizophrenia in 206 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONpAr,o gSePnAy.IN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.135 Genetic variants in minor physical anomalies and craniofacial Materials and Methods: The aim of our research was to compare polymor- measures in schizophrenia phic allele rates of inflammation: TNFα (-308 G/A), IL-6 (-174G/C), detoxi- A. Chen1, S. Wang1, P. Hsiao1, L. Yeh2, C. Liu3, C. Liu3, T. Hwang3, M. Hsieh3, Y. Chien3, Y. Lin3, cation: GSTM1 (del), GSTT1(del), CY P1
A1 (6235 T/C), CY P2
E1  (-1019C/T), S. D. Chandler4, S. J. Glatt5, N. Laird6, S. V. Faraone5, M. Tsuang4, H. Hwu1,3,7, W. Chen1,7,8; methylation: (MTHFR (677C/T), COMT (Val158Met), DNMT3b (-149C/T) 1Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, Taipei, genes in mothers of healthy and suffering from schizophrenia persons. Taiwan, 2Department of Healthcare Administration, College of Health Science, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan, 3Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine and 158 mothers of patients and 82 mothers with healthy progeny were studied National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, by PCR-RFLP. 4Center for Behavioral Genomics, Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Results: Significant differences in the distribution of COMT and IL-6 alle- Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States, 5Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences les were revealed between two groups. For the mothers of patients val- and Neuroscience and Physiology, Medical Genetics Research Center, SUNY Upstate val/COMT (OR=3,82; rs4680) and gc/IL-6 (OR=3,13; CI: 1.5829 - 6.1825; Medical University, Syracuse, NY, United States, 6Department of Biostatistics, Harvard rs1800795) were proved to be risk genotypes; val/COMT (OR=2,31; CI: University, Boston, MA, United States, 7Institute of Brain and Mind Sciences, College 1.4275 to 3,7552) and w1/CY
P1 A1 (OR=2,27; CI: 1.1515 to 4.4586; rs of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 8Genetic Epidemiology Core Laboratory, Division of Genomic Medicine, Research Center for Medical Excellence, 4646903) were elucidated as risk alleles. National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Also the genotype combinations frequencies of functionally different genes varied significantly in examined maternal groups. Conclusions: These results support the general hypothesis that connects Background the predisposition to schizophrenia with the anomalies during the prenatal Schizophrenia (SZ) patients and their first-degree relatives show more mi- development of nervous system. Possibly, processes of inflammation, deto- nor physical anomalies (MPAs)/abnormal craniofacial features (CFs) than xication and methylation, biochemically interconnected and determined in the general population. Family studies found moderate heritability of MPAs/ the maternal genome, can guide the peculiarities of fetal neurodevelopment CFs, but no genetic markers have been consistently identified. This study that later enhance the risk of mental disorder . aims to 1) examine the relationships between MPAs/CFs and clinical cha- 
P09 .133 racteristics; and 2) identify MPAs/CFs-related genetic markers in schizo- Analysis of exome sequence data provides further support for the phrenia. involvement of histone pathways in the aetiology of schizophrenia Methods D. Curtis1,2; A genome-wide association study was performed in 1,123 SZ patients to 1UCL Genetics Institute, London, United Kingdom, 2Barts and the London School of search for genetic variants of MPAs/CFs. Using a 6-item questionnaire to Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom. collect MPAs/CFs measurements and calculate a MPAs score. Genotyping was conducted using the PsychChip microarray co-developed by PGC and il- lumina. Polygenic risk score analysis was applied to predict individual MPAs Weighted burden pathway analysis was applied to whole exome sequence score. data for 2045 schizophrenic subjects and 2045 controls. More weight was Results given to variants which were rare and/or to variants predicted to have a A total of 1,067 SZ patients and 330,000 SNPs entered final analysis. Patients functional effect. The 1454 „all GO gene sets, gene symbols“ pathways were with more hair whorls (p<0.03) or nostrils anteverted (p<0.01) showed hig- downloaded from the Molecular Signatures Database and were used to defi- her positive symptoms scores. Micrognathia was associated with both po- ne gene sets. Overall, there was a statistically significant excess of pathways sitive (p<.0003) and negative (p<.0003) symptoms. A polygenic score was with more rare, functional variants in cases than controls. Among these significantly associated with patients with higher MPAs score (p<.0001). No were pathways involved in histone modification, as well neuron differen- single nucleotide polymorphism reached genome-wide significance. tiation and membrane and vesicle function. This bolsters the evidence from Conclusions other studies that histone modification pathways may be important in the Our finding suggests that multiple variants with small effects influence aetiology of schizophrenia. MPAs/CFs in SZ. Further investigation into the pathways or biological func- 
P09 .134 tions of these variants would help us understand more about MPAs and its First exome sequencing study in multiply affected families with relationship to SZ. schizophrenia from Indonesia Grant references F. Degenhardt1, A. C. Koller1, K. U. Ludwig1, S. Heilmann-Heimbach1, S. Sivalingam1, J. Supporting by NIH/NHGRI grant U54HG003067, NIMH grants R01 Strohmaier2, H. Thiele3, P. Nürnberg3, M. Rietschel2, A. Kusumawardhani4, D. Wildenauer5, MH085521, R01 MH085560, the Gerber Foundation, the Sidney R. Baer, Jr. S. Schwab4, M. M. Nöthen1; Foundation, NARSAD: The Brain and Behavior Research Foundation, and the 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research. Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry at the Central Institute of Mental Health, University Medical Center Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 3Cologne 
P09 .137 Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4The University of Exome sequencing in multiply affected families identifies new Western Australia, Crawley, Australia, 5., Perth, Australia. candidate genes for schizophrenia A. C. Koller1,2, K. U. Ludwig1,2, S. Heilmann-Heimbach1,2, S. Sivalingam1,2, J. Strohmaier3, J. Hecker4,1, M. Lang3, H. Löhlein Fier5,4,1, A. Maaser1,2, A. J. Forstner1,2, H. Thiele6, P. Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a common neuropsychiatric disorder with an estima- Nürnberg6, T. G. Schulze7, M. Rietschel3, M. M. Nöthen1,2, A. Reif8, F. Degenhardt1,2; ted heritability of approximately 60-80%. So far, only a small proportion of 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Genetic Epidemiology its underlying genetic risk factors have been identified. In the search for new in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, University Medical Center Mannheim/ risk factors, the analysis of multiply affected families is a very promising University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 4Institute of Genomic Mathematics, approach. Here, we present the first exome sequencing study in multiply University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Department of Biostatistics at the Harvard T.H. affected families with SCZ from Indonesia. In each of the nine families, three Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States, 6Cologne Center for Genomics, to five genetically distant individuals were exome sequenced on an Illumina University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7Institute for Psychiatric Phenomic and HiSeq2500. For the data analyses the Varbank pipeline (http://varbank.ccg. Genomic (IPPG), Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 8Department uni-koeln.de), and the CLC Biomedical Genomics Workbench were used. For of Psychiatry Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany. the downstream analyses only those variants were taken into account that were predicted to be deleterious, rare in publically available databases (mi- nor allele frequency <0.1%), experimentally confirmed, and co-segregating within the respective family. On average, we have identified 30-50 mutati- Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a common disorder with a lifetime risk of ~1%. Only ons per family that fulfil these criteria. Indonesian samples are underrepre- few of the patients are additionally diagnosed with cataphasia (speech dis- sented in the publically available databases. Therefore the most promising order) or periodic catatonia (movement disorder). To the authors’ know- variants are genotyped in 1,000 controls from Indonesia to exclude popula- ledge, this is the first study performing exome sequencing in patients with tion stratification. All variants with a MAF >0.1% are excluded. Not all genes these infrequent subphenotypes. implicated in our study will be relevant for SCZ. In search for additional ge- Four genetically distant individuals (from three multiply affected families) netic evidence for the implicated genes, we check publically available SCZ were exome sequenced. For the data analyses the Varbank pipeline (http:// exomes (>2,500 index patients and >1,000 parent-proband trios) and addi- varbank.ccg.uni-koeln.de), and the CLC Biomedical Genomics Workbench tional 150 in-house exomes of severly affected SCZ patients for the presence were used. The analyses included only those variants that were: (i) predic- of mutations in the identified genes. The study is ongoing and more detailed ted to be deleterious (Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion score data will be presented at the conference. ≥15; http://cadd.gs.washington.edu/), (ii) rare in publically available data- ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPA bIN as e| s W (mW inoW r a.E lleS lH e fG re. qO ueR nG cy ≤0.1%), (iii) confirmed by Sanger sequen2c0in7g,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and (iv) co-segregating within the respective family. and not previously reported to cause autosomal recessive disease. Hete- The initial results of the analysis revealed 35 variants in 35 genes. We are rozygous mutations have been linked to focal epilepsSyC NoAf 3ch ildhood and in currently genotyping all identified variants in 1,000 German population- one case to encephalopathy with multiple congenital anomalies. Additional based controls and will exclude variants with a minor allele frequency cases are needed to confirm whether mutations in could cause an ≥0.1%. In addition, we performed gene-based tests (as implemented in VE- autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental syndrome. GAS) in a genome-wide association study of SCZ (35,000 patients, 100,000 
P09 .140 controls). A French collaborative study of genotype - phenotype relationships in To validate the candidate genes identified, we will: (i) check publically avai- 78 patients carried a 22q13.3 genomic imbalance lable SCZ datasets (>2,500 exomes) and additional 50 in-house multiply A. Tabet1,2, M. Ducloy3, J. Buratti3, A. Mathieu3, B. Keren4, E. Pipiras5, S. Chantot- affected SCZ families for the presence of mutations in the identified genes; Bastaraud6, C. Le Caignec7, J. Dupont8, S. Kemeny9, A. Mosca Boidron10, C. Missirian11, D. (ii) re-sequence the most promising genes in independent patients with SCZ Sanlaville12, G. Vieville13, M. Vuillaume14, R. Delorme3,15, T. Bourgeron3; and controls. So far, our most promising candidate genes are ZNF426, NO
S3 , 1Robert Debre Hospital APHP, paris, France, 2GHFC unit, Pasteur institute, Paris, France, and MEC
P2 . For these, at least one de novo mutation in a patient with SCZ 3GHFC unit, Pasteur institute, paris, France, 4Genetic unit, Pitié Salpetrière hospital, was reported in the literature. paris, France, 5Cytogenetic unit, Jean Verdier Hospital, Bondy, France, 6Cytogenetic Unit, Trousseau Hospital, paris, France, 7Genetic Unit, Nantes Hospital, Nantes, France, 
P09 .138 8Cochin Hospital APHP, paris, France, 9Genetic Unit, CHU Estaing, Clermont Ferrand, Identification of six novel mutations in SCN1A gene in Hungarian France, 10Cytogenetic Unit, Dijon Hospital, Dijon, France, 11Genetic Unit, La Timone patients with epilepsy Hospital, Marseille, France, 12Lyon Civil Hospital, Lyon, France, 13Cytogenetic Unit, J. Bene1,2, K. Hadzsiev1,2, T. Szabo1, E. Pöstyeni1, E. Kovesdi1,2, R. Szalai1,2, A. Till1, A. Fekete- Grenoble Hospital, Grenoble, France, 14Genetic unit, Bordeaux hospital, Bordeaux, Locsei1, B. Melegh1,2; France, 15Psychopathologic Unit, Robert Debre Hospital, Paris, France. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Szentagothai Research Centre, Pécs, Hungary. Patients with Phelan McDermid Syndrome, (or 22q13.3 deletion syndrome) often have intellectual disability (ID), language impairment and autism. Introduction: Epilepsies are a heterogeneous group of neurological disor- SHANK3 is one of the genes that contribute to the phenotype. There is a ders characterized by recurrent and unprovoked seizures. Family and twin high clinical heterogeneity and the genotype-phenotype correlation is still studies revealed that 30-40 % of the epilepsy cases have a genetic compo- unclear. Our French collaborative study aims to precise it and look for poten- nent. Monogenic form of epilepsy represents 1 % of the idiopathic eSpCiNle1pA- tial modifying genetic factors. sies and mutations of ion channel genes play a major role in the pathogene- We reported genetic and phenotypic data from 78 patients, 73 carried a sis of this type of epilepsy. Among the ion channel genes mutationSsC iNn1 A 22q13.3 deletion and 5 had a duplication ranging in size from 45.8 kb to (sodium channel type 1 alpha subunit) gene are the most frequent and most 9.10 Mb. clinically relevant. The aim of our study waSsC tNo1 cAharacterize the mu- The neonatal period revealed mild motor developmental delay in deleted tation spectrum in Hungarian epilepsy patients. carriers. All patients exhibited language disorder and 50% had no verbal Materials and methods: We performed the gene mutation analysis of communication. Autistic traits were reported in 50% of cases, unfortunate- 106 Hungarian patients with epilepsy phenotype using Sanger sequencing. ly, objective tests were available only for three patients. Most patients had Results: A total of 12 different point mutations were identified. Half of the intellectual deficiency and medical comorbidity were also noted. Long-term mutations wSeCrNe 1nAewly identified in 9 patients and involve 4 (67%) missense follow up of two patients showed motor regression and acute psychiatric and 2 (33%) frameshift mutations. Moreover we detected 6 different known disorder episode at adulthood.Patients with duplication had language di- pathogenic mutations in 10 patients, in which 3 (30.0%) of them sturbance and three presented with autistic traits. were missense mutation, 2 (20.0%) of them were nonsense mutation, also 2 We studied the correlation between the size of the deleted segments and the (20.0%) of them wSCerNe1 sAplice region variant, and one (10.0%) of them was a main clinical features. We also analyzed the presence of other CNVs affecting frameshift-causing deletion. gene coding sequences to detect potential “second hit” implicated in the cli- Conclusions: The SCN g1eAne mutation analysis of Hungarian patients with nical heterogeneity of the syndrome. epilepsy resulted in the identification of 6 novel mutations, which could ex- Interestingly, 2 patients with deletion had also a CNV at 16p11.2 involved in pand the spectrum of mutations and supports the current understan- ASD, ID and obesity. ding of genotype-phenotype correlations. Based on the results of this pilot study, we aim to extend this research to other European and International centers to identify factors that modulate 
P09 .139 the severity of the disorder. Rare compound heterozygous variants in SCN3A in a patient with congenital hypotonia, micrognathia, trismus and developmental delay 
P09 .141 I. L. Mero1, A. M. Øye1, Y. Sheng1, S. C. Wallace2, T. Stiris3, H. E. Høgevold4, B. Paus5, M. D. Heterozygous HTRA1 mutations are associated with autosomal Vigeland1, K. K. Selmer1; dominant cerebral small vessel disease 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Department E. Verdura1,2, D. Hervé1,2,3, E. Scharrer4, M. Amador5, L. Guyant-Maréchal6, A. Philippi1,2, of Pediatrics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Oslo A. Corlobé7, F. Bergametti1,2, S. Gazal8, C. Prieto-Morin1,2,5, N. Beaufort4, B. Le Bail9, I. University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Craniofacial team and Department of Plastic and Viakhireva10, M. Dichgans4,11, H. Chabriat1,2,3, C. Haffner4, E. Tournier-Lasserve1,2,5; Reconstructive Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Department of Medical 1INSERM UMR-1161, Génétique et Physiopathologie des Maladies Cérébro-vasculaires, Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and Institute of Clinical Medicine University of Oslo, Paris, France, 2Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité (SPC), Paris, France, Oslo, Norway. 3AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Saint-Louis Lariboisière-Fernand-Widal, Service de Neurologie, Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares du Cerveau et de l’Oeil (CERVCO), Paris, France, 4Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Klinikum der We report on a girl born to healthy non-consanguinous parents who pre- Universität München, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 5AP-HP, Groupe viously experienced a stillbirth due to an umbilical cord knot. The patient Hospitalier Saint-Louis Lariboisière-Fernand-Widal, Service de Génétique Moléculaire Neurovasculaire, Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares du Cerveau was born at 38 weeks gestation, birth weight 2.7 kg. She presented with et de l’Oeil (CERVCO), Paris, France, 6Service de Neurophysiologie, Hôpital Charles pronounced hypotonia, reduced suck-swallow reflex, micrognathia and tris- Nicolle, Rouen, France, Rouen, France, 7Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Gui de Chauliac, mus. At 24 months she has global developmental delay. She is only able to Montpellier, France, 8Plateforme de Génomique Constitutionnelle du GHU Nord, open her mouth 1cm, however during sedation full-range movement of her Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP), Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France, 9Service jaw is obtained. There is no history of seizures. Brain MRIs were initially de Neurologie, CH Bretagne Sud, Lorient, France, 10Service de Neurologie, Hôpital de reported normal, whereas a recent MRI shows volume loss of the cerebral la Cavale Blanche, Brest, France, 11Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), peduncles, hypoplastic corpus callosum and increased T2/FLAIR signaling Munich, Germany, Munich, Germany. in the thalamic regions. The findings are suspicious of periventricular leuco- mSaClNa3ciAa, but the clinical presentation does not support this diagnosis. Trio exome sequencing identified two missense variants in NM_001081676 Introduction: Cerebral Small Vessel Disease (SVD) represents a heteroge- ( ): c.5278G>A (p.
E1760 K) and c.A154A>C (p.N52H), each inherited neous group of disorders leading to stroke and cognitive impairment. Va- from one parent. The former variant has a frequency of 5.77e-05 in ExAC rious monogenic forms have been reported. However, they only account for and the latter has never been observed in ExAC, 1000GP, ES
P6500 , nor in a minority of familial SVD patients. our inhouse Norwegian database. Both variants are highly conserved (GERP Material and methods: Pangenomic linkage analysis and whole exome se- 6.17 and 5.32 respectively), predicted pathogenic by SIFT and PolyPhen2 quencing were used to identify candidate genes in an autosomal dominant and CADD-scores are 16.74 and 23.2. SVD family for which known SVD genes had been excluded. Candidate ge- 
S2  
C0  N8 A3 is a sodium channel predominantly expE rS esH seG d 2 in0 b1 ra6 in | aB nA d R mC usE cL leO , NnAe,s SwPeAreI Nth e|n W scWreeWne.dE SinH 2G01.O unRrGelated probands with a familial SVD ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index unknown etiology. ability to speak backward voluntarily. Results: A heterozygous variant within HTRA1 (Arg166Leu), absent from Materials and Methods: We employed behavioral tests to describe the trait public databases and predicted to be deleterious by in silico tools was iden- and neuroimaging (EEG and fMRI) to study the neural processing behind tified in all affected members of the index family. Ten probands out of the backward-speech. Moreover, we investigated coding sequence changes 201 unrelated familial SVD probands (4.97 %) harbored a heterozygous through exome sequencing and copy number variations using SNP array HTRA1 mutation predicted to be damaging. There was a highly significant data in this family. difference in the number of likely deleterious variants in cases compared to Results: Behavioral data suggests that backward-speech loads heavily upon controls (p=4.2x10-6; OR=15.4; CI=4.9-45.5), strongly suggesting causality. working memory. Event-related potentials above the frontal lobe are affec- In vitro activity analysis of HTRA1 mutants demonstrated a loss-of-function ted by word reversal and the maintenance of backward-words in working effect. Clinical and MRI features of this autosomal dominant SVD differed memory. fMRI revealed that the left fusiform gyrus may facilitate backward- from those of CARASIL (a very rare, autosomal recessive SVD form, caused speech in the daughter. Exome sequencing identified three novel coding va- by biallelic HTRA1 mutations) by a later age of onset and the absence of riants of potential significance in the RI
C3 , RIPK1 and ZBED5 genes. extraneurological features. Conclusions: Our data suggest that in the daughter, backward-speech is af- Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that heterozygous HTRA1 mutations are forded by an extraordinary working memory capacity. We hypothesize that an important cause of familial SVD. Screening of HTRA1 should be conside- this is served by cholinergic projections from the basal forebrain to the fron- red in hereditary SVD patients. Investigation of the pathogenicity of these tal cortex and supported by visual semantic loops within the left fusiform heterozygous mutations in the trimeric HtrA1 enzyme is ongoing. gyrus and that these processes may be mediated by a genetic mutation in the RI
C3  gene which encodes a chaperone for nicotinic acetylcholine recep- 
P09 .142 tors. Compound heterozygous SPATA5 mutations cause progressive This research was supported by grants from MSTD (179006, 179033 and neurodegenerative disorder with microcephaly, seizures and hearing 175093), NBRP (KTIA_13_NAP-A-II/20), and MRC (G1000569/1 and MR/ loss J003719/1). K. Õunap1,2, S. Pajusalu1,3, K. Reinson1,2, A. Kaasik4, I. Talvik5, Ü. Murumets1, T. 
P09 .144 Reimand1,2,3; Spinal lipoma as a dysembryogenetic anomaly: 4 unusual cases of 1Department of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department ectopic iliac rib within the spinal lipoma of Paediatrics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, A. Accogli1, M. Pavanello1, P. Accorsi2, P. De Marco1, E. Merello1, P. Nozza1, C. Fiorillo1, L. 3Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Pinelli3, A. Cama1, A. Rossi1, M. Catala4,5,6, V. Capra1; University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine 1Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2U.O. Neuropsichiatria dell’Infanzia e and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Tallinn Children’s dell’Adolescenza, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy, 3U.O.C. Neuroradiologia, Spedali Civili, Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. Brescia, Italy, 4Fédération de Neurologie, Groupe hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière APHP, Paris, France, 5Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, Paris, France, 6CNRS, Institut de Biologie Paris Seine (IBPS) – Developmental Biology Laboratory, Paris, Tanaka et al. (2015) recently identified 14 individuals with microcephaly, France. developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, spasticity, seizures, sensorineural hearing loss, cortical visual impairment, and biallelic pre- sumably disease causing variants in spermatogenesis-associated protein 5 Background: Congenital spinal lipomas are closed spinal dysraphisms be- (SPATA5). SPATA5 encodes a ubiquitously expressed member of the ATPase longing to the Neural Tube Defects (NTDs) group. They include a broad protein family which is involved in mitochondrial morphogenesis during spectrum of lesions ranging from simple lipomas of the filum terminale to early spermatogenesis. Here we report two siblings with similar phenotype complex malformations. On histological evaluation, various tissue compon- and compound heterozygous mutations in the SPATA5 gene. ents of ectodermal, mesodermal or endodermal origin are found within the Index patient had developmental delay since 2months of age and remarkab- lipomas, with prevalence for nerves and striated muscle. Overall, rib malfor- le regression since 7 months. At 1y she had microcephaly (-2 SD), spasticity, mations have been occasionally observed in patients with NTDs and in NTD dystonic movements, strabismus, no eye contact, sensorineural hearing loss mouse models. However, an ectopic rib arising within the spinal lipoma and and tonic-clonic seizures. Brain MRI showed moderate cerebral atrophy, a articulating with the iliac crest has not been reported in neither of them. slightly elevated signal intensity in white matter, and atrophic caudate nu- Cases: We describe four patients affected by lipomyeloschisis or lipomye- cleus suggesting a neurodegenerative disorder. Lysosomal disorders have lomeningocele, with an unusual fibrocartilaginous protuberance arising been excluded by enzyme analyses. Elder brother had similar progressive within the lipoma and connecting to one iliac crest, resembling an ectopic disease and both died at 3 years of age. rib. Histological evaluation confirmed the presence of cartilaginous tissue. Whole exome sequencing in index case identified two rare heterozygous mu- Discussion: This anatomical feature is reminiscent of the so-called caudal tations in SPATA5 gene: c.250C>T p.Arg84* and c.989_991del p.Thr330del appendages that can arise elsewhere from the midline. In our cases, the pre- (NM_145207.2). Compound heterozygosity of both affected siblings and sence of the extra-rib in the sacral region suggests a defect of the genetic heterozygosity of only c.250C>T in the mother was confirmed by Sanger pathway that controls the specification of the antero-posterior identity. sequencing. Conclusions: We expand the clinical spectrum of fibrocartilaginous anoma- The described family supports the conclusion by Tanaka et al. that muta- lies associated with spinal lipoma, suggesting the presence of an ectopic rib tions in SPATA5 might affect brain development and function, resulting in as a new possible phenotype in NTDs. A careful analysis by neuroradiolo- microcephaly, developmental delay, and intellectual disability. We are cur- gists and pathologists should be performed in spinal lipomas to assess the rently performing functional studies on patients’ fibroblasts to further as- presence of an ectopic rib or other uncommon developmental anomalies. sess the role of the SPATA5 mutations. Furthemore, molecular studies are required to detect the genetic cause of This work was supported by the Estonian Research Council grant PUT355. this unusual phenotype. 
P09 .143 
P09 .145 Multidisciplinary investigation of backward-speech trait suggests a In-vitro characterization of STUB1 mutations in recessively inherited link between RI
C3 , RIPK1, ZBED5 and working memory spinocerebellar ataxia-16 S. Prekovic1, D. Filipović Đurđević2,3, G. Csifcsák4, O. Sveljo5,6, O. Stojković7, F. Ceroni8, D. F. Y. Pakdaman1,2, M. Sanchez-Guixé1,2, R. Kleppe3,4, K. Heimdal5, P. M. Knappskog1,2, I. Newbury8; Aukrust2, S. Johansson1,2; 1Faculty of Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Faculty of Philosophy, University 1Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 2Center for of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia, 3Faculty of Philosophy, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Serbia, 4Institute of Psychology, Faculty of Arts, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, Norway, 3Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 4K.G. 5Diagnostic Imaging Center, Oncology Institute of Vojvodina, Sremska Kamenica, Serbia, Jebsen Centre for Neuropsychiatric Disorders, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 6Faculty of Technical Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia, 7Faculty of 5Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 8Wellcome Trust Center for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. STUB1 Introduction:Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia-16 is caused by mutations in encoding the ubiquitin 
E3  ligase and dimeric co-cha- Introduction: Working memory is essential for the development of many perone CHIP. There is limited knowledge about the mechanisms whereby language-related traits. It has been suggested that the rare trait of back- these mutations cause the disease. This study aims to characterize the struc- ward-speaking is linked to working memory. This trait is described as an ture and function of six previously published pathogenic CHIP mutations. ability to spontaneously and accurately reverse words. Here we describe Material and methods: Six mutations 
E28 K, N65S, K145Q, M211I, 
S236 T, individuals (the father and daughter)E fSroHmG a 2Se0r1bi6an | fBamAiRlyC wEhLoO haNveA t,h Se PAaINnd |T W24W6MW w.eEreS mHaGde.O byR sGite-directed mutagenesis, and purified as re2co0m9-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index E. coli binant proteins from . The mutants were analyzed and compared with healthy at birth but died at 1.5-4.5 months of age. Slow movement, ataxia wild-type CHIP by ubiquitination activity assay, limited proteolysis assay, and tremor are among neurological abnormalities. TLC and IHC analysis oligome rization analysis by gel-filtration chromatography, and circular di- showed massive accumulation of GM2 ganglioside in brain. Electron and chroism. light microscopy analysis of brain cortex showed lysosomal storage disea- Results:Only N65S and T246M showed impaired ability to ubiquitinate the se pathology similar to Tay-Sachs patient’s. Behavioral analysis including HS
C70  chaperone. The limited proteolysis assay showed an increased stabi- passive-avoidance, rotarod and water maize revealed age-dependent motor lity against trypsin digestion for N65S, while T246M and 
E28 K were more coordination impairment and memory deficit which indicate progressive rapidly cleaved than wild-type, indicating a less compact protein structure. neurodegeneration in HexA-/-Neu3-/- mice compared to HexA-/-. The un- By gel-filtration chromatography analysis N65S showed a sharp dimeric expected severe phenotype of HexA-/- mice appeared to be influence by the peak compared to T246 and 
E28 K that both generated broad oligomeric status of sialidase Neu3 gene. peaks. K145Q, M211I and 
S236 T behaved overall similar to wild-type CHIP. 
P09 .148 Further characterization is currently being performed using circular dichro- Genetic variants of TREM2 associated with neurodegenerative ism to analyze protein structure/stability, and in cellular systems to analyze disorders subcellular localization. B. J. Peplonska, M. Berdynski, M. Kobrys, C. Zekanowski; Conclusion: Our riens uvlittsro illustrate that some mutatiSoTnUs Bk1nown to cause re- Mossakowski Medical Research Centre Polish Academy of Sciences, Warszawa, Poland. cessive spinocerebellar ataxia-16 can affect protein structure and ability of CHIP to dimerize . Hence, we speculate that mutations might nino vt iovnoly affect CHIP´s 
E3  ubiquitin ligase properties and interaction with its Introduction:TREM2 encodes triggering receptor expressed on myeloid chaperones, but may also affect its protein structure and possibly stability cells 2 expressed on the cell membrane of many types of immune cells in- . cluding macrophages, dendritic cells, osteoclasts and microglia. Activation 
P09 .146 of the TREM2 receptor on microglia stimulates phagocytosis activity and Synaptotagmin-1 mutation is a recurrent disorder of decreases microglial proinflamatory responses. The protein may play role neurotransmitter release in cleaning damaged or apoptotic cells and cellular debris and help resolve K. Baker1, S. L. Gordon2, UK10K Consortium, M. A. Cousin3, F. L. Raymond1; damage-induced inflammation. Given the reported antiinflammatory role 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, of TREM2 in the brain, mutations and polymorphic variants may increase 2The Florey Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 3Centre for Integrative Physiology, University the risk of neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer‘s disease (AD), of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). SYT1 Materials and Methods: The study group consisted of: 250 neurologically normal controls, 150 AD, 192 ALS, 144 FTD patients. TREM2 exon 2 with Synaptotagmin-1 ( ) is a calcium-binding synSaYpTt1ic vesicle protein re- flankig intronic sequences was mined using Sanger fluorescent method (ABI quired for both exocytosis and endocytosis. We recently described the first 3130) in the whole studied group. human condition associated with a rare variant in . The individual har- Results: Six rare variants located in exon 2 of TREM2 were identified, pre- bouring this variant presented with an early onset dyskinetic movement dominantly in heterozygous state. Three of them (R62H, R62C, D87N) are disorder, severe motor delay, and profound cognitive impairment. StruScYtTu1- present in all groups. Variant D87N in homozygous state was identified in ral MRI was normal, but EEG showed extensive neurophysiological distur- one FTD patient. R98W was found only in one AD patient, T66T and T66M bances. Trio analysis of whole-exome sequence identified a de novo were identified in FTD group only. The results suggest that variant T66M is missense variant (I368T). Expression of rat SYT1 containing the equivalent in linkage disequillibrium with R62C one. human variant in WT mouse primary hippocampal cultures revealed that Conclusion: Due to modulatory action of TREM2 on inflamatory immune the mutant form of SYT1 correctly localizes to nerve terminals and is ex- responses in microglia, we suggest that mutations and polymorphisms in pressed at levels that are approximately equal to levels of endogenous WT TREM2 could contribute to disease pathogenesis in the Polish population. protein. The presence of the mutant SYT1 slowed synaptic vesicle fusion kinetics, a finding that agrees with the previously demonstrated role for 
P09 .149 I368 in calcium dependent membrane penetration. Expression of the I368T Synaptic plasticity and cognitive function are disrupted in a mouse variant also altereSdY tTh1e kinetics of synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Subsequent- model of Williams-Beuren syndrome ly, three further cases of neurodevelopmental disorder associated with de C. Borralleras1,2,3, T. Amédée4, S. Mato5, G. Albericio2, C. Mulle4, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1,2,3, V. Campuzano1,2,3; novo mutation in have been identified. In common with the first case, 1Institut Hospital del Mar d’Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, structural brain development is normal whilst cortical electrophysiology is 2Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, severely disturbed, though no case has experienced overt seizures. Motor Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras development is consistently less severely disrupted than communication (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 4Institut Interdisciplinaire de Neurosciences, CNRS and social development. Unpredictable deteriorations in behavioural fSuYnTc1- UMR 5297 Université de Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France, 5Department of Neuroscience, tion are reported in all cases. Together, the clinical features, electrophysio- Neurotek-University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain. logical phenotype, and in vitro neuronal phenotype associated with mutation highlight presynaptic mechanisms of synchronous neurotransmit- ter release and short term plasticity that mediate human motor control and Introduction: Williams-Beuren Syndrome is a rare neurodevelopmental dis- cognitive development. order caused by a heterozygous deletion of 26-28 genes on chromosome band 7q11.23 manifesting a characteristic cognitive and behavioral profile 
P09 .147 including intellectual disability, increased general anxiety, overfriendly per- Behavioral analysis of mouse model with combined deficiencies of sonality and visuospatial deficits. The complete deletion (CD) mouse model, β-Hexosaminidase A and sialidase Neu3 reveals motor coordination which carries the same deletion found in WBS patients, recapitulates rele- impairment and memory loss vant features of WBS neurocognitive phenotype and shows a reduction in S. Akyildiz Demir1, E. Erdemli2, B. Demir3, T. Dalkara3, T. Miyagi4, V. Seyrantepe1; spine density in CA1 hippocampus. However, the mechanisms underlying 1Izmir Institute of Technology, İzmir, Turkey, 2Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 4Tohoku Pharmaceutical these phenotypes are still unknown. University, Miyagi, Japan. Materials and methods: We used some behavioral paradigms related to memory function to study cognitive dysfunction in CD mice. We also inve- stigated synaptic transmission and plasticity by recording excitatory post- synaptic currents (EPSCs) at hippocampal CA3-CA1 glutamatergic synapses. Tay-Sachs disease is a severe lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutati- Finally, the expression of molecules associated with synaptic plasticity was ons in the HEXA gene coding for α subunit of lysosomal β-Hexosaminidase A characterized by immunofluorescence techniques. enzyme, which converts GM2 to GM3 ganglioside. Unexpectedly, the HexA-/- Results: Behavioral characterization of CD mice showed cognitive dysfunc- mice have a normal lifespan and show no obvious neurological impairments tion, specifically in spatial working memory. In addition, some alterations in until at least 1 year of age, owing to the ability of these mice to catabolise synaptic transmission and plasticity were present in CA1 hippocampus of stored GM2 ganglioside via sialidase Neu3 removing sialic acid into glycoli- CD mice, including a significantly reduced long-term potentiation. We also pid GA2 which further processed by β-Hexosaminidase B, thereby bypassing observed molecular dysregulation of some synaptic plasticity markers such the HexA defect. To elucidate whether sialidase Ne u3 can contribute to GM2 as a reduction in BDNF expression in pyramidal layer of CA1 in CD mice. ganglioside degradation, we generated mice model with combined defici- Conclusions: Taken together, these data suggest that behavioral and cogni- e2n1ci0es of β-Hexosaminidase A and sialidase NeEu3S.HHGex A2-/0-1N6eu 
|3  -B/-A mRicCeE aLreO NtAiv,e S dPefAicIiNts o| fW CDW mWice.E cSouHldG b.eO liRnkGed to alterations in glutamatergic syn- aptic transmission and plasticity in hippocampus. In addition, our resultsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P09 .152 Psychological consequences of pathway alterations as a target for identify dysregulation of some synaptic plasticity markers that could be po- genomic psychology tential targets for a pharmacological therapy. M. A. Zelenova1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova2,1,3, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, A. M. Kazmin3, I. Y. Iourov1,2,4; Grant support: SAF2012-40036, SAF2015-69776-R and FI-DGR/2013. 1Mental Health Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics named after Y.E Veltishev at the Pirogov Russian National 
P09 .150 Research Medical University, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow Effects of GTF2I-GTF2IRD2 interaction on the Williams-Beuren State University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Department syndrome cognitive phenotype of Medical Genetics, Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of G. Albericio1, A. Antonell2, C. Borralleras3,1,4, D. Pérez1,3,4, L. A. Pérez Jurado1,3,4, V. Health, Moscow, Russian Federation. Campuzano1,3,4; 1Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital del Mar Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 4Centro Introduction.Genomic alterations to molecular pathways influence intellec- de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. tual functioning.However, psychological consequences of genomic changes remain largely obscure. To get further insights into the emerging field of ge- nomic psychology, new tools for correlating genomic and psychological data Introduction: Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a rare neurodevelop- appear to be required. Here we propose an approach combining psycholo- mental disorder caused by a heterozygous deletion at chromosome band gical evaluation using International Classification of Functioning (ICF -CY), 7q11.23. Haploinsufficiency for two General Transcription Factor genes chromosomal microarray and original bioinformatic approach for network (GTF2I coding for TFII-I and GTF2IRD1 coding for BEN-GTF3) has been based-classification. associated with the WBS cognitive profile. A multi-copy and variably de- Materials and methods.To test the approach, we studied 7 children (16 leted gene of the family, GTF2IRD2, antagonizes TFII-I´s activity and may years) with varying degrees of intellectual disability, autism and congenital modulate executive function and cognition in WBS. Depending on deletion malformations. From the ICF -CY, we focused on general mental functions, breakpoints, WBS patients express different GTF2IRD2 copy-number and communication and involvement. isoforms, including a chimeric form. Results.Three cases demonstrated copy number variations and losses of Methods: We analyzed by immunofluorescence assays the subcellular loca- heterozygosity spanning genes involved in metabolic pathways (KEGG: lization of TFII-I in neuronal cultures of mice with the complete WBS-de- hsa01100): PON1, PON2, PON3, URO
C1 ,UGT1A8, UGT1A10. Bioinformatic letion (CD). The subcellular localization and interaction between different analysis showed these genomic and epigenomic variations to underlie phe- GTF2IRD2 isoforms and TFII-I was also studied by immunofluorescence and notypic features. Application of ICF -CY showed that all children had little to pull-down assays in CO
S7  cells. no phrasal speech (d1331), troubles maintaining cyclic interaction with a Results: We observed a clear reduction of nuclear TFII-I in neurons of CD person (d3503) and about 50% success in responding to complex requests mice, consistent with gene dosage. GTF2IRD2 isoforms were differentially (more than 3 parameters) (d3102). All children were engaging in symbolic localized in the cells but all interacted with TFII-I. Transient expression of play and shared activities with adults. patient-derived chimeric GTF2IRD2 in neurons of CD mice resulted in an Сonclusions. The correlation between psychological and genomic data can increased amount of nuclear TFII-I. shed light on molecular pathways to brain malfunctioning. Here, we de- Conclusions: Our data show that interactions between GTF2IRD2 isoforms monstrated that an opportunity to obtain such correlation combining ge- and TFII-I could affect the nuclear bioavailability of TFII-I and may explain nomic, bioinformatic and psychological methodology does exist. In order to part of the phenotypic variability in WBS. Considering the capital role of confirm the found typical features and the effectiveness of the approach it TFII-I dosage on WBS sociability and cognition, understanding these mecha- should be applied towards a larger cohort. Supported by the Russian Sci- nisms might provide novel therapeutic targets for these features. ence Foundation (grant:14- 15- 00411). Grant support: SAF2015-69776-R, Innopharma2014 & 2014SGR1468 
P09 .151 
P10  Neuromuscular disorders Association of serotonin transporter gene polymorphisms (5-HTTLPR and rs 25531) and life-histories with psychopathology vulnerability profiles: a study performed with healthy young adults 
P10 .01 M. Alvarez1,2, P. Pereira2, L. Manco1,2, S. Cherpe3, M. Cunha3, J. Pinto Gouveia4,3, P. G. Mota1; A novel mutation in SL
C16 A2 gene in a Turkish boy with Allan- 1Department of Life Sciences, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Research Center Herndon-Dudley Syndrome for Anthropology and Health, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CINEICC, E. Tasdelen1, V. Bas2, H. Aslan1, O. Cilingir1, E. Erzurumluoglu1, M. Ozdemir1, B. Durak University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Faculty of Psychology and Education Aras1, O. Kırkbıyık3, Y. Kutbay3, S. Artan1; Sciences, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Departments of Medical Genetic, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir State Hospital, Departments of Pediatrics Endocrinology, Eskisehir, Turkey, 3Tepecik Training and Research Hospital Department of Medical Introduction: Variation in both 5-HTTLPR and rs25531 polymorphisms, at Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. the serotonin transporter gene SL
C6 A4, is hypothesized to moderate the re- sponse to stress on depression by serotonin transporter levels and/or by amygdala structure. The aim of this study was to look for statistical interac- Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS,MIM 300523) is an X-linked re- tions between genotypes, defined by both polymorphisms, and phenotypes, cessive neurodegenerative disorder, with severe mental retardation, an defined by levels of anxiety, depression and stress, under specific environ- impaired speech ability, truncal hypotonia, poor head control, generalized mental risk factors in young adults. muscle weakness, spastic quadriplegia, joint contractures, movement ab- Materials and Methods: A total of 300 Portuguese healthy young adults were normalities and feeding difficulties in combination with changed thyroid assessed for: i) genotype at both 5HTTLPR and rs25531 segregation sites; hormon (TH) levels . The cases, have increased serum levels of fT3, while ii) levels of anxiety, depression and stress estimated by EADS-21 scale; and TSH concentrations are normal and low-normal fT4. Seizures, poor weight iii) psychosocial environment stressors, including parents mental illness, gain, hyperactive deep tendon reflexes obserMveCdT 8in some patients.S MLC
C1 T68A 2is childhood abuse and general well-being, using the CTQ and MHC scales, re- transporter triiodothyronine (T3) hormone, and plays an important role to spectively. Statistical interactions between genotype, phenotype and the en- uptake into neuronal cells. Mutations in the , also known as , vironmental variables were screened using Generalized Linear Models test have been related with AHDS. (GLM), implemented in IBM SPSS 22. We here identified a five years old boy with developmental delay, truncal hy- Results: The allele’s frequency spectrum found in Portuguese young adults potonia, spastic paraplegia, psychomotor retardation, mild dysmorphic fa- is similar to those observed in other European population samples, and cial features and patoghnomonic thyroid function tests, such as elevated fT3 match the values predicted by Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Highly signi- and low fT4 levels. Elongated face, poor feeding, pectus carinatum, inability ficant statistical interactions were found between SL
C6 A4 low transcriptio- to walk and independently sit, myoclSoLnCic1 6mAo2v ements, hyperreflexia were nal genotypes and levels of anxiety, depression and stress scored by EADS- noted. Thyroid profile and clinical findings of patient that were consistent 21. Parents depression was the strongest environmental stressor for the with AHDS. Sanger sequencing of the gene revealed a hemizygous development of mood symptoms (p<0.001). Gender had not a significant mutation in exon 1 ( p.
E9 X; c.25G>T). The proband’s mother and grandmo- effect (p = 0.077). ther have heterozygous c.25G>T mutation, but the proband’s uncle with Conclusions: Our results confirmed the association of 5HTTLPR S and psycomotor retardation, could not be analysed, since he had passed away rs25531g alleles to mood symptoms and the usefulness of the interaction nine months ago. To our knowledge, this mutation has not been previously gene x environment experimental design in the interpretation of psychopa- reported in the etiology of AHDS. Due to generated premature stop codon, thology vulnerability profiles. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAtIhNe m| WutaWtioWn i.sE eSvHaluGa.tOedR dGisease causing mutation. 211ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P10 .02 Application of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) in the ALS research: a study in Swedish families family showing an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern with incomple- R. Rofougaran1, L. Köhn2, A. Birve1, A. Nilsson1, M. Berdynski1, P. Andersen1; te penetrance, comprising an index patient and his affected paternal great- 1Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Neuroscience, Umeå University, Umeå, auFnItG. 4By using an overlapping strategy to identify variants sFhIaGr4ed by the Sweden, Umeå, Sweden, 2Department of Radiation Sciences, Oncology, Umeå University, patient and his father, we detected a rare heterozygous frameshift mutation Umeå, Sweden, Umeå, Sweden. in predicted to truncatFeI Gth4e FIG4 protein in its active site. encodes a phosphoinositide 5-phosphatase with a key role in vesicle trafficking in eukaryotic cells. Bi-allelic mutations have previously been descrFibIGed4 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative dis- to cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, type 4J (CMT4J) and Yunis-Varon syn- order that eventually leads to the death of motor neurons and fatal paralysis. droFmIGe4. Recent studies showed an association between heterozygous Approximately, mutations in 26 genes have been associated with pathogene- mutations and ALS. Therefore, we performed WES or targeted sequencing sis of ALS and several of them are also linked with fronto-temporal dementia of in 200 ALS patients of mainly central European origin revealingF fIiGv4e (FTD). However, mutations in these genes explain less than one-third of ALS additional known or novel rare heterozygous missensemutations predicted cases. NGS technologies can be used to generate deep sequencing of target to be deleterious. Disease duration wFasIG r4elatively long in four of six genome regions, such as the exome or known disease loci. Generally, the spe- mutation carriers, and three of six displayed a predominant upper motor cificity and accuracy of the results from panels are more reliable compared neuron phenotype. Here, we confirm as an ALS risk gene identifying to whole-exome sequencing data since panels have better and more efficient novel or known rare heterozygous variants in 3% of European patients. data coverage than whole-exome sequencing.The aim of the current project 
P10 .05 is to analyze 26 genes that are associated with ALS disease using NGS pa- A syndromic form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease associated with a nel. After library and indexed-enriched library preparations and validations 41-Mb terminal duplication on Xp22.3-11.4 spanning the PDX3 gene of samples who had previously tested negative for 
C9 orf72 mutations, the (CMTX6) samples were sequenced on Miseq. Analyzing the data showed the sufficient A. Pelle1,2, D. Carli1,2, E. Di Gregorio3,4, G. Mandrile1, B. Ferrero5, M. De Marchi1,2, D. F. sequencing with mean coverage of more than 150X. Then, bioinformatics Giachino1,2, A. Brusco3,4; analyzes were done and the coding and splicing variants were selected and 1University of Torino, Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Torino, Italy, filtered against MAF below 1% which have been described in HGMD. Our Orbassano (TO), Italy, 2Medical Genetics, San Luigi Gonzaga University Hospital, results showed mutations in SOD1 and other ALS-linked genes as well. The Orbassano (TO), Italy, 3S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, Città della Salute e della Scienza, results will be discussed in more detailed.To conclude, the combination of Torino, Italy, 4University of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, DNA capture enrichment systems and high-throughput sequencing techni- 5University Division of Neurology, San Luigi Gonzaga University Hospital, Orbassano ques can be used to have deep insight for the diagnosis of ALS. (TO), Italy. *The project has been funded by grants for Peter Andersen, Umeå Univer- sity, Sweden We report on a mother and her daughter affected by peripheral polyneuro- 
P10 .03 pathy and intellectual disability. The two patients referred frequent falls and Study of the role of epigenetic regulators in the pathogenesis of ALS walking difficulties. A motor- mixed sensory axonal-demyelinating polyneu- C. Bernardini, M. Bernardinelli, M. Branzini, L. Di Pietro, F. Michetti, E. Ricci, M. ropathy was diagnosed with electromyography (MCV: 33m/sec in the mo- Sabatelli; ther, 25m/sec in the daughter). Clinical features included in both patients Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. premature ovarian failure, osteoporosis, body freckling, pes cavus and claw toes. Early hair whitening, seizures and thyroid nodular hyperplasia were observed only in the daughter. ALS is characterized by the progressive loss of neuromuscular junction In both subjects, a telomeric duplication at Xp22.3-11.4 was identified by ar- (NMJ) and muscle mass, followed by muscle weakness, paralysis and death. ray-CGH analysis. The duplicated region spanned 41 Mb and encompassed Most of the studies on ALS focused primarily on motor neurons (MN) to un- 135 genes, among which only few had previously been associated with some derstand the etiology of the disease. However, there are evidences sugge- aspects of their clinical phenotype. sting that muscle dysfunction and NMJ degeneration occur long before sym- Duplications of CDK
L5  and RP
S6 KA3 cause developmental delay and lear- ptom onset and may contribute to MN death. Recently, HDA
C4  was identified ning disabilities both in males and females. SAT1 duplication is associated as the critical linker connecting neural activity to muscle transcription; in- with a rare kind of chronic dermatitis named keratosis follicularis spinulosa deed induction of HDA
C4  leads to increased levels of myogenin. Moreover decalvans. Interestingly, PDK3 had been associated with the new X-linked the regulation of RNA metabolism in the NMJ is an emerging mechanism dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 6 (CMTX6, MIM300905) on the basis involved in ALS pathogenesis, and microRNAs (miRNAs) could be the me- of the finding of a missense PDK3 (p.Arg158His) gain-of-function mutation diators of this process. The aim of this study is to unravel the molecular pa- (Kennerson et al, 2013). Thus, in our patients we hypothesise an activating thway that exists between nerve and muscle in order to control the mecha- role of the PDK3 duplication, in analogy with PM
P22  in the Charcot-Marie- nisms that exacerbate the disease. In particular selected genes and miRNAs Tooth type 1A. involved in the innervation pathway have been analyzed in human skeletal In conclusion, we describe two patients with a 41-Mb Xp-telomeric duplica- muscle derived from ALS patients. 12 ALS patients with 7 relative controls tion related to a syndromic form of polyneuropathy and intellectual disabi- have been collected for this aim. Selected genes and miRNAs were then ana- lity. Clinical phenotype could be explained by a combination of duplicated lyzed through qPCR and differential expression of HDA
C4 , MYOG, mir-23a, genes: CDK
L5  and RP
S6 KA3 for intellectual disability, SAT1 for body freck- mir-155 and mir-206 was found. Collectively these data suggest that the in- ling, PDK3 for polyneuropathy. nervation pathway is modulated in skeletal muscle in ALS patients and iden- tify specific miRNAs potentially acting in HDA
C4  inhibition. The inhibition of 
P10 .06 HDA
C4  could represent a promising therapeutic approach to enhance motor A novel mutation in NEFL gene associated with early onset severe performance and slow disease progression in patients with ALS. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in Karachay populations This study has been funded by Arisla R. A. Zinchenko1,2, E. L. Dadali1,2, A. K. Makaov3, A. V. Polyakov1, M. V. Bulach1, E. K. Ginter1; 
P10 .04 1Federal state scientific budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Medical Genetics», Confirming FIG4 as a risk gene for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Моscow, Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, (ALS) in a central European cohort by whole exome and targeted Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Municipal Budgetary Health Care setting, Chabez, Russian sequencing Federation. I. Rangnau1,2, A. Osmanovic1,2, A. Kosfeld1, S. Abdulla2, C. Janssen2, S. Petri2, R. G. Weber1; 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Introduction: Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) - is genetically and clinically hete- rogeneous group of the peripheral nervous system diseases. On average, in the world their prevalence is 10.0 per 100,000 persons, ranging from 0.1 to Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common adult-onset motor 41.0 per 100,000 persons. neuron disease characterized by progressive degeneration of upper and lo- Materials and Methods: During expeditions into Ust-Dzhegutinsky district wer motor neurons. It leads to increasing weakness of voluntary muscles of Karachai-Cherkess 10 patients from one family with autosomal dominant until death occurs from respiratory failure within an average of three years. form CMT were identified. We developed and used the panel for TargetSeq While important progress has been made in understanding the genetic etio- containing 400 genes mutations in which are found by NGS of neurogenetic logy of ALS, the majority of genetic variation involved in ALS is still undefi- diseases patients. The analysis was performed on Illumina NextSeq 500 by n2e1d.2 In this study, we performed whole exomeE seSqHueGn c2in0g1 (W6 E| SB) AinR aCn EALLSO NpAa,i rSedP-AenIdN r |e aWdsW (2Wx1.5
E1 S bHp)G w.OithR aGn average coverage of at least 70-100xABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index in situ paired-end. studied further by Southern blot, sequencing, allele specific expression, Results: Using NGS scanning, we identified heterozygous substitution hybridization, Western blot and analysis of fetal splice isoforms of DM2 c.65C>A (p.Pro22His) in exon 1 of the gene NEFL. This nucleotide substitu- effector proteins. tion has not been previously reported in literature and mutations databases Results: Clinical features are mild, including myalgic pain, muscle weakness (HGMD, IPNMDB). Then we searched the mutation in other patients, using and stiffness. Muscle biopsy showed DM2-like changes. PCR-based methods the method of Sanger sequencing. The mutation c.65C>A was detected in all and Southern blot indicated a repeat expansion of (CCTG)50-70. In contrast to affected family members in the heterozygous state. The debut of the disease DM2, ribonuclear foci were not detected, splicing of DM2 effector proteins between 13 to 18 years with the appearance of weakness peroneal muscle was normal and CNBP protein level was normal. groups. The speed of the pulse (SPI) on the median nerve in patients was Discussion and conclusions: Finding of (CCTG)50-70 repeats containing mu- from 33.5 to 42.3 m/s. tations in mildly symptomatic patients suggests that even shorter than pre- Conclusion: This is the first report of missense mutations c.65C>A viously reported expansions may cause a disease, although with a different (p.Pro22His) gene NEFL, associated with a group of intermediate types CMT. phenotype. The molecular findings indicate a unique pathomechanism and This types CMT was found in Karachai family. The prevalence in the region the term ‘myotonic dystrophy’ cannot be applied to this new type of disease. amounts 1:3300 Karachai. 
P10 .10 This work was partially funded by RFBR grants 15-04-01859. Multi-gene panel analysis in the primary diagnosis of limb-girdle 
P10 .08 muscular dystrophy Prevalence and spectrum of SH3T
C2  mutations in Norway V. Mayer1, S. Bulst1, A. Nissen1, S. Kleinle1, K. Becker1, M. C. Walter2, A. Benet-Pagès1, A. K. A. Arntzen1, H. Høyer2, M. Ingebrigtsen3, Ø. L. Busk2, Ø. L. Holla2, K. Tveten2, H. T. Abicht1,2; Hilmarsen2, K. Ørstavik4, C. Tallaksen4,5, M. Nebuchennykh1, C. Jonsrud3, G. J. Braathen2, T. 1Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum MGZ, Munich, Germany, 2Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Fagerheim3; Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. 1Department of Neurology, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 4Department Introduction: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies are characterized by great of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Institute of Clinical Medicine, clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Mutations in a number of genes lead to University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. overlapping phenotypes that cannot always be differentiated clinically or through muscle biopsy. Molecular genetic testing is therefore becoming in- creasingly important to t he initial diagnosis of potential dystrophinopathies Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4C (CMT4C) is a demyelinating recessi- with significant clinical and familial consequences. ve form of CMT, caused by mutations in the SH3T
C2  gene. CMT4C has so Materials and Methods:Our cohort comprised more than 80 patients with far been regarded as a relatively uncommon type of CMT and the literature a suspected differential diagnosis of dystrophinopathy and negative test re- describes mostly single cases and families. The aim of this study was to in- sults for DMD gene dosage analysis by MLPA and DMD gene point mutation vestigate the prevalence and spectrum of SH3T
C2  mutations in the Norwe- analysis by next generation sequencing (NGS). As over 700 neurogenetic/ gian CMT population, and to characterize the clinical manifestations of this neuromuscular genes were captured during the course of technical analysis patient group. by NGS, we were able to perform a second-tier expanded data analysis of This project is a co-operation between the two centers in Norway diagno- a gene p anel including more than 140 genes known to be responsible for sing CMT4C. All patients diagnosed with homozygous or compound hetero- congenital muscular dystrophies or myopathies. zygous mutations in the SH3T
C2  gene were invited to participate in the stu- Results:More than 30% of patients tested were found to have a disease- dy. The study is based on genetic analysis, information from clinical health causing mutation in another gene. In other patients sequence variants of records and patient questionnaires. unknown clinical significance were detected; the potential clinical relevance In total 35 patients from 30 families were diagnosed with homozygous of these variants cannot be assessed with certainty without further testing. or compound heterozygous mutations in SH3T
C2 . Most common was the Conclusion: Multi-gene panels utilizing NGS technologies enable sensitive, NM_024577.3: c.2860C>T p.(Arg954*) mutation, present in 21 patients as cost-efficient, and simultaneous analysis of multiple disease-relevant genes. homozygous, and in 13 patients as heterozygous in combination with ano- However, despite the broad analysis, it is not possible to identify pathoge- ther SH3T
C2  mutations. The additional mutations included among others nic mutations in all patients. There is also a risk that the analysis of a large seven mutations not previously reported in the literature. To date 20 pa- number of genes independent of the clinical phenotype may identify vari- tients have been included in the clinical study. Mean age of onset was four ants that can be assessed only in combination with refined clinical or muscle years, affection of arms, scoliosis and reduced hearing were reported by 95, biopsy data and/or segregation analysis. 80 and 50% of the patients respectively. Mutations in SH3T
C2  are one of the five most frequent causes of CMT in 
P10 .11 the Norwegian CMT population. All patients except one, carried one or two Deletion and duplication patterns of dystophin gene in Turkish c.2860C>T mutations, a variant which likely has high carrier frequency in Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy patients Norway. F. Guclu-Geyik1, N. Coban1, B. Tüysüz2, P. Serdaroglu3, Y. Parman4, F. Deymeer4, N. Erginel-Unaltuna1; 
P10 .09 1Istanbul University, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Department of Genetics, DM2-linked myopathy caused by uninterrupted short (CCTG)50-70 ISTANBUL, Turkey, 2İstanbul University Cerrahpaşa Faculty of Medicine, Department of repeat expansion in CNBP Pediatric Genetics, ISTANBUL, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, T. Suominen1, L. Bachinski2, O. Raheem1, H. Haapasalo3, W. Kress4, R. Krahe2,5, B. Udd1,6; Department of Neurology, ISTANBUL, Turkey, 4Istanbul University,Istanbul Medical 1University of Tampere, Neuromuscular Research Unit, Tampere, Finland, 2Department Faculty, Department of Neurology, ISTANBUL, Turkey. of Genetics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States, 3Department of Pathology, Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Biozentrum, Background: Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) are Am Hubland, Wuerzburg, Germany, 5Graduate Programs in Human and Molecular X-linked recessive inherited neuromuscular diseases that result from hete- Genetics and Genes and Development, University of Texas at Houston Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX, United States, 6Department of Neurology, Tampere rogeneous mutations in the dystrophin (DMD) gene. Our aim was to inve- University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. stigate DMD gene deletion/duplication frequencies and patterns in Turkish DMD/BMD patients and carriers. Methods: Our study comprised of 217 male patients clinically diagnosed or Background and aims: Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is one of the most suspected with DMD/BMD and 125 female cases. DMD gene deletion/dupli- comCNmBoPn adult-onset muscular dystrophies in Europe. It is a dominantly cations were detected by Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification inherited multisystemic disease caused by a repeat expansion in intron 1 (MLPA) method. of gene. The disease-causing repeat expansions consist of 75-11,000 Results: DMD gene mutations were identified in 44.7% of male probands, (CCTG) repeats. In this study, we characterize a new type of DM2-linked of which 36.4% (mean age of diagnosis: 9.48, range; from 0 to 32 age) and mild myopathy in several patients without myotonia associated with very 8.3% (mean age of diagnosis 11.78, range; from 2 to 35 age) were deletions short (CCTG)50-70 repeat expansions. and duplications, respectively. Methods: All ten individuals carrying a short (CCTG) repeat expansion have There were 45 deletions, 11 of which were single exon deletions. Duplicati- been analyzed by repeat-primed PCR and haplotype analysis. Additionally on pattern however, were found in 17 male patient. Deletions of exons 45- five patients have been clinically evaluated and muscle biopsy analyzed. For 47 (n=6) and 45-50 (n=5) were the most common identified patterns. The one of the patient, an index patient of Ea SlaHrgGer 2fa0m1ily6, t|h Be mAuRtCatEioLnO haNs Abe,e Sn PAr Ia Nn g |e W of W the W d .u Ep Sli Hca Gtio .n Os Rin G our group was mainly between exons 2-27 2 a 1n 3d single exon duplications were mostly located in the central region (51-53)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of DMD gene. In the females however, the carrier status was determined to molecular testing and results reporting. be 27.2%. Interestingly, the DMD mutation was inherited from the mother in Methods: Twenty-seven Duchenne/DMD experts, including molecular/ 63%, 37% were sporadic cases. clinical geneticists, research scientists, and genetic counselors, met in July Conclusion: This is the first well-established deletion/duplication database and November, 2015 to discuss Duchenne/DMD molecular diagnosis and in Turkey. MLPA is a sensitive and useful technology which allows detection reporting. Representatives from 20 diagnostic laboratories also completed of DMD deletions/duplications in affected males and carrier mothers, also a comprehensive survey. offers appropriate genetic counseling in Turkey. Results: Laboratories detect large deletions and duplications (~80% of pathogenic DMD mutations) by one or more methods: multiplex ligation- 
P10 .13 dependent probe amplification (MLPA, 90% of laboratories surveyed), ar- MLPA analysis and clinical profile of DMD patients in Turkish ray comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH, 40%), and next generation population sequencing (NGS, 50%). Few laboratories still use multiplex PCR (mPCR). M. Y. Alp1, A. Yesilyurt1, F. A. Pinarli1, G. Haliloglu2, B. Konuskan2, H. Topaloglu2; 1Dışkapı Yıldırım Beyazıt Research and Training Hospital Genetic Diagnostic Center, All these methods, except mPCR, are sufficient to detect deletions/dupli- Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Division of Pediatric cations in DMD; sequence-level mutation detection requires use of Sanger Neurology, Ankara, Turkey. sequencing or NGS. For molecular therapy-eligible Duchenne/DMD, precise molecular analysis, accurate result interpretation, and clear reporting are essential to inform healthcare professionals. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is the most common muscular di- Discussion: The experts recommend an updated molecular diagnostic algo- sease in children, and one of the most frequent genetic disorder. It has an rithm with tiered testing options to guide the accurate detection of all DMD incidence of 1:3,500 live born males with a prevalence of 6 in 100000 males. mutations and determination of molecular therapy eligibility. MLPA-based DMD is inherited in X-linked recessive manner caused by mutations in dsy- single exon deletion/duplication results must be confirmed by an alterna- trophin gene (DMD) which is the largest human gene encoding dystrophin tive method. If a deletion/duplication is not detected, sequencing is recom- protein. DMD gene located at Xp21, contains 79 exons, spanning 2.4 Mb of a mended. The experts recommend revising best practices for DMD molecular genomic sequence. New therapeutic strategies e.g exon skipping made ge- testing, interpretation, and results reporting due to new developments in netic diagnosis crucial for patients. In Genetic Diagnostic Center of Diskapi molecular diagnostics and therapies in development. Yildirim Beyazit Training and Research Hospital, 238 clinically diagnosed 
P10 .16 male DMD patients were examined by MLPA for detecting deletion or dupli- Genetic and clinical heterogeneity of dystroglycanopathies: cation in DMD gene. 154 patients (64.7%) had abnormal MLPA results, 140 challenging for next-generation sequencing? deletion (58.8%), 14 duplication (5.9%), 84 patients (35.3%) were normal. J. Oliveira1,2, S. Janssens3, A. Gonçalves1,2, E. Vieira1,2, M. E. Oliveira1,2, T. Moreno4, L. Most affected exons were exon 50, 46, and 47, respectively. 66.2 percent of Negrão5, I. Fineza6, M. Sousa7,8, R. Santos1,2,9; MLPA mutations were disrupted readingframe which were candidate of 1Unidade de Genética Molecular, Centro de Genética Médica Dr Jacinto Magalhães, exon skipping. DMD patients were also characterized as follows; mean cur- Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidade Multidisciplinar de Investigação rent age was 8,8 years, mean age at diagnosis was 4.7 years, mean CK levels Biomédica (UMIB), Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Porto, at diagnosis was 11193 U/L. At diagnosis, 30.5% of patients had asympto- Portugal, 3Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Unidade de Neuropediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, matic CK elevation, 69.5% of patients were symptomatic. 11.8 percent of Lisboa, Portugal, 5Consulta de Doenças Neuromusculares, Hospitais da Universidade patients had wheelchair dependency. 29.6 percent of patients had family hi- de Coimbra, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de CoimbraCentro Hospitalar do Porto, story, 57 percent of patients had carrier mother. Statistical analysis revealed Coimbra, Portugal, 6Unidade de Neuropediatria, Centro de Desenvolvimento da Criança that positive family history was significantly associated with normal MLPA Luís Borges, Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de results, and wheelchair dependency was significantly associated with pres- Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Departamento de Microscopia, Laboratório de Biologia ence of exonic deletion and duplication. Celular, Unidade Multidisciplinar de Investigação Biomédica (UMIB), Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 
P10 .14 8Centro de Genética da Reprodução Prof. Alberto Barros, Porto, Portugal, 9UCIBIO/ Molecular diagnosis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy: Best practices REQUIMTE, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de Bioquímica, and guidelines for molecular testing and test results reporting with Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. advent of molecular therapies A. Ferlini1, A. Aartsma-Rus2, M. Bailey3, P. Bayrak-Toydemir4, Y. Chien5, M. Davis6, M. Foncuberta7, F. Giliberto8, I. Ginjaar9, L. Hagerty10, M. Hegde11, E. Izzo3, E. Kimura12, A. Introduction: Dystroglycanopathies, a group of diseases defined by hypogly- Kiselev13, L. Kulikowski14, J. Kwon15, J. Lee16, A. Lindy17, A. Martin18, S. Monges7, C. Müller19, cosylation of alpha-dystroglycan, are classified into three major subtypes: J. Nectoux20, R. Santos21, T. Sejersen22, J. Scull23, H. van Duyvenvoorde9, F. Varfaj3, E. severe congenital muscular dystrophy (MD) with brain and eye anomalies Welch24, S. Yau25, E. Zanotelli26, N. Miller3; (type A), congenital MD with mental retardation (type B) and limb-girdle 1Department of Medical Sciences, Medical Genetics Unit, Università degli Studi di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, MD (type C). Eighteen different genes have been linked to dystroglycano- 3BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Inc., Novato, CA, United States, 4University of Utah School pathies, the majority coding for proteins involved in O-mannosylglycan bio- of Medicine, ARUP Laboratories,, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 5Department synthesis. Recently, defects in the synthesis of dolichol phosphate mannose, of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, initially associated with congenital disorders of glycosylation, was shown to Taiwan, 6PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA, Perth, Australia, 7Hospital Pediatría cause dystroglycanopathy. J.P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 8Hospital de Clinicas José San Martín, Buenos Materials and Methods: Twenty-one patients with suspected dystroglyca- Aires, Argentina, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, nopathy – ranging from severe congenital forms to milder adult-onset MD Leiden, Netherlands, 10Muscular Dystrophy Association, Durham, NC, United States, 11Emory Genetics Laboratory, Decatur, GA, United States, 12Translational Medical Center, – were genetically characterized by Sanger sequencing, using a stepwise National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan, 13D.O.Ott Research Institute approach or homozygosity mapping. MLPA and/or cDNA analysis was per- of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductology,, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation, fFoKrRmPed in four cases. POMGNT1 14Department of Pathology, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 15Departments Results: Eleven distinct pathogenic variants were identifiedP OinM fTo2ur genes: of Neurology, Golisano Children‘s Hospital at Strong Memorial Hospital, University of (5 missense and one baFsKeT-pNair duplication, 16 patients), Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, United States, 16Greenwood Genetic Center, (2 variants affecting splicing and 1 missense, 3 patients), (1 mis- Greenwood, SC, United States, 17Neurogenetics Department, GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, sense variant, 1 patieFnKtR) Pand (1 multiF-eKxRoPnic duplication, 1 patient). United States, 18Duchenne Connect, Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy, Hackensack, NJ, United States, 19Department of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, These comprise four unpublished variants: two missenPsOeM (pG.NTyTr1407Asp and Germany, 20Laboratoire de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Hospital Cochin, Paris, p.Asp360His both in ), one frameshift ( :c.1234dupC) and one ap- France, 21Department of Genetics, Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, CHP, parently silent substitution causing exon skipping ( :c.534G>A/ Porto, Portugal, 22Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Stockholm, Sweden, r.421_534del). 23Medical Genetics Laboratory, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, Conclusions: The expanding clinical and genetic heterogeneity of dystrogly- 24PTC Therapeutics, South Plainfield, NJ, United States, 25Department of Genetics, canopathies could justify the application of comprehensive next-generation Genetics Viapath LL sequencing (NGS) applications such as whole-exome sequencing. Interestin- gly, we found four patients with pathogenic alleles that could be problematic for NGS automated analysis pipeline. Thus, it is essential to employ robust Background/Objectives: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (Duchenne/DMD) analytical algorithms for data analysis and approaches focusing on RNA to is a severe form of muscular dystrophy caused by mutations in the DMD successfully characterize these patients. gene. Molecular testing is essential for an early and accurate diagnosis. Two working groups of international molecular testing experts, organized by B2i1oM4arin, met to evaluate the current state oEf SDuHcGhe n2n0e/1D6M |D B dAiaRgnCoEstLicO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P10 .17 KY Multifactor dimensionality reduction: detection gene-gene interactions in DMD studies tion mutation in the kyphoscoliosis peptidase gene ( ). We investigated a V. C. Sacara; 7.5-year-old girl with walking difficulties from two years of age presented Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. with generalized muscle weakness; mild contractures in the shoulders, hips, and feet; cavus feet; and lordosis but no scoliosis. She had previously been operated with Achilles tendon elongation. Whole-body MRI showed atrophy Epistasis is increasingly assumed to play a crucial role in the architecture and fatty infiltration in the calf muscles. Biopsy of the vastus lateralis mu- of genetics disease. We try to modeling epistasis between 5 genes: dystro- scle showed variability in fiber size, with some internalized nuclei and nu- phin, MTHFR, MTR, MTRR, eNOS in case of the wheelchair dependency- up merous very small fibers with variable expression of developmental myosin to 9or12 years. heavy chain isoforms. Some small fibers showed abnormal sarcomeres w KitYh A retrospective long-term study was carried out in 148 corticosteroids-free thickened Z-discs and abortive nemaline rods. Whole-exome sequencing DMD patients. Gene-gene interactions were analyzed using entropy-based revealed a homozygous one-base deletion (c.1071delG, p.T358fs*3) in , MDR 3.02. predicted to result in a truncated proKteyin. Analysis of an RNA panel revealed The analysis of the hierarchical structure of all components, the best mo- that KY is predominantly expressed in skeletal muscle in humans. A recessi- del in case of 9wch consists of four interconnected clusters. The first clu- ve mutation in the murine ortholog was previously described in a spon- ster is presented independent of the dystrophin deletion from other genes. taneously generated mouse mutant with kyphoscoliosis, which developed The second cluster also integrates with MTRR gene locus independent- postnatally and was caused by dystrophy of postural muscles. We describe ly interconnected clusters combine the two genes clusters: cycle folate the first human case of disease associated with KY inactivation. As in the (MTHFR677,MTHFR1298) and MTR-eNOS (both strong synergy), having mouse model, the affected child showed myopathy and muscle weakness― the effect of interaction between each other- moderate synergy. In group of but in contrast, no kyphoscoliosis. 12wch, we have identified two separate clusters. The first independent clu- 
P10 .20 ster has united the groups of related loci MTHFR1298 and eNOS expressed ANO5 mutations identified in the Polish LGMD patients by whole duplicate the effects of interactions. The second cluster has established a exome sequencing strong synergy between MTHFR677 locus, the dystrophin deletion and J. P. Fichna1, A. Macias2, M. Suszek3, A. Maruszak1, M. J. Rędowicz3, A. M. Kamińska2, C. MTR, in which the activity of dystrophin is depended from MTR. In the cir- Żekanowski1; cular graph was found that the effect of MTHFR677 at 12wch decreasing 1Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, (0.16%), compared with the effect in 9wch(1.78%), also noted the impact Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, of the MTR (0.48) diminishes as compared with the effect of this locus at Poland, 3Department of Biochemistry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Warsaw, 9wch(1.08%). But in the 12wch has increased the impact of MTHFR1298lo- Poland. cus(1.96%) and information gain of pair «MTHFR1298-eNOS»-1.64%. This method can extend the biological reach of pathway-based results The anoctamin-5 belongs to a family of proteins involved in a variety of cel- 
P10 .18 lular functions including chloride ion transport. The precise function oAfN tOh5e Intergenerational instability in Huntington’s disease: insights from anoctamin-5 protein remains largely unknown, however expression pattern mice models suggests its important role in the muscAuNloOs5keletal system. Recessive J. L. Neto1,2, J. Lee1, T. Gillis1, J. R. Guide1, B. Lager3, I. Alonso2,4, V. C. Wheeler1, R. Mouro- gene mutations cause limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) and Miyoshi Pinto1; myopathy (MMD3). Here, we describe mutations found in LGMD pa- 1Center for Human Genetic Research - Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2UnIGENe, IBMC – Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular and i3S – tients in Poland. Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto, Portugal, 3CHDI Foundation Inc, The study group comprised probands representing 82 families with a cli- Princeton, NJ, United States, 4Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), nical diagnosis of LGMD. To find causative mutations and comprehensively Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. analyse genetic background of theA NdiOs5ease we have determined exomic se- quence using Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) method. We have identified eight different mutations, two of them novel, in se- Intergenerational CAG repeat instability is a distinctive feature of ven patiAeNntOs5. Two patients presented compound heterozygoDsiYtyS Fand caCrAriVe3d Huntington’s disease (HD), associated with genetic anticipation. Intergene- mutations that could be considered pathogenic. In three cases known single rational repeat changes are present in patients and mouse models of the known mutations accompany pathogeAnNiOc 5variants in and , disorder. In this work two large breeding datasets of HD knock-in mouse and might only have phenotype modifying effect. In one case another single, models, globally encompassing more than 18,000 repeat transmissions, led although novel and puAtNatOiv5ely pathogenic mutation, was identified us to confirm and gain new insight into factors influencing intergenerational and further investigation of genetic etiology is needed. instability.HttQ80 HttQ92 HttQ111 HttQ140 HttQ175 Our study reveals that mutations in the Polish population have lower The first dataset includes information from 16,000 transmissions across prevalence compared to the Northern Europe, where it is the second most five lines ( , , , , ) and allowed us to determine common cause of LGMD. Additional mutations found apart from the most li- effects of 1) parent-of-origin; 2) sex of offspring and 3) parental CAG repeat kely causative ones might also influence the phenotype. WES can be applied length on the frequency and magnitude of unstable transmissions. Parent as a single genetic test to quickly characterize the comprehensive spectrum of origin, but not the sex of the offspring contributed to intergenerational of genetic variation. instability. We also determined that paternal CAG size affects the frequency The research was supported by the NCN 2013/09/B/NZ4/03258 grant, of expansions and stable transmissions, while not significantly altering the KNOW-MMRC project (JPF) and PL-Grid infrastructure (JPF, bioinformatics). rate of contractions, even though the magnitude of both contractions and 
P10 .21 expansions are affected by CAG length. Importantly, the sizeable dataset re- A novel mutation in the desmin gene (DES) cause an autosomal vealed the presence of large repeat length changes as seen in patients and recessive form of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2R without not previously appreciated in mouse models. clear-cut desminopathy pathology The second dataset is comprised of about 2,000 transmissions from knock- B. Balci-Hayta1, N. Cetin1, H. Gundesli1, P. Korkusuz2, N. Purali3, B. Talim4, E. Tan5, D. in mice belonging to six different background strains (129, CD1, FVB, DBA, Selcen6, S. Erdem-Ozdamar5, P. Dincer1; B6N, B6J), providing insight into effects of genetic background on the fre- 1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Ankara, quency of unstable transmissions independent from parental CAG size ef- Turkey, 2Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology and fects. These results provide novel opportunities to search for CAG instability Embryology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of modifiers through the comparison of genetic variation between different Biophysics, Ankara, Turkey, 4Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of strains. Pediatrics, Pathology Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 5Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology and Neuromuscular Diseases Research Laboratory, Ankara, Funding: SFRH/BD/51705/2011; NIH N
S09206 ; CHDI Foundation Turkey, 6Mayo Clinic, Department of Neurology and Neuromuscular Disease Research 
P10 .19 Laboratory, Rochester, NY, United States. A new early-onset myopathy associated with deficiency in kyphoscoliosis peptidase (KY) C. Hedberg-Oldfors1, N. Darin1, M. Olsson Engman2, A. Oldfors1; Introduction: The autosomal recessive forms of limb girdle muscular dystro- 1University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Blekinge Hospital, Karlskrona, Sweden. phies (LGMD2) are a group of rare genetic disorders that are characterized by progressive muscle weakness of the shoulder and pelvic girdle muscles and include at least 23 different genetic entities. We describe a new congenital myopatEhyS HduGe t2o 0a 1ho6m |o BzyAgoRuCs EloLssO-oNf-fAun, cS-PAMINat e| rWialWs aWnd. ERSesHulGts.:O GRenGome-wide homozygosity mapping was pe2r1fo5r-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index med in a consanguineous LGMD2 family with two affected individuals and (~720), approx. 20% as uncertain (~820) and 3-4% as likely pathogenic or the LGMD2 phenotype was mapped to chromosome 2q35-q36.3. DNA se- pathogenic each (~150 each). quence analysis of the candidate gene DES revealed a homozygous splice Conclusions: At least one likely pathogenic or pathogenic variant was iden- site mutation c.1289-2A>G in the affected family members. IF staining and tified in 180 of the 300 patients suffering from different myopathies (de- WB analysis showed that the expression and the cytoskeletal network for- tection rate: 60%). Furthermore, in almost all 300 patients analyzed by our mation of mutant desmin were preserved in skeletal muscle fibres. Intere- muscle gene panel at least one variant of uncertain significance (class 3) stingly, the affected individuals do not have the classical features of desmi- was detected which could be regarded as potentially associated with the nopathy, neither cardiomyopathy nor the typical histological changes such myopathy. as disruption of myofibrillar organization, aggregation of intracellular pro- 
P10 .24 teins, dislocation/aggregation of membranous organelles. This novel muta- Novel recessive mutations in MYH2 presenting with congenital tion results in addition of 16 amino acids within the tail domain of desmin, ophthalmoplegia and bulbar palsy which has been suggested to interact with lamin B protein. We also detected M. Bertoli1, M. McEntagart2, T. Kerr3, V. Straub1; a specific disruption of desmin-lamin B interaction in the skeletal muscle of 1The John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, MRC Centre for Neuromuscular the patient by confocal laser scanning microscopy. Diseases at Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Medical Genetics, Conclusions: DES mutations should be considered as a cause of LGMD2 wit- St George’s University Hospitals, NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, hout features of myofibrillar myopathy and the inability of mutant desmin to 3Department of Paediatric Neurology, St Georges University Hospitals NHS Foundation interact with lamin B may trigger disease development. This study was sup- Trust, London, United Kingdom. ported by TÜBİTAK, TURKEY (grant numbers: 108
S124  and SBAG-1774). First three authors contributed equally to this study. Hereditary myosin myopathies are a group of clinically heterogeneous mus- 
P10 .22 cle diseases, caused by mutations in the skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain The first case of a genetically proven Maple syrup urine disease in (MyHC) genes. Mutations in the MYH2 gene (Myosin heavy chain IIa) have Bulgaria been associated both with an autosomal dominant and a recessive form of I. Yordanova1, H. Kadam2, T. Todorov1, R. Tincheva2, A. Todorova1; proximal myopathy with ophthalmoplegia (MYPOP). 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Pediatric We describe two sisters, aged 5 1/2 and 3 years, who presented at birth with Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. partial external ophthalmoplegia and inability to swallow, requiring gastro- stomy feeding. The older sister walked by 2 years of age and often complains about leg pain. She had a normal brain MRI and an EMG showed evidence of Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder a bulbar palsy. The younger sister walked before she was 1 year of age. They of branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) metabolism caused by dysfunction of both show mild proximal weakness. They can walk independently up to 5 the multi-enzyme branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) minutes and then need to be carried. They fall frequently and have difficulty complex. BCKDH catalyzes the oxidative decarboxylation of branched-chain climbing stairs. Both sisters share the same compound heterozygous novel alpha-ketoacids produced by transamination of the BCAAs leucine, isoleu- mutations in the MYH2 gene (p.
S294 L and p.Q291H), which were identified cine, valine. Classic MSUD is the most common phenotype, represented in through exome sequencing via the Complementary Analysis Project on con- about 75% of patients, typically manifested as severe neurological impair- genital myopathies within the Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) ment during the neonatal period. Affected infants typically show lethargy, project. weight loss, metabolic derangements and progressive neurologic signs, like Bulbar involvement has been described in autosomal dominant MYH2 myo- alternating hypotonia and hypertonia. MSUD can be caused by mutations in pathies in a patient presenting in his teens with proximal weakness who at least 3 genes: BCKDHA on chromosome 19q13, BCKDHB on chromoso- consecutively developed ophthalmoplegia and swallowing difficulties, and me 6q14, and DBT on chromosome 1p21. Mutations in BCKDHA gene were in a baby presenting with generalised hypotonia and swallowing difficulties associated with approximately 37% of MSUD cases previously described in at birth. Here we describe the first case of an MYH2-related myopathy due to the literature. Direct sequencing of the BCKDHA gene was performed in or- compound heterozygous missense mutations, presenting at birth with bul- der to screen for germline mutations a dizygotic twin pair with MSUD. The bar palsy as the predominant feature rather than weakness. parents are first cousins of Iranian origin. The genetic testing showed one already reported c.452C>T, p.Thr151Met homozygous mutation in only one 
P10 .25 of the twins. Surprisingly, the second one was negative for this mutation. A novel MYH2 mutation in family members presenting with Both parents were heterozygous carriers. The second child is also MSUD congenital myopathy, ophthalmoplegia and facial weakness affected as reported by the clinicians. There is a need for further review of T. Willis1, C. Hedberg-Oldfors2, Z. Alhaswani1, R. Kulshrestha1, C. Sewry1, A. Oldfors2; clinical data and genetic analysis of the rest two genes to clarify the genetic 1Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Hospital, Oswestry, United Kingdom, 2University of cause for MSUD in the second twin. We hypothesize the presence of a second Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. genetic change associated with the same clinical picture of MSUD in a single consanguineous family. Myosin heavy chain (MyHC) is a major structural component of the striated 
P10 .23 muscle contractile apparatus. There are several striated muscle MyHC iso- Analysis of 37 / 65 muscle genes in 300 patients with neuromuscular forms encoded by different genes. In adult human limb skeletal muscle, diseases there are three major MyHC isoforms: MyHC I (slow/beta-cardiac MyHC, N. Pluta, G. Emmert, W. Kress, C. R. Müller, S. Rost; MYH7), is expressed in slow, type 1 muscle fibers; MyHC IIa (MYH2) is ex- Department of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany. pressed in fast, type 2A muscle fibers and MyHC IIx (MYH1) is expressed in fast, type 2B muscle fibers. Some fibers express both MyHC IIa and IIx. The different muscle fiber types differ in their physiological properties. Introduction: Neuromuscular diseases (NMDs) are clinically and geneti- Hereditary myosin myopathies have emerged as an important group of di- cally highly heterogeneous with more than 300 associated genes known to seases with variable clinical and morphological expression depending on date making conventional molecular diagnosis challenging and expensive. the mutated isoform and type and location of the mutation. Myosin myopa- Hence, we designed a targeted gene panel consisting of 37 (version 1) and thy with external ophthalmoplegia is associated with mutations in MYH2 65 (version 2) genes associated with the most common types of muscular and is inherited in both dominant as well as in recessive manner. dystrophies and myopathies. We present a family with myopathy with early onset proximal muscle wea- Methods: A total of 300 patients was analysed using the software Gen- kness, facial muscle involvement and ophthalmoplegia, affecting a woman, searchNGS (PhenoSystems) after target enrichment of the selected muscle her sister and two of her children. The clinical features and inheritance rai- genes and next generation sequencing on a MiSeq desktop sequencer (Illu- sed the suspicion of mitochondrial myopathy with maternal or autosomal mina). About 99% of all coding exons were covered >20x, the overall ave- dominant inheritance. Muscle biopsy demonstrated lack of type 2A muscle rage coverage was >500x. fibers and genetic work up demonstrated that the disease was caused by a Results: After removing recurrent sequencing artefacts and common va- novel recessive MYH2 mutation: c.1009-1G>A resulting in skipping of exon riants (MAF>2%), we detected more than 4000 variants (~1400 different 12, which is predicted to result in a frame shift and introducing at premature ones) in the 300 patients analyzed, which we classified from benign to pa- stop codon at position 347 (p.Ser337LeufsX11). thogenic (class 1-5). Among these were 35% missense, 29% intronic (9-20 bp flanking sequence), 24% synonymous, 7% potential/essential splice, 4% small deletions/insertions and less than 1% nonsense variants. About 70% o2f 1th6e detected variants were classified as benE igS nH (~G 2 22 00 01 ) o6 r | l iB keA lyR bC enE igL nO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P10 .26 CLCN1 variants identified in a large North American cohort of myotonia congenita patients: novel variants and pedigrees with 23 exons. The disease can be inherited either as an autosomal dominant atypical segregation patterns (Thomsen’s myotonia, MIM 160800) or an autosomal recessive (Becker’s J. C. Tarleton; myotonia, recessive generalized myotonia, RGM, MIM 255700) trait. Materi- Fullerton Genetics Lab, Mission Health System, Asheville, NC, United States. als and Methods: We describe three patients from two different healthy con- sanguineous Turkish family with muscle stiffness and easy fatigability. EMG showed myotonic discharges in all the patients and CK levels were slightly Myotonia congenita (MC) is characterized by impaired muscle relaxation increased in patient 1 and 2 and elevated in patient 3. Genetic investigation after contraction presenting as mild to severe muscle stiffness when in- has been performed. itiating movement. Cramping and transitory weakness may occur in some Results: Mutation analyses showed a homozygous p.Leu159Cysfs*11 patients. Stiffness is relieved by repetitive contractions of the muscle, the (c.475delC) mutation in patient 1 and a homozygous p.Y150* (c.450C>A) “warm-up” phenomenon. Mutations in CLCN1, encoding the muscle-specific mutation in patient 2 and 3 in the CLCN1 gene. These mutations have never chloride channel, Cl
C1 , disrupt channel forming homodimers by a variety of been reported before and in silico analyses showed the mutations as disease mechanisms resulting in MC. Over 200 variants are recorded in HGMD. The causing. recessive form (Becker disease, OMIM 255700) is usually associated with Conclusion: The two new CLCN1 variants can be added to the growing data- more severe symptoms than the dominant form (Thomsen disease, OMIM base of MC-associated mutations. Our data expand the spectrum of CLCN1 160800). However, numerous examples are known of CLCN1 variants that mutations and provide insights for genotype-phenotype correlations of segregate as dominant in some families yet as recessive in others. Wide phe- myotonia congenita. notypic variation occurs even among individuals with the same mutation Detailed clinical features of subjects with novel CLCN1 mutations. suggesting reduced penetrance and genetic modifier effects are common. Patient 1 Patient 2 Patient 3 Sex Male Male Male Reported here is the compilation of over 10 years of CLCN1 sequence ana- Age at examination 9 yr 14 yr 18 yr lysis on nearly 500 probands and follow up studies of North American MC (yr) Age at onset (yr) 6 yr 9 yr 10 yr families. Thirty five previously unreported variants were identified. During Family history - brother affected brother affected Consanguinity + + + segregation analysis of some MC families we found carriers of variants pre- Inheritance autosomal recessive autosomal autosomal recessive recessive viously classified as recessive had mild myotonia suggesting semi-dominant Symptom at onset lower limb stiffness lower limb lower limb stiffness and reduced penetrance inheritance. Discussed here are two specific ex- Warm-up + s +tiffness + amples, one from a family segregating a presumed loss-of-function splice Muscle - + - hypertrophy variant and the second from a missense variant. Both have long been classi- Muscle pain + + + Transient + + + fied as recessive. These studies suggest that haplotype insufficiency may so- weakness metimes occur in heterozygotes carrying loss-of-function variants and some Permanent + + + weakness heretofore recessive missense variants have mild dominant-negative effects. Electromyography Myotonic discharges Myotonic Myotonic discharges discharges Mutation in CLCN1 p.Leu159Cysfs*11 p.Y150* p.Y150* (c.450C>A) 
P10 .27 (c.475delC) (c.450C>A) Homozygous Mutation screening of two presumable Myotonia congenita type Homozygous Homozygous Exon/intron of Exon 4 Exon 4 Exon 4 Becker endemic regions in Bulgaria mutations Diagnosis Becker Myotonia Becker Myotonia Becker Myotonia S. Tincheva1,2, B. Georgieva1, A. Todorova1,2, T. Todorov2, I. Litvinenko3, V. Mitev1; 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory 
P10 .30 Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Neurology, University Pediatric Hospital, Nemaline myopathy may be caused by a variety of large copy number Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. variations in NEB detectable with the NM-CGH array K. Kiiski1, V. Lehtokari1, L. Sagath1, C. Wallgren-Pettersson1, K. Pelin1,2; 1The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and The Department of Medical and Clinical Myotonia congenita type Becker is an autosomal recessive nondystrophic Genetics, Medicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Biosciences, skeletal muscle disorder, caused by mutations in the CLCN1 gene, encoding Division of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. skeletal muscle chloride channel-1. The disease is characterized by muscle stiffness and an inability of the muscle to relax after voluntary contraction. It affects primarily the lower limb muscles and later progress to the arms, Our custom designed NM-CGH microarray detects copy number variants neck, and facial muscles. (CNVs) in the currently known ten nemaline myopathy –causing (NM) gNeEnBes Here we report the results from mutation screening of two presumable and one unpublished gene. NM constiNtuEtBes a heterogeneous group of disor- endemic regions for CLCN1 mutations in Bulgaria. Previous studies of our ders among the congenital myopathies. Variants in the nebulin gene ( ) group discovered a large family from Bulgarian origin populating a village are the most frequent cause for NM. consists of 249kb of genomic se- located in the northwest part of the country. The pedigree showed a number quence including 183 exons. Using the NM-CGH array, 315 samples from of Myotonia congenita type Becker affected individuals both in vertical and 230 families have been analysed to date, and NaE pBathogenic CNV has been horizontal direction, all of them caring a homozygous missense substituti- identified altogether in 14% of the studied NM families. These include 15 on p.Tyr524Cys. Endogamous marriages are very unusual for the Bulgarian different large disease-causing aberrations in in 31 different families. population, supposing a high carrier frequency in this subpopulation. Scree- 12 aberrations were identified in only one family each, one aberration in ning of 154 residents of the corresponding region showed a significant car- tNwEoB families, one in three families and one recurrent aberration in 36 fami- rier frequency for the p.Tyr524Cys mutation of about 0.65% (1/154). The lies. The size of the aberrNaEtiBons vary greatly, covering from only a part of one second interesting region in the context of Myotonia congenita type Becker exon (72 bp) to more than half of the gene (133 kb). The recurrent CNV is the southwest part of the country, where we found a large family from Bul- consisting of the 32kb triplicate regiNonE B(TRI), where eight exons are garian Turkish origin. The disease causing missense mutation p.Val273Met normally repeated three times, was shown to contain a CNV in 16% of the was again present in homozygous state. Surprisingly, the genetic testing of NM families and in 6% of thTeP fMam3ilies the TRI CNV was interpreted to newborns from southwest Bulgaria showed an even higher carrier status of be pathogenic. Furthermore, one pathogenic CNV (17-21kb) was also iden- about 2.6% (3/116), disproving our initial hypothesis of endogamous mar- tified in another NM gene, . We are currently updating the NM-CGH riages (traditionally common in this subpopulation) being the cause for the microarray to include a larger variety of myopathy causing genes to allow disease in these patients. for analysis for the patients with NM-related clinical phenotypes. The NM- CGH microarray method is available for mutation analysis in our laboratory. 
P10 .28 
P10 .31 Becker myotonia: novel mutations in patients born to consanguineous A mutation in EPT1 causes neurodevelopmental delay and spastic parents paraplegia: a First report of impaired Kennedy pathway I. Sahin, H. B. Erdem, S. Tasdemir, A. Tatar; A. H. Alkhayat AlShehi1, F. A. Alsalmi1, F. Almurshedi1, A. AlFutaisi1, M. Y. Ahmed2, B. A. Ataturk University Department of Medical Genetics, Erzurum, Turkey. Chioza2, P. Fernandez-Murray3, A. Cazenave-Gassiot4, M. R. Wenk4, M. A. Patton2, D. L. Silver5, E. Baple2, C. R. McMaster3, S. Alzuhaibi1, A. H. Crosby6; 1Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 2University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, Introduction: Myotonia congenital (MC) is an inherited muscle disease 3Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 4National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 5Duke–NUS, Singapore, Singapore, 6University of Exeter, Exter, United characterized by impaired muscle relaxation after contraction, resulting in Kingdom. muscle stiffness, present from childhood. All striated muscle groups may be involved. MC is due to Cl− channel mutations that reduce the stabilizing Cl− conductance and is caused by mutations in the CLCN1 gene. CLCN1 is encE omSH paG e2 s0 31 6 | nB gA eR noC mE icL DO NN AA w, tS PAMINan |y W suWbtyWpe.sE SofH hGer.eOdiRtaGry spastic paraplegia (HSP), a highly hete2ro1g7e- located on chromosome 7q35 and ss 5 kb i i hABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index neous group of neurodegenerative motor neuron disorders, has been asso- W748S). ciated with mutations in genes involved in lipid metabolism. Here, we report Results: We identified several novel and reported non-synonymous patho- a new form of autosomal recessive complex HSP associated with mutation in genic mutations in the POLG1, POLG2 and 
C10 orf2. We also identified seve- the ethanolaminephosphotransferase 1 (EPT1) gene, responsible for the fi- ral synonymous variants and variants in non coding regions. Pathogenicity nal step in Kennedy pathway forming phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) from of novel mutations were assessed based upon (a) absence in 100 normal CDP-ethanolamine. PE is a glycerophospholipid that, together with phos- controls, (b) the mutation causes substitution in conserved amino acid resi- phatidylcholine (PC), constitutes more than half of the total phospholipids dues of the proteins, (c) location in protein regions of structural/functional in eukaryotic cell membranes. We determined that the mutation defined importance, (d) co-segregation of the mutations with the disease phenotype dramatically reduces the enzymatic activity of EPT1, thereby hindering the and (e) mtDNA multiple deletions and/or depletion. Carrier frequency of final step in PE synthesis. Additionally, due to CNS inaccessibility we un- common POLG1 mutations is 0.08% for A467T, 0.20% for W748 and 0.00% dertook quantification of PE levels and species in patient and control blood for G848S in India. samples as an indication of liver PE biosynthesis. Although this revealed Conclusion: Identification of POLG1, POLG2 and 
C10 orf2 mutations is very alteration to levels of specific PE fatty acyl species in patients, overall PE le- important for diagnosis, proper medical management and appropriate ge- vels were broadly unaffected indicating that in blood EPT1 inactivity may be netic counseling. compensated for in part via alternate biochemical pathways. These studies 
P10 .34 define the first human disorder arising due defective CDP-ethanolamine Neutral Lipid Storage Disease with Myopathy: first report of an Italian pathway biosynthesis and provide new insight into the role of Kennedy pa- patient with novel PNPLA2 mutations causing an in frame skipping of thway components in human neurological function. exon 5 This study is supported by funding from the MRC (G1002279, G1001931), S. Missaglia1, M. Mora2, L. Morandi2, D. Cassandrini3, F. M. Santorelli3, L. Maggi2, D. Newlife, The Research Council, Oman (ORG/HSS/09/002), Genome Canada, Tavian1; Genome Atlantic, the Nova Scotia Research Innovation Trust, the Nova Scot- 1Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy, 2Fondazione IRCCS Istituto ia Department of Health and Wellness to CRM, and the Singapore Ministry of Neurologico „Carlo Besta“, Milan, Italy, 3IRCCS Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy. Health’s National Medical Research Council (CBRG/069/2014). 
P10 .32 Neutral Lipid Storage Disease with Myopathy (NLSDM), is a rare autoso- A genotype-first approach to defining a neuromuscular disease A. Rodríguez1, M. Miramar1, S. Izquierdo1, M. Alcaine1, A. Lasierra1, E. Barrio2, J. mal recessive disorder characterized by excessive lipid accumulation into Gonzalez1, J. Capablo1, E. Mayayo1; cytoplasmic lipid droplets present in many tissues, including skin, bone 1H.U.Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain. marrow, heart, liver and muscles. Clinically, NLSDM patients present with skeletal muscle myopathy and sometimes with severe dilated cardiomyo- pathy, hepatomegaly and insulin resistance. NLSDM is caused by a defect in Introduction: Medical genetics typically entails the detailed characterizati- the PNPLA2 gene, which encodes the adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL), an on of a patient’s phenotypes followed by genotyping to discover the respon- enzyme that hydrolyses fatty acids from triacylglycerol. Here we report the sible gene or mutation. The genetic study of polygenic or similar clinical clinical and genetic findings of an Italian patient carrying two novel PNPLA2 manifestations diseases, such as neuromuscular, has historically been diffi- mutations(c.696+4A>G and c.553_565delGTCCCCCTTCTCG). The patient cult, meeting with limited success. This difficulty are progressing to a point presented at the age of 39 years with right upper limb abduction weakness where a reverse strategy may be fruitful in assigning the pathogenic effects progressing slowly over the years with asymmetric involvement of proxi- of many different genes and in determining whether particular genotypes mal muscle in upper and lower limbs. At the age of 53 mild left ventricular manifest as clinically recognizable phenotypes.The aim of this work is to de- diastolic dysfunction was detected. This is the first report of a NLSDM pati- monstrate the diagnostic throwput of a genetic study by massive exome se- ent with a splice site mutation causing an in-frame exon5 PNPLA2 skipping. quencing in order to identify variants associated with congenital myasthe- Molecular analysis revealed that only one type of PNPA
L2  transcript, lacking nia disorders of glycosylation channelopathies and neuromuscular diseases. exon 5, was present in patient’s cells. Such aberrant mRNA should cause the Material and Methods: A 41 years old male patient from neurology comes to production of a ATGL protein able to bind lipid droplets but lacking part of our section of clinical genetics with distal myopathy and clinical diagnosis of catalytic domain. This is a very interesting case displaying severe PNPLA2 dysferlinopathy. He´s never run and jump well. He notices decreased muscle mutations with a clinical presentation ranging from slight cardiac impair- mass in both twins and difficulty walking fast and misalignment of both feet. ment to full expression of a severe asymmetric myopathy. This work was He suffers from spasms in lower extremities to small efforts. After written supported by Telethon grant (GG
P14066 ). The authors acknowledge Euro- consent, peripherical blood sample were send to study dysferlin gene. No BioBank and the Telethon Network of Genetic Biobanks (GTB12001F), for mutation was found. New sample were sent to an external laboratory (Nim- providing biological samples. genetics) and masive exome sequencing were done (199 genes) 
P10 .35 Results: Homozygous pathogenic variant c.7447A>G (p.Lys2483Glu) in Mutation detection in a patient with muscular dystrophy using a next the CO
L6 A3 gene were identified. It´s Bethlem myopathy associated. Both generation sequencing panel parents are carriers. H. A. van Duyvenvoorde1, R. F. M. de Coo2, L. Vijfhuizen1, W. S. Frankhuizen1, I. B. Ginjaar1, Conclusions: With sequencing becoming increasingly cheaper as well as the S. H. B. Bollen1, N. van der Stoep1; preferred frontline diagnostic test, genetics becomes the first step to give 1Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, the clinical diagnosis of neuromuscular diseases. 2Erasmus Medical Center, Department of Child Neurology, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 
P10 .33 Clinical spectrum of mitochondrial diseases associated with POLG1, Introduction: POLG2 and 
C10 orf2 mutations Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy is a clinically and genetically heteroge- A. Paramasivam1, A. K. Meena2, M. S. Uppin2, K. Thangaraj1; 1CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India, 2Department of neous group of muscular dystrophies. Identification of the specific gene de- Neurology, Nizam‘s Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, India. fect can be challenging. Immunohistochemistry testing of muscle biopsies can be helpful to select the confirmatory genetic test. Alternatively, direct testing a LGMD genepanel can help identify the causal gene. We describe Introduction: Mitochondrial diseases are a heterogeneous group of disor- a boy with severe childhood onset of LGMD with increasing and especial- ders caused by genetic defects in mitochondrial DNA or in nuclear genes. ly distal weakness of the muscles. Initial investigation on a muscle biopsy Mutations in nuclear genes POLG1, POLG2 and 
C10 orf2 required to replicate showed moderate reduction of dystrophin and dysferlin. However, no DMD the mitochondrial genome are reported to affect mtDNA stability such as ac- gene mutation was identified. Additional investigations provided no strong cumulation of point mutations, multiple deletions and depletion of mtDNA, indication for a dyspherlinopathy or sarcoglycanopathy. Previously, several and cause progressive mitochondrial disorder. other genes were tested but no causal gene was identified. Therefore we ap- Materials and Methods: we sequenced the exons and intron-exon bounda- plied our NGS approach that evaluates 39 genes known to be responsible for ries of the POLG1, POLG2 and 
C10 orf2 genes from >500 unrelated patients various Limb-Girdle muscular dystrophies and several muscular myopathy with a heterogeneous array of clinical presentations (Myopathy, CPEO, Ata- related diseases. xia, Progressive myoclonus epilepsy, LHON, Neuropathy and ataxia, Leigh Materials en Methods: All coding exons and at least 20 bp of flanking intro- syndrome, Leukodystrophy-atoxia-neuropathy etc.,) and 2400 population nic sequences were enriched by using the Agilent SureSelectXT Inherited Di- samples from various parts of India were also used to determine the carrier sease Panel, followed by sequencing on a Illumina HiSeq2000. Data analysis f2re1q8uencies of common pathogenic mutationsE iSn HPOGL G210 (1p6.A 4| 6B7AT, RG
C84 E8
LSO, NwAa,s S pPeArfoINrm |e dW uWsinWg a. EhoSmHeG-m.OadRe Gpipeline.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.39 LGMD2D intrafamilial clinical heterogeneity caused by alternative Results: High-quality sequence data was obtained. Variant analysis using a splicing of SGCA gene low stringency analysis pipeline revealed a homozygous pathogenic frames- L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, J. Diaz- Manera2, M. Rodriguez3, E. Gallardo4, C. Lleixa2, P. Piñol- hift mutation in exon 6 of the SGCG gene. Jurado5, V. Straub6, A. Topf6, P. Gallano1; Conclusions: Although investigation of a muscle biopsy did not clearly in- 1Genetics Dept. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, U-705 CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, dicate the involvement of sarcoglycans, we identified a homozygous patho- 2Neurology Dept. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Genetics Dept. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 4Neurology Dept. Hospital de la genic SGCG gene mutation, establishing the diagnosis LGMD2C. Indicating Santa Creu i Sant Pau, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 5neurology Dept. Hospital de la Santa that a broad high-quality NGS genepanel can identify the causal mutation, if Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 6John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, muscle biopsy investigation is not conclusive. Newcastle, United Kingdom.  P10
.36 SGCA Impact of PM P22
 duplication on integrins expression in Charcot- Marie-Tooth (CMT1A) transgenic rat model BACKGROUND: Mutations in the gene cause limb girdle muscular dys- M. Jouaud1, L. Richard1, B. Funalot2, F. G. Sturtz1, A. Lia1; trophy type 2D (LGMD2D), a recessive form of muscular dystrophy mainly 1Univ. Limoges, Maintenance myélinique et neuropathies périphériques, EA 6309, affecting proximal muscles. Most individuals present onset in childhood Limoges, France, 2Univ. Paris-Est Créteil, Limoges, France. with a progressive and severe clinical course while others have first sym- ptoms at young/adult age and a mild form of the disease. METHODS: We report a LGMD2D family with three affected siblings. The in- Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the most prevalent hereditary peripheral dex case developed muscle weakness involving paraspinal muscles, showing neuropathy (1/2500). The most common form (CMT1A) is caused by du- a dystrophic pattern in the muscle biopsy, considered as an axial myopathy. plication on Peripheral Myelin Protein 22 (PM P22
), leading to peripheral Her two siblings only had hyperckemia. . Exome sequencing was performed progressive demyelination, associated with sensibility and mobility loss of as part of Myo-Seq project. Sanger sequencing verified the presence of the upper and lower limbs. The role of PM P22
 is currently not well established. variants detected. mRNA isolated from muscle biopsy was analysed and the To better understand its role, Amici et al. (2006) created a Pmp22 knock- level of differenStG tCrAanscripts quantified. out murine model and observed a reduced expression for some integrins. RESULTS: Exome sequencing revealed an intronic deletion located at c.585- These integrins (α6β4 & α6β1) are known to be involved in Schwann cells 31_585-24 of in homozygous state. mRNA showed the presence of differentiation and myelination. In addition, a CMT1A-transgenic rat strain, three different transcripts: 1) The wild type, 2) A transcript with a frames- carrying supplementary copies of the Pmp22 gene, was created by Sereda et hift deletion of exon 6, and 3) A transcript with a cryptic splicing acceptor al. (1996). Our goal was to study in this last model the effect of Pmp22 gene leading to a cDNA including 26 extra amino acids coming from intron 6. We duplication on integrins expression. confirmed a deficiency of alpha-sarcoglycan in the muscle biopsy using IF At various age (from 1 month to 1 year), we studied, on homozygous, he- and WB. The remaining sarcoglycan complex proteins and dystrophin were terozygous and wild-type rats sciatic nerves, PM P22
 and integrins expres- all normal. sion by quantitative Real-Time-PCR, Western-Blotting, immunohistology DISCUSSION: The mild clinical presentation of LGMD2D in this family is at- and electron-microscopy. Our first results show that some of these integrins tributable to the presence of wild type transcript in spite of having a homo- are not expressed appropriately. In homozygous and heterozygous rats, we zygous mutation. The proportion of each transcript can be the key of the observed mislocation of the PM P22
 protein and integrins in the Schwann different degrees of severity between family members. cells. Interestingly, integrins remain collocated with PM P22
 despite its bad  P10
.40 location. The gene expression and quantity of protein are also varying in X-linked spastic paraplegia with dysarthria caused by insertional correlation with animal’s phenotype and nerve pathology. translocation into the Xq26.3 located inverted repeat These experiments show that the Pmp22 overexpression has a potential *. Asan1, T. Thelle2, R. Christensen3, L. Bolund4, A. Gunnarsson3, Z. Quan1, X. Zhang1, J. Li5, role on the Schwann cells differentiation and myelination through interac- P. Qvist4, A. Børglum4, E. Kamsteeg6, J. Hedegaard3, B. Peters7, L. Sunde3, M. Nyegaard4, U. tions with integrins and may explain clinical symptoms of CMT1A patients. Jensen3; 1BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China, 2Regionshospital Viborg, Viborg, Denmark,  P10
.38 3Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, 4Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark, Molecular diagnosis approach based on selection of candidate genes 5Southeast University, Nanjing, China, 6Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Complete by priorization scripts. A case of two affected siblings presenting Genomics, Mountain View, CA, United States. multi-minicore and central core disease respectively. S. Carmona1, C. Sánchez1, J. Lezana1, I. Diez1, C. Torres1, M. Ruíz1, J. López1, S. Franco2, C. Benito2, J. López-Siles1; Background and aim: Spastic paraplegia is a genetically heterogeneous di- 1M.G.C. Genetaq, Málaga, Spain, 2Fetal-Maternal Hospital, Málaga, Spain. sease that can be caused by alterations in one of many loci. We describe a family with X-linked complicated spastic paraplegia with early onset dysar- thria. Mild intellectual disability is described in some patients. Introduction: Multi-minicore (MmD) and central-core (CCD) diseases are Methods: In order to pinpoint candidate gene, we used a combination of lin- two disorders where RYR1 gene plays a crucial role. Most CCD is associated kage analysis, exome sequencing and whole genome sequencing. Linkage with mutations in RYR1 whereas MmD is related with pathogenic variants in analysis showed linkage to a region within Xq26.3 containing 52 genes. As SEPN1 and RYR1. We report a 5-years-old male patient histologically diag- the exome sequencing did not reveal any pathogenic mutations we used the nosed with MmD (patient-1), and his 10-years-old brother diagnosed with Complete Genomics platform to sequence the entire genome of one patient CCD (patient-2). and one healthy male control. RNA-seq of PAX blood, fibroblasts, iPSC and Materials and Methods: TruSight-One sequencing panel (Illumina) was neuroprogenitor cells were quantified. carried out and SEPN1 and RYR1 genes were analysed. The variants were Results: Whole genome sequencing detected an insertional translocation of generated by alignment against reference genome (UCSC hg19) with BWA chromosome 4 material into a palindromic inverted repeat located within aligner and GATK variant caller. Then, three VCF files containing common Xq26. Such translocation has been described before resulting in both XD variants in patients and unique variants were generated using BedTools, hypertrichosis and XR hypertrichosis. XR CMT phenotype has also been de- and a custom priorization script was used to select candidate genes based scribed as well as hypoparathyroidism. To pinpoint the disruption in gene on different phenotype-genotype association databases (Human Phenotype expression, we analysed the expression of the entire transcriptome and Ontology, DisGeNet, HGMD). found that the activity of multiple genes was affected. Results: Two variants of clinical interest in heterozygous state were detect- Conclusion: It is very likely that such insertions changes the topologically ed in RYR1 only in patient-1 (c.6721C>T:p.Arg2241Stop and c.2122G>A:p. associated domains (TADs) and causes a rewiring of the region. However, Asp708Asn). our results also illustrate the difficulties in pinpointing a single candidate As symptoms of patients could not be explained by these results, we de- gene. As we suspect that some of the differentially expressed genes are due cided to search potential causal variants in other candidate genes selected. to normal variation between case and control we will discuss a strategy to A variant of potential interest was detected in TTN in heterozygous state narrow down the number of candidate genes. in both patients (c.59866_59869delAGTG:p.Ser19956LeufsX28). Another variant in TTN canonical splice site in heterozygous state (c.15983-1G>A) was detected in patient-1. Conclusions: These variants in TTN gene do not clearly explain the pheno- type of patient-2, but could justify the clinical features of patient-1. We keep analysing variants in other potentially related genes by exome sequencing using the approach described, as scripEtsS aHreG e a2si0ly1 s6ca |l aBblAe.RCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 219ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.41 Novel truncating mutation is attributed to Spastic Paraplegia-64 M. Noruzinia1,2, O. Bashti1, M. Ahmadvand3, A. Salehi Chaleshtori1; lular matrix which is found around neuronal cell body and dendrites in the 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares central nervous system. PNN is responsible from synaptic stabilization in University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Sarem Cell Research Center (SCRC), Sarem neurons and regulation of plasticity. It also has neuroprotective role against Women’s Hospital, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Department of Hematology and excitotoxicity and oxidative stress. One of the major elements of PNN are Blood Banking, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, hyaluronan and proteoglycan link protein (HAPLN1), tenascin-R (TNR) and Islamic Republic of. aggrecan (ACAN) proteins. Materials/Methods:In order to investigate the effects of HAPLN1, TNR and ACAN during neural differentiation; P C12
 cell line which is derived from the Introduction: Neurodegenerative genetic diseases of motor neuron charac- neural crest lineage and undergo to a neural phenotype when treated with terized by progressive age-dependent defeat of corticospinal motor tract NGF was used as a differentiation model. mRNA, protein expression levels function celebrated as Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSPs). Main features and distribution of PNN were analyzed before and after differentiation (day are axonal degeneration and progressive lower limb spasticity. One of them, 3,5,7). Also neurite length analysis were performed. Spastic Paraplegia-64 (SPG64; OMIM# 615683) is an autosomal recessive Results:Our study demonstrated that HAPLN1 and ACAN expression sho- paradigm, established by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutati- wed an increase at day 7 and the longest neurite were detected at that time ons in the ENTPD1 gene. point (p< 0,05). On the other hand TNR RNA/protein levels remained un- Materials and Methods: A seven years old male with chief compliments of changed. In addition to our results obtained from P C12
 model of neuronal severe neurodevelopmental delay referred to SCRC in order to genetic te- differentiation, we used spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) as a disease model sting. Patient’s Blood collected from antecubital veins, genomic DNA extrac- which is caused by neuritogenesis defects. Using transcriptome analysis, we ted and applied to exome capture, library generation and exome sequencing. identified that extracellular matrix- synapse organization pathways were Then inheritance validation of candidate variants confirmed by the Sanger affected and PNN components showed a significant decrease in SMA fibro- sequencing in all family members. blasts. The results were validated and 2 to 5 fold decrease was detected. Results: A homozygous single base pair deletion in exon 8 of the ENTPD1 Conclusions:In-vitro disease models and mouse models will also provide gene (chr10:9762261delA) that drives a frameshifting and termination of information on PNN dysfunction in the pathogenesis of other neurodegene- the protein two amino acids downstream to codon 383 (p.Asn383ThrfsTer2; rative diseases. TÜBİTAK:114 S914
 ENST00000371207) was detected. No other variant that warrants to be re- ported was detected. This frameshift variation is not reported in both 1000  P10
.44 genomes and ExAC databases. Occurrence of CHCHD10 mutations in Finnish patients with motor Conclusion: This mutation led to NMD, frameshifting and production of neuron disorder truncated protein. This mutation truncate the ENTPD1 protein in its extra- S. Penttilä1, M. Jokela2, A. Saukkonen3, J. Toivanen3, B. Udd1,4,5; cellular domain partially and its helical and cytoplasmic domains entirely. 1Neuromuscular Research Unit, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 2Department of Neurology, Turku University, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Neurology, Central We concluded that this truncated protein is the most logical causative for Hospital of Northern Karelia, Joensuu, Finland, 4University of Helsinki, Folkhälsan explanation of the SPG-64 phenotype in reported patient and this mutation Institute of Genetics and the Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, would be applied in PND and PGD in the family. This study was funded by 5Department of Neurology, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland. SCRC of Sarem women’s hospital.  P10
.42 DYN C1
H1 gene methylation correlates with a severity of spinal Background and aims: Spinal muscular atrophy Jokela type (SMAJ, OMIM muscular atrophy #615048) is a relatively benign form of motor neuron disease. The disease is M. A. Maretina1,2, G. Y. Zheleznyakova3, V. S. Baranov1,2, A. V. Kiselev1; caused by a dominant mutation c.197G>T p.G66V in CHCHD10 that is a foun- 1D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, der mutation in Finland. Other mutations in CHCHD10 have been reported Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian to cause frontotemporal dementia-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS) Federation, 3Karolinska Institute Stockholm, Solna, Sweden. with mitochondrial myopathy and isolated mitochondrial myopathy. Some mutations have been associated with FTD-ALS but their pathogenicity has remained uncertain. We wanted to know if the mutation c.197G>T p.G66V Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) - inherited neuromuscular might cause other phenotypes besides SMAJ. Other aims of the study were to disorder caused by homozygous mutations of SMN1 gene. Respective of find out if there are other mutations of CHCHD10 in Finnish patients and if manifestation and achieved motor milestones SMA is subdivided into four CHCHD10 mutations are frequent among patients with distinct neurogenic clinical types. The number of SMN2 gene copies determines SMA severity. disorders. Involvement of some modifiers in SMA progression including DNA methyla- Methods: Exon 2 of CHCHD10 that harbors all reported mutations was se- tion is also suspected. Our recent genome-wide methylation study revealed quenced in 308 patients. In 103 patients the whole coding region of the gene 40 genes with differentially methylated CpG sites in SMA patients compa- was sequenced. Of the patients included in the study, 208 patients had a red to healthy subjects. DYN C1
H1, SL C23
A2 and CDK2A P1
 genes picked up phenotype compatible with SMAJ, 22 patients had a non-specific neuroge- in our previous study and most probably participating in SMA progression nic disorder, 14 patients had mitochondrial myopathy, and 64 patients had were chosen for the present work. diagnosis of ALS. Material and Methods: Analysis of melting profiles was carried out in 78 Results: The founder mutation was found in 20 patients. All of them were DNA samples from SMA patients with severe type I (40) and mild types III-IV suspected to have SMAJ. No other possibly pathogenic mutations were (38) of disease. High-resolution melting procedure with bisulphite-treated found, and no mutations were found in other patient groups. DNA was used. Methylation level was estimated by interpolating polynomi- Discussion and conclusions: Our results suggest that the CHCHD10 muta- als using values of DNA standards with known percentage of methylation. tion c.197G>T p.G66V is a common mutation in Finland with a prevalence Results: No differences in methylation of 5’-UTR of SL C23
A2 and CDK2A P1
 around 2/100000. The clinical outcome of c.197G>T p.G66V is very restric- as well as exon 41 of DYN C1
H1 were found in the patients with severe and ted to the SMAJ phenotype. mild SMA. Significantly higher methylation of DYN C1
H1 exon 37 was regi-  P10
.45 stered in mildly affected SMA patients compared to SMA type I patients. Genetic risk factors associated with Sporadic Inclusion Body Myositis Conclusion: Exon 37 of DYN C1
H1 lies within CpG-rich region and apparent- M. Johari, M. Arumilli, N. Sandholm, H. Lohi, P. Hackman, B. Udd; ly should be methylated for preventing spurious transcription initiations. Folkhalsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland. Mutations in DYN C1
H1 were shown to be associated with common neuro- muscular diseases, such as ALS and dominant SMA. Feasible involvement of DYN C1
H1 into SMA pathogenesis is suggested. Sporadic Inclusion Body Myositis (s-IBM) is the most frequent disabling  P10
.43 progressive muscle disease of unknown cause in elderly people, onset at 45 Analysis of perineuronal net components in neuronal differentiation years or later, with coexistence of degenerative pathology and inflammatory defects muscle changes. In Finland, the estimated prevalence is 70/million. Because N. Eskici1, S. Erdem-Ozdamar2, D. Dayangac-Erden1; of the dual pathology, different pathogenic mechanisms are considered; one 1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Ankara, suggests that multiple post-translationally modified proteins accumulated Turkey, 2Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of Neurology, Ankara, in the s-IBM aging muscle fibers may be eliciting a T-cell inflammatory reac- Turkey. tion. This abnormal proteostasis and muscle fiber injury could be the result of defects in several different susceptibility genes, making s-IBM a complex 220 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONmAu, lStiPfaActIoNria |l WdisWeasWe. .TEhSe HisoGla.tOioRn Gof Finnish population provides an excel- Introduction:Perineuronal net (PNN) is composed of a specialized extracel-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index lent opportunity to look for possible disease causing associations. By whole cases, usually meaning known mutations in genes compatible with the phe- exome sequencing (WES) followed by association analysis we have found notype. 7,5 % of the cases were suspected to have either a new phenotype genetic variants that have an observed considerably higher frequency in linked to a known disease-causing gene or a completely new phenotype- 30 Finnish s-IBM patients compared to control population. These variants genotype correlation. In 20 % of the cases we could clearly state that no could individually or in combination be associated with higher susceptibi- variations compatible with the patient‘s phenotype were found. In 60 % of lity for the disease. We are currently investigating the effects on these asso- the cases further studies were recommended. ciations with an increased cohort size and wider population. Further, we are We conclude that MYOcap is an effective tool for assigning a genetic dia- going to perform in-silico network and pathway analysis to identify possible gnosis in neuromuscular disorders and can also be used to discover new connections of the identified candidate genes with regard to molecular me- phenotype-genotype correlations. chanisms of muscle homeostasis, autophagy and injury.  P10
.48  P10
.46 Clinical and genetic characterization of the first reported Spanish Systematic analysis of polymorphic tandem repeats through the family with UBQLN2 mutation development of a NGS method B. Quintáns1,2, A. Ordóñez-Ugalde1,3, E. Goberna4, P. Díaz1, S. Züchner5, J. Martínez- L. Corrado1, R. Bordoni2, L. M. Genovese3, E. Mangano2, F. Geraci3, M. Severgnini2, R. Simón4, Á. Carracedo3,6,2, M. J. Sobrido1,6,2; D‘Aurizio3, C. Locci1, F. De Marchi4, L. Mazzini4, A. Brusco5, G. Manzini6, M. Pellegrini3, G. 1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, De Bellis2, S. D‘Alfonso1; Spain, 3USC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4Complejo Hospitalario Torrecárdenas, 1Dept. of Health Science, University of Eastern Piedmont UPO, Novara, Italy, 2Institute Almería, Spain, 5University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States, 6Fundación Pública for Biomedical Technologies (ITB), National Research Council (CNR), Segrate (MI), Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Milan, Italy, 3Institute for Informatics and Telematics (IIT), National Research Council (CNR), Pisa (PI), Pisa, Italy, 4Dept. of Neurology, Ospedale Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy, 5Department of Medical Science, University ofTorino, Italy, Torino, Italy, 6Institute for Informatics and Telematics (IIT), National Research Council (CNR), Pisa (PI), Introduction: Mutations in the UBQLN2 gene are the cause of a diversity of Department of Science and Technological Innovation University of Piemonte Orientale, neurological syndromes: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 15 (AL S15
) with or UPO, Novara, Italy. without frontotemporal dementia (FTD), and spastic paraplegia (HSP). Spa- nish patients with UBQLN2 mutations have not been reported so far. Patients and methods: We studied a large family from Southern Spain in Tandem repeats polymorphisms (TRPs) are extremely common throughout which at least 9 members had a progressive disorder combining upper the genome and represent good candidates for missing hereditability in dif- and, subsequently lower motor neuron manifestations. Clinical data were ferent neurodegenerative diseases for whom the expansion of TRP repre- obtained from 11 individuals in 3 generations. The  C9
orf72 mutation was sents the major disease gene. analyzed by RP-PCR. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was carried out on To date, TRPs analysis is a remarkable challenge using current next gene- the proband. Variants in genes causing HSP, ALS and FTD were prioritized. ration sequencing (NGS) approach and thus they were never systematically Results: The  C9
orf72 expansion was not detected. We identified a previous- analyzed at genome wide level. ly reported pathogenic variant in UBQLN2 (NM_013444.3:c.1516C>T;NP_0 The aim of this study is to implement a pipeline for the TRPs analysis from 11630.15:p. P506
S) segregating with the disease. There was variability in genome-wide NGS data. To this purpose, we successfully implemented a onset age (generally younger in males), initial symptoms (variable combi- new procedure to genotype TRPs, which we applied to a NGS target-rese- nation of upper and lower motor neuron), severity and progression rate quencing panel containing over 10000 TRP loci, including 37 known disea- (generally more severe in men, although one affected woman died at 42). se-causing TRPs. Symptoms of FTD were frequent as disease advanced. Penetrance was com- Fifteen DNA patients affected by nine different neurodegenerative diseases plete in males and incomplete in females (asymptomatic carriers in the sixth and carrying expanded alleles of different lengths/repeat motif have been and eighth decades). sequenced and analyzed together with one CEPH sample with about 9900 Conclusions: UBQLN2 must be ruled out in patients with HSP, even in the known TRPs genotyping. absence of second motor neuron signs. The WES approach is useful for the Our approach correctly determines the allele size of 76% of known geno- diagnosis of clinically heterogeneous disorders. Our data are in agreement types at 63 TR loci in the CEPH sample. Similarly, when considering the ty- with the phenotype previously described in families with this particular mu- ping in known disease-related loci we obtained a consistent genotyping in tation. Genetic counseling is challenging in this X-linked dominant, devasta- almost all cases (98% of 56 genotypes). Even for very large expansions such ting disease. Funding: ISCIII-FIS P S09
/01830. those in c9orf72 and DM, which are indeed not measurable, we identified  P10
.49 those samples carrying a pathological expanded allele. Accordingly, our NGS Activation of the mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt) approach can be applied to discover new disease loci characterized by tan- pathway in  C2
C12  myoblast cell line E. Aksu1, B. Talim2, P. Dincer1, B. Balci-Hayta1; dem repeat expansion. With this aim, we are performing a comprehensive 1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Ankara, genome-wide research of TRPs in all gene regions in a large cohort of ALS Turkey, 2Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Pathology patients with a WGS approach. Unit, Ankara, Turkey. 
P10 .47 Targeted next-generation sequencing as a diagnostic tool in neuromuscular disorders Introduction: The mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt) is S. Lehtinen1, S. Penttilä1, T. Suominen1, B. Udd1,2,3; a mitochondrial stress response pathway that adapts the protein folding 1Neuromuscular Research Center, Tampere University and University Hospital, Tampere, capacity of the organelle to the load of unfolded and misfolded proteins in Finland, 2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of Medical Genetics, normal physiology and disease states. Although the detailed mechanism is Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Neurology, not known, UPRmt mechanism activates transcription of nuclear-encoded Vasa Central Hospital, Vasa, Finland. mitochondrial chaperones and quality control proteases to promote prote- in homeostasis within the organelle. Mitochondrial dysfunction, one of the main causes of muscle degeneration, has been recognized as a key patho- Diagnosing neuromuscular disorders is often very challenging. There is con- logical hallmark of several major neuromuscular disorders. However, the siderable overlap of clinical findings between different disorders. Further- relationship between mitochondrial dysfunction and UPRmt has not been more, the genes expressed in muscles can be large and one gene can cause investigated yet. For this purpose, an in-vitro model of UPRmt was genera- different disorders. ted as a continuously available infrastructure for high-throughput analysis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic power of our new analy- Materials and Methods: UPRmt activation in 
C2 C12
 cells was performed tic tool, MYOcap gene panel. It is a next-generation sequencing (NGS) assay by treating cells with an appropriate non-toxic conditions of antimycin targeted to all exons of all known and predicted myopathy or muscular dys- (100/150µM.), a known inhibitor of mETC complex III, in serum-free media trophy causing genes. at 37°C for 90 minutes. The acquired sequencing data was filtered so that only the variants meeting Results: Antimycin-induced UPRmt activation was reported by the obser- our quality requirements, having a population frequency less than 1 %, and vation of decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and impaired dyna- coverage of at least 20X remained. 40 patients were included in this evalua- mics as detected by Mitotracker Red-CMXRos staining, altered bioenergetic tion study. The patients presented with the clinical phenotype of muscular function of mitochondria by MTT assay, high levels of reactive oxygen spe- dystrophy or myopathy but the genetic background of their disorder had not cies measured by DCFDA assay and increased levels of mitochondrial speci- been resolved despite of thorough investigations. fic chaperone Hsp60 by Western Blot. With MYOcap, we were able to reach aE dSeHfinGit i2ve0 d1i6ag |n oBsAis RinC 1 E2
L,5O %N oAf t,h Se PA CIN on c| lW usiW onW s: . TE hS e H deG v. eO loR pmG ent of an in-vitro model of UPRmt in  C22
C2112 ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P10 .52 Impact of two SMN1 polymorphisms to improve SMA carriers cells will pave the way for identifying the novel genes/proteins involved in diagnosis UPRmt pathway and novel drug targets by screening libraries of small mole- L. Alías1,2, S. Bernal3, E. Martínez3, F. March3, A. Venceslá4, M. Baiget1, E. Tizzano5; cules. This study was supported by TÜBİTAK (Project no:114
S876 ). 1U705-CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genetics Department. Hospital Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Genetics Department. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 
P10 .50 Barcelona, Spain, 4IRBB-Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 5Department of Clinical and Targeted Whole Exome Sequencing analysis allows for identification Molecular Genetics, Hospital Vall d‘Hebron., Barcelona, Spain. of a new case of myoclonus epilepsy and ataxia due to potassium channel mutation (MEAK) R. Szymanczak1, K. Spodar1, A. Wasowska1, M. Kania1, E. Matczynska1, M. Jurkowska1, A. Lasek-Bal2, A. Potulska-Chromik3, A. Kostera-Pruszczyk3, A. M. Boguszewska- Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive Chachulska1; motor neuron disease caused by deletions/mutations in the SMN1 gene. 1Genomed SA, Warsaw, Poland, 2High School of Science, Medical University of Silesia Classical SMA carriers (1/0) with one of their SMN1 copies mutated show in Katowice, Department of Neurology, Katowice, Poland, 3Department of Neurology, a frequency around 1/40 in our population. SMA carriers with two copies Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. of the SMN1 gene in cis have been described. These 2/0 SMA carriers are undistinguishable from non carrier individuals (1/1) by quantitative stu- dies. In the Ashkenazi population, two polymorphisms have been associated Whole Exome Sequencing was performed for a seventeen years old male with two SMN1 copies in the same chromosome: g.27134G>T in intron 7 patient with myoclonic jerks, cerebellar ataxia, slight extrapyramidal signs and g.27706_27707delAT in exon 8. Furthermore, these alleles are more with epileptiform pattern in EEG. frequent in Africans in which the presence of chromosomes with two SMN1 The patient’s intellect was normal, he had neither obvious dysmorphic fea- copies is higher. Material: We analyzed these markers in 368 Spanish in- tures nor congenital anomalies. CNS imaging and extensive biochemical ex- dividuals including SMA patients with SMN2-SMN1 hybrid genes, 1/0 car- aminations reveaCleSdT Bno apparent abnormalities. riers, controls and individuals with more than one SMN1 copy in cis. Me- Previous genetic testing of SCA1,2,3, Friedreich ataxia and for a dynamic thods: Sanger sequencing from the exon 7 to 8 of the SMN1 gene. Results: mutation in the gene, associated with Unverricht-Lundborg disease, Both SNP’s are more frequently detected in chromosomes with two SMN1 gave normal results. copies in cis in comparison with chromosomes carrying one copy. The A whole exome sequencing was performed in our laboratory and targeted g.27706_27707delAT was more frequent in SMN2-SMN1 hybrids than in exome sequencing data analysis has been carried out to identify pathoge- wild type SMN1 genes (16.7 versus 1.3%, p<0.05). Conclusion: The impact nic mutations in almost 400 genes associated with: progressive myoclonus of these polymorphisms depends on the population studied. In our Spanish epilepsy, spastic paraplegia, ataxia and extrapyramidal signs, and in the mi- population, they are less valuable to predict putative 2/0 carriers and their tochondrial genome. KCN
C1  absence does not exclude the existence of two SMN1 in cis. The high fre- A newly described, recurrent, pathogenic mutation c.959G>A, p.(Arg320His) quency of g.27706_27707delAT in hybrids genes suggest that chromosomal was identified in one allele of the gene, which can be considered, with rearrangements are prone to occur in presence of this polymorphism. a high probability, tod eb ne otvhoe. main cause of clinical symptoms observed. The carrier status analysis performed in Patients’ parents demonstrated that the 
P11  Multiple Malformation/anomalies mutation occurred No pathogenic mutations or potentially patho- syndromes genic variants, which could be responsible for the Patient’s clinical picture as a whole, have been identified in the other analysed geetn aels.. The result of the analysis support the diagnosis of progressive myoclonus epilepsy type 7, described in the publication of Muona (2015) as myo- 
P11 .001 clonus epilepsy and ataxia due to potassium channel mutation (MEAK). Tissue-specific mosaicism of partial 13q monosomy identified in Recently performed targeted neurological examination seems to confirm fibroblasts of the patient with mild intellectual disability, dysmorphic the MEAK diagnosis. features and skin lesions K. Ziemkiewicz, M. Smyk, K. Jakubów-Durska, A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak, B. A. 
P10 .51 Nowakowska; Clinical, molecular and histopathological findings in a girl with Xq28 Dep of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. duplication resulting in X-linked myotubular myopathy K. Kosma1, M. Tzetis1, A. Mitrakos1, M. Braoudaki1, C. Sofocleous1, A. Xaidara2, G. Papadimas3, A. Tsezou4, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1; Introduction: The severity of symptoms in 13q monosomy may vary greatly, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2First Pediatric depending upon the size and location of the deletion and degree of mo- Department, University of Athens, Aghia Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Neurology, University of Athens, Aeginition, Athens, Greece, 4Laboratory saicism. Large deletions are generally associated with growth delay, mostly of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece. severe or moderate mental retardation, defects of the hands and feet, ocu- lar abnormalities, and other major malformations. We describe a girl dia- gnosed at the age of t2h years 10 months with psychomotor and speech delay, X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a rare inherited neuromuscular clinodactyly of the 5 finger, big hands and feet and very light iris. At the age disorder, clinically characterized by severe hypotonia, respiratory failure of 5 karyotype was performed due to clinical features: linear and whirled and skeletal muscle weakness, typical of congenital myopathies, as well as hypochromic skin lesions, abnormal iris pigmentation and hair texture. At abundant central nuclei as the most prominent histopathological feature on the age of 6 years patient presented mild intellectual disability and subtle muscle biopsy, thus being grouped in the genetically heterogeneous group dysmorphic features. of Centronuclear Myopathies (CNMs). XLMTM is associated with mutations Materials and Methods: aCGH analysis was performed using CytoSure ISCA, and CNVs in the Xq28 chromosomal region, that contains the MTM1 gene. OGT and chromosome lymphocytes and fibroblasts analysis by G-banding Here we report a case of a severely affected girl with XLMTM, caused by techniques. a maternally inherited duplication in the Xq28 region, identified by high Results: In the aCGH analysis no abnormality was found. GTG banding of me- resolution aCGH analysis, utilizing the 4x180k aCGH+SNP platform from taphases from skin fibroblasts showed the 13q deletion in 38 % of cells. The Agilent Technologies. Furthermore, we studied the methylation profile to karyotype was: mos 46,XX,del(13)(q12.1)[16]/46,XX[26]. In chromosome determine the X-inactivation pattern that led to the disease and conducted analysis of 600 blood lymphocytes metaphases only one abnormal cell with histopathological examination on tissue from muscle biopsy that confirmed deletion 13q was detected. the diagnosis of XLMTM. A full clinical examination was also performed. Conclusions: Patients with tissue-specific mosaicism may develop much less DNA microarray analysis of the peripheral blood sample and muscle biopsy severe phenotype despite large size of 13q deletion. Karyotyping of skin, of the proband and her mother revealed a 661kb microduplication in the to detect mosaicism is warranted in all patients presenting with hypo/hy- Xq28 region, containing the MAMLD1, MTM1, MTMR1 and CD99
L2  genes. perpigmentary changes and/or eyes and hair abnormalities regardless of The muscle biopsy revealed histopathological changes usually observed in normal peripheral blood aCGH result. centronuclear myopathies. To our knowledge this is the first report of a girl This work was granted from Ministry of Science and Higher Education with XLMTM caused by Xq28 microduplication. This case report adds to the (3942/E-215/S/2014 to BAN). knowledge on centronuclear myopathies underlying the necessity of tho- rough genetic testing in the investigation of rare genetic syndromes. 222 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .002 
P11 .004 Three cases of unusual chromosomal rearrangements involving the Partial trisomy 22q12.1 and monosomy 13q12.1 in a child due to chromosome 22q11.2 region maternal t(13;22)(q12.1;q12.1) V. Cejnova1, V. Harmas1, L. Liskova1, M. Tothova2, P. Hedvicakova3, A. Klimova1, M. S. Altıner1, N. Kutlay1, T. Tos2, T. Tuncalı1; Soukupova1, J. Lastuvkova1; 1Department of Medical Genetics,School of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey, 1Regional Health Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem, Department of 2Department of Medical Genetics,Dr. Sami Ulus Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Medical Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic, 2GENVIA, Prague, Czech Republic, Ankara, Turkey. 3Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. Introduction: 22q11.2 microduplication is a well-defined syndrome and its phenotype is variable form mild intellectual disability to severe congenital Chromosome 22q11.21 contains a cluster of low-copy repeats (LCRs), re- malformations. Recently, deletion of proximal arm of the 13q is also repor- ferred to as LCR22A-H, that mediate meiotic non-allelic homologous recom- ted in the literature. Here we report a family with different derivate chro- bination, resulting in either deletion or duplication of various intervals in mosomes over a 4.5 year-old female patient referred to our department for the region. The deletion of the DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome interval suspected chromosome breakage syndromes with partial trisomy 22q12.1 LCR22A-D is the most common recurrent microdeletion in humans, with an and monosomy 13q12.1 originated from maternal t(13;22)(q12.1;q12.1). estimated incidence of 1: 4,000 births. Although both deletion and dupli- Material and Methods: Conventional cytogenetics and FISH analyses were cation events should occur in equal proportions, microduplications of the performed in all family members using standart methodology. Chromoso- 22q11.2 region are about half as frequent as microdeletions. Probably, mi- mal breakage (DEB) test was performed in index case. Karyotypes were croduplications are underdiagnosed by karyotype analysis and FISH. then reported according to the ISCN 2013. We present clinical, cytogenetic and molecular analysis of three cases in- Results: Karyotypes of the mother, the index case (DEB test: result) volving the 22q11.2 region. In the first case, we report prenatal diagno- and the male sibling were determined as follows: 46,XX,t(13;22) sis of a 2.6 Mb deletion in the 22q11.2 region and a 1.7 Mb duplication in (q12~13;q11~12), 46,XX,der(22)t(13;22)(q12~13;q11~12) the 16p13.11 region by array CGH in a fetus with congenital heart defect. (DEB test: negative) 46,XY,der(13)t(13;22)(q12~13;q11~12). 16p13.11 microduplication syndrome is a recently described syndrome as- Conclusion: Index case had the findings of both the partial trisomy of sociated with variable clinical features including behavioral abnormalities, 22q12.1 and the monosomy of 13q12.1 in which severe skeletal malfor- developmental delay, congenital heart defects and skeletal anomalies. In mations, hirsutismus and eventration of diaphrapma were due to the latter the second case, array CGH showed a 156 kb interstitial microdeletion of chromosomal aberration. We suggest a possible role of haploinsufficency of 22q11.21 in a pregnant women with complex congenital heart disease. The a gene, FGF9, located at 13q11-12 for the causality. microdeletion affected ten genes, including CRKL, which is considered a can- didate critical gene for the ‘central‘ deletions in 22q11.2. In the third case, 
P11 .005 we detected prenatally a 22q11.2 microduplication of seven probes (HIRA, Clinical and molecular cytogenetic characterization of four unrelated CLDN5, KIAA1652, KLH
L22 , PCQAP, SNA
P29  and LZTR1) using MLPA. patients carrying 2p14p15 microdeletions M. Mathieu1, C. Demily2, S. Chantot-Bastaraud3, A. Afenjar3, C. Mignot4, J. Andrieux5, M. All findings were confirmed by FISH and we also investigated parents in or- Gerard6, J. Catala-Mora7, P. Jouk8, A. Labalme1, P. Edery1,9, D. Sanlaville1,9, M. Rossi1,9; der to determine the parental origin of chromosomal rearrangements. 1Centre de référence des anomalies du développement, Service de génétique, Hospices 
P11 .003 Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 2Centre de dépistage et prises en charge des troubles psychiatriques d’origine génétique, CH Le Vinatier, Bron, France, 3Centre de référence Cytogenomic delineation of Brazilian patients with 22q11.2 deletion des malformations et maladies congénitales du cervelet, Service de génétique, Hôpital syndrome associated autoimmune heterogeneous phenotype Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, AP- C. Milani1, F. A. R. Madia1, T. V. M. M. Costa1, J. G. Damasceno1, E. A. Zanardo1, A. T. Dias1, HP, Paris, France, 5Institut de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU M. M. Montenegro1, G. M. Novo-Filho1, F. B. Piazzon1, A. M. Nascimento1, M. Rocha2, D. C. de Lille, Lille, France, 6Service de génétique, Hôpital Clémenceau, CHU de Caen, Caen, Soares3, M. S. Grassi3, A. F. L. Carvalho4, D. Bertola3, M. I. Melaragno5, C. A. Kim3, M. M. S. France, 7Oftalmología Infantil, Hospital el Pilar, Barcelona, Spain, 8Centre de référence Carneiro-Sampaio3, L. D. Kulikowski1,2,3; des anomalies du développement, Service de Génétique, Hôpital Couple-Enfant, CHU de 1Faculdade de Medicina da USP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Centro de Reprodução Humana e Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 9INSERM U1028 CNRS UMR 5292, UCBL, CRNL, GENDEV Genética, Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Santo Andre, Brazil, 3Unidade de Genética, Team, Bron, France. Departamento de Pediatria, Instituto da Criança, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 4Departamento de Biologia Geral, Laboratorio de Genetica Humana e Mutagenese, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil, 5Departamento de Morfologia e Genetica da Escola Paulista de Medicina, UNIFESP, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Chromosomal Microarray (CMA) is a first-tier test in the diagnostic work- out assessment of multiple congenital abnormalities/intellectual disabili- ty (MCA/ID) syndromes, detecting pathogenic copy number variations in The 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome phenotype is very heterogeneous with va- 15-20% of patients. CMA has allowed the characterization of an increasing riable expression of the different features including the immunodeficiency. number of syndromes, named after their underlying chromosomal unba- The clinical evidence suggests that the immunodeficiency can be seen in lance. Even if microdeletions caused by allelic non-homogeneous recombi- most of the patients with this alteration and the immunological phenotype nation of repeated duplicons in flanking regions generally have a relatively may vary widely between the patients and the deletion size does not appear homogeneous size, their clinical phenotype can show variable expressivity, to be responsible for this variation. Thus new insights into pathophysiolo- making the prognosis evaluation difficult. It is even more challenging, for gy are important for a better assessment and targeting treatment for the clinical geneticists, to evaluate the prognosis of patients carrying “unique” patients. non-recurrent deletions: the information available in the literature is often Cytogenomic alterations in 22q region were investigated using MLPA and very poor, mostly concerning only partially overlapping microdeletions. SNP-array (HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip and CytoSNP-850K BeadChip) to 2p14p15 microdeletions can be considered as a typical example of the latter map the presence of Copy Number Variations (CNVs) and Loss of Heterozy- group of chromosomal abnormalities. Only three patients have been repor- gosity (LOH) in 31 Brazilian patients with a spectrum of 22q11.2 phenotypic ted to date, showing ID and dysmorphisms. We report the clinical and mole- manifestations. cular cytogenetic characterization of four further ID/MCA patients from We identified different sizes of genomic alterations in the 22q region. In a France and Spain carrying 2p14p15 microdeletions. The present study and cohort of 31 patients (32% males and 68% females) we found 14 deletions a review of the literature showed AthCaTtR 32/7 paStPieRnEtsD 2had sensorineural hea- and 14 duplications, and 7 patients with loss of heterozygosity including ring loss. No deafness-causing gene has been reported so far in 2p14. Here genes associated with lupus erythematosus, polyarthritis, psoriasis, rheu- we discuss the possible role of the and genes in the observed matoid arthritis, sepsis, bronchitis and pneumonia. Hypoparathyroidism, hearing loss. Significant ophthalmological involvement was noted, including cardiac abnormalities as well as developmental delay and psychiatric dis- glaucoma and rod degeneration. One patient developed a progressive car- orders were the other features related to some pathogenic CNV showed in diomyopathy, suggesting that a cardiac follow-up should be systematically these patients. warranted, even in the absence of congenital heart disease. Cytogenomic investigation permitted a better chromosome breakpoint de- In conclusion, our study contributes significantly to delineate the phenoty- finition and the identification of deletion and duplication syndromes in 22q pic spectrum of 2p14p15 microdeletions. region enabling a biological interpretation of the immunologic abnormali- ties. Grants: FAPESP: 14/50489-9, CNPq 09/53105-9 and FINEP-CT INFRA 0160/12 S
P8  ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 223ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .006 Mild intellectual disability, congenital heart defect and skeletal abnormalities in three patients with 4q13.3 microdeletion and prenatally diagnosed congenital heart defect (ASD, VSD, left ventricle E. Preikšaitienė, Ž. Maldžienė, B. Aleksiūnienė, V. Kučinskas; hypoplasia). First routine karyotype analysis (GTG-banding) revealed a nor- Dept. Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, mal male karyotype. Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA, HumanCytoS- Lithuania. NP-12 BeadChip, Illumina Inc.) revealed a ~8.3 Mb duplication of 5q35.1- qter. To localize the extra copy, FISH analysis was done with Kreatech hTERT/NSD1 and 5p/5q subtelomeric probes. Surprisingly, two additional Many patients have genomic alterations that are described in only few indi- signals of NSD1 and 5qter were seen, located on a small additional marker viduals and evaluation of clinical significance of these chromosomal altera- chromosome, which was present in ~10% of metaphases (all of them were tions is very challenging. Nevertheless detection of novel pathogenic copy of bad band quality and so escaped in first analysis), and in 50% of inter- number variants and delineation of novel genomic disorders is an important phase nuclei. part of genomic studies. The mosaic tetrasomy due to the presence of der(5q) marker-chromosome We report on three affected individuals in a family, a mother and her two in ~50% of cells results in a typical duplication picture seen in CMA as well daughters, 9 and 15 years of age, with mild intellectual disability, minor fa- as in clinical features typical for 5q35 duplication. More severe clinical pic- cial anomalies, congenital heart defect, short stature, broad chest, and sco- ture compared to common 5q35 duplication can be explained by encompas- liosis. The mother and her older daughter additionally had microcepahly sing NK2 (cardiac development) and MSX2 (limb and bone development) and delayed puberty. genes. Submicroscopic chromosomal alterations were screened by whole-genome 
P11 .009 genotyping analysis using the HumanCytoSNP-12v2.1 BeadChips (Illumina Molecular mechanisms of reciprocal rearrangements at 7q11.23 Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) and revealed 4q13.3 microdeletion, 1.5 Mb in size. R. Corominas1,2,3, G. Palacios-Verdú1,2,3, N. Rivera-Brugués1, R. Flores1,2,3, D. Pérez- FISH analysis using R
P11 -373J21 probe overlapping part of ADAMT
S3  gene García1,2,3, G. Aznar4, I. Cuscó1,2,3, C. A. Morris5, C. B. Mervis6, L. R. Osborne7, L. A. Pérez- confirmed the deletion in all three affected individuals. This novel chromo- Jurado1,2,3; somal alteration involves GC, NPFFR2, ADAMT
S3 , COX18 and ANKRD17 ge- 1Genetics Unit, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital del Mar Research nes. ADAMT
S3  gene is highly expressed in specific regions of the developing Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de mouse brain and in connective tissues such as bone and tendon. Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 4Pediatric Neurology, Hospital This clinical report provides clinical and molecular characterization of pre- del Mar, Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain, 5Department of Pediatrics, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Las Vegas, NV, United States, 6Department of Psychological viously unreported 4q13.3 microdeletion. ADAMT
S3  gene might be a can- and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States, 7Departments of didate gene for intellectual disability and other clinical features, including Medicine and Molecular Genetics and Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, short stature. Detailed clinical examination of additional patients with a Toronto, ON, Canada. similar microdeletion is needed for further delineation of this clinically re- cognizable syndrome. The work was funded by the Lithuanian-Swiss cooperation programme to Introduction reduce economic and social disparities within the enlarged European Union Williams-Beuren (WBS) and 7q11.23 microduplication (7DUP) syndromes under project agreement No.CH-3-ŠMM-01/04, UNIGENE project. are two neurodevelopmental disorders caused by reciprocal rearrange- 
P11 .007 ments at 7q11.23, either deletions (WBS) or duplications (7DUP). These Distal 4q partial trisomy vs. distal 10q monosomy - report of a family recurrent rearrangements are generated by non-allelic homologous recom- with a t(4;10)(q31.3;q24) bination (NAHR) between flanking segmental duplications (SDs). G. A. Motei, D. Ozunu, V. Plaiasu; Methods Mother and Child Care Institute „Prof. Dr. Alfred Rusescu“, Bucharest, Romania. By dosage analyses of site-specific nucleotides or cis-morphisms, single and multiple-copy microsatellites in trios, we have investigated the extension and parental origin of the rearrangements in 720 WBS and 99 7DUP pa- Distal trisomy 4q and distal monosomy of 10q are rare, complex syndromes tients and evaluated the presence of susceptibility factors in transmitting of intellectual disability, developmental and behavioral problems and di- parents. By haplotype cloning and RT-PCR, we have characterized the junc- stinctive facial features. The severity of the condition and the signs and sym- tion fragments at sequence level in a subset. ptoms depend on the size and location of the duplication and/or deletion Results and which genes are involved. Although some cases occur sporadically, most Deletion events were all de novo, while duplications were mostly de novo are inherited from a parent with a balanced translocation. Individual cases (88%) and also inherited (12%). The type and size of the rearrangement of trisomy 4q31.3 and deletions of 10q24 are rare and have been previously was similarly distributed in del/dup cases: 1.55Mb (86%/89%), 1.83Mb reported in the literature, with variable clinical manifestations. (12%/7.5%) and atypical (2%/3.5%). No differences were observed in the We report the case of a boy with partial trisomy for the distal part of the parental origin. Disrupted alleles were mediated by inter-chromosomal long arm of chromosome 4 (4q31.3-->qter) and a concomitant monosomy NAHR in 7q11.23 paracentric inversion carriers in 20%/30% (del/dup) of 10(10q24-->qter). The patient presented with hydrocephaly, craniofacial cases. Rearranged chromosomes resulted in different copy number of the dysmorphism, cryptorhidism and axial hypotonia. The chromosomal ab- NCF1 gene, and the generation of chimeric GTF2IRD2 transcripts in a sub- normalities resulted from a paternal balanced translocation involving chro- set of probands. We further defined a 1.4Kb hotspot for intrachromosomal mosomes 4 and 10. The inheritance and identity of the translocation was NAHR of paternal origin within intron 19 of GTF2I and characterized two ascertained by extensive familial cytogenetic and FISH studies. additional hotspots for reciprocal inversion-mediated events at intron 2 of To our knowledge, this report is the first to describe a translocation that GTF2IRD2. rAecskunlotewdl eidng tmhee nctosm: Tbhinisa wtioornk o wf amso snuopspoomrtye d1 b0yq 2O4b jaenctdi vter i3so.3m oyf R4oqm31a.n3i acno eMxii-- Conclusions sntiisntrgy i nof t hheea slathm Per iongdriavmid uVaI la.nd by PN-II-PT-PCCA-2013-4-133 grant Rearrangements causing WBS and 7DUP are the result of reciprocal NAHR events between SDs at 7q11.23. A few hotspots for positional preference of recombination can be identified within SDs. Grant Support: CONV.Nº52 
P11 .008 Mosaic de novo tetrasomy of 5q35 in a newborn with typical features 
P11 .010 of 5q35 duplication syndrome and heart defect 9p13.3 Interstitial deletion - a new syndrome? K. Kuuse1, P. Tammur1, P. Ilisson1, T. Ilus1, M. Jürgenson1, O. Žilina1,2, K. Muru1; S. I. Ferreira1, I. M. Carreira1,2,3, M. Pinto1, L. Ramos4, J. B. Melo1,2,3; 1Tartu University Hospital, United Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Tartu, Estonia, 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de 2Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2CIMAGO – Centro de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Genética e Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CNC-IBILI, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. Recently described 5q35 microduplication reciprocal to the common Sotos syndrome deletion (~2 Mb) is associated with microcephaly, short stature, developmental delay and delayed bone maturation. The clinical picture is The 9p deletion syndrome is a clinically characterized syndrome, presen- largely opposite to that of Sotos syndrome (macrocephaly, overgrowth and ting as a cytogenetically heterogeneous condition with variable deletion advanced bone age). The dosage effect of NSD1 (5q35) is suggested to be the sizes. In contrast, 9p interstitial deletions have only been described in five cause of the main clinical problems. patients. Two patients were characterized by conventional cytogenetics and W2e2 4report a dysmorphic newborn with IUGR,E mSiHcroGc e2p0ha1ly6, s|h BorAt RstCatEurLeO, NhAa,v eS PlaArgIeNr d| eWletWionWs i.nEvSoHlviGng. ObaRnGds 9p12p13, and the other three wereABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index characterized by array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization and have only Materials and Methods: We describe two sibs with mental retardation, ab- band 9p13 deleted. sence of speech, and typical facial dysmorphism. The family members were We report a 12 year old male presenting with developmental delay, atten- screened by MS-MLPA probemix M
E028 -B2 Prader-Willi/Angelman for tion deficit hyperactivity disorder, social personality, short stature, hands copy number variations and assessment of methylation profile. Both child- tremor, bruxism and facial dysmorphisms that was studied by Agilent 180K ren MS-MLPA profiles were compared with their parents and 3 normal con- oligonucleotide array-CGH. Array-CGH revealed a 2.8Mb de novo interstitial trols. deletion at chromosome 9p21.1p13.3(33,100,287-35,911,318 bp)[hg19], Results: The test for methylation revealed missing SNRPN methylation spe- overlapping the previously described patients. cific fragments in the patients profile in comparison to their parents and The reported patient presents the smallest 9p13 interstitial deletion as it normal controls, which is compatible with paternal non-methylated frag- only includes sub-band 9p13.3, besides 100Kb from band 9p21.1, while the ments and deleted or wrong methylated maternal fragments. The copy previous described patients have larger deletions including band 9p13. The number test did not show deletion of the SNRPN specific fragments, but two patients share a 2.1Mb commonly deleted region that includes 65 genes, 34 other fragments, corresponding to AS-SRO region (part of the PWS-AS im- described in OMIM and 11 in Morbid Map. One of those genes is NPR2, with printing center) were deleted. The deletion was detected in both affected heterozygous mutations associated with short stature without a distinct children and it was inherited from the asymptomatic mother. clinical phenotype, suggesting that haploinsufficiency of the gene contribu- Conclusion: The missing SNRPN methylation specific fragments correspond tes to short stature, a feature reported in the four patients characterized by to wrong methylation (demethylation) on the maternal allele due to deleti- array-CGH. on of the PWS-AS imprinting center. This mistake in the methylation profile These patients share a particular association of clinical features such as in both affected children affects maternal copy, while in the asymptomatic developmental delay, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, social perso- mother most probably the deletion affects the paternal copy, hence non- nality, short stature, hands tremor, bruxism and facial dysmorphisms that pathogenic. suggest that 9p13.3 deletion might be a new syndrome. 
P11 .013 
P11 .011 A de novo Ser to Thr change of a conserved phosphorylation site in Balanced X-autosome translocation suggests association between aquaporin-4 was found in a man with ID, short stature, deafness and AMMECR1 and growth, bone and heart alterations progressive spastic gait disturbance M. Moyses-Oliveira1,2, R. J. Fish3, G. Giannuzzi2, V. A. Meloni1, C. O. Gigek1, J. M. Cerutti1, S. Berland, G. Houge, III; A. Di Battista1, T. Liehr4, N. Kozyakova4, G. Carvalheira1, M. Neerman-Arbez3, M. I. Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. Melaragno1, A. Reymond2; 1Genetics Division, Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Aquaporin-4, encoded by AQ
P4 , is the predominant water channel in the Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Jena brain with importance for the blood-brain barrier, water and electrolyte ba- University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany. lance, and edema formation and clearance. In an adult with mild/moderate ID, sensorineural hearing loss, ataxia, tre- mor and progressive spasticity, a de novo missense variant was found in Female balanced X-autosome translocations are usually associated with ab- AQ
P4  (NM_001650.4) c.332G>C, p.(Ser111Thr). Pregnancy and birth had sence of functional copies of the gene mapping at the breakpoint through been normal, but shortly thereafter he developed heart failure associated disruption of the derivative-chromosome copy and inactivation of the with a cardiomyopathy that later resolved. Neonatal EEG and CT indicated normal X-chromosome. We report on a nine year-old girl with karyotype brain ischemic injury, but that also resolved. He had delayed motor and 46,X,t(X;9)(q23;q12)dn, disproportionate short stature (<1st centile), sep- speech development but normal social skills and behavior. A recent cerebral tal atrial defect, scoliosis, bone dysplasia, and normal cognition. Array-CGH MRI showed large ventricles and atrophic changes in the lentiform nucleus. and breakpoint sequencing confirmed the full complement of genetic ma- He is short (L 8 cm < 2.5 p) with a large head (HC 60 cm) and mild facial dys- terial, whereas replication banding showed preferential inactivation of the morphism. Even though no other similar cases have been found, his clinical normal X-chromosome. The autosomal breakpoint affects a heterochroma- picture is judged to be compatible with an aquaporin dysfunction. tic region while the X-chromosomal breakpoint was mapped between the The 
S111 T change affects a highy conserved phosphorylation site in a short AMMECR1 and RGAG1 genes. Whereas expression of the latter was unmodi- cytoplasmic loop between transmembrane domain 2 and 3 of AQ
P4 , found fied, RT-qPCR indicated absence of AMMECR1 expression in the blood and necessary for channel activation but not regulation of of water permeabi- lymphoblastoid cells of the patient. The encoded AMMECR1 protein, which lity. Possibly, the change from a serine to a threonine phosphorylation site is evolutionary conserved in prokaryotes and eukaryotes including bacte- affects phosphorylation dynamics in a way that disturbes channel fine-re- ria, archea, yeast and mammals, localizes to the nucleus in HeLa cells, and gulation upon e.g. local changes in osmolality. This remains to be proven. contains nucleic acid-binding RAGNYA domains. We show that AMMECR1 is 
P11 .014 co-expressed with genes implicated in cell cycle and translation regulation; Clinical relevance of the B
P1 -B
P2  microdeletion of the chromosome five of which were previously associated with growth and bone alteration 15 in a patient with epilepsy and developmental delay syndromes. Our knockdown of the zebrafish orthologous gene resulted in A. Szabó1,2, M. Czakó1,2, K. Hadzsiev1,2, A. Lőcsei-Fekete1,2, B. Duga1,2, K. Komlósi1,2, E. animals with shorter tails, thin and curved bodies, dorsally-kinked tail-ends, Pöstyéni1,2, T. Szabó1,2, B. Melegh1,2; poorly defined somites, pericardial edema and hydrocephaly phenotypes 1Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary, 2Szentagothai Research Centre, Pécs, reminiscent of our patient’s features. Our results suggest that AMMECR1 is Hungary. potentially involved in cell cycle control and linked to a new syndrome with growth, bone and heart alterations. In the 15q11.2-q13 region five recurrent breakpoints (B
P1  to B
P5 ) have 
P11 .012 been observed. The most common rearrangements are the type I (B
P1 - First familial case of Angelman syndrome in Bulgaria B
P3 ) and II (B
P2 -B
P3 ) deletions associated with well known phenotype B. Karashova1, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella2, T. Todorov3, A. Todorova4,5, H. Kathom6, S. Tsaneva7, (Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes). Clinical manifestations of type I I. Litvinenko8, R. Tincheva6; 1University Pediatric hospital Sofia; Mediacal univestity Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, and II deletions include speech and motor developmental delay, behavioral 2University Pediatric Hospital; Mediacal univestity, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Genetic Medico- and characteristic dysmorphic features, however, B
P4 -B
P5  microdeletions Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Genetic Medico-Diagnostic comprising CHRNA7 lead to intellectual disability accompanied by epi- Laboratory “Genica”,, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Department of Medical Chemistry and lepsy. Furthermore, in a couple of cases with less severe symptoms, B
P1 - Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, B
P2  (15q11.2) deletions have been published. We investigated a boy having University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 7Genetic Medico- developmental delay, epilepsy and muscle hypotonia using Agilent Human Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 8Department of Child Neurology, Genome Unrestricted G3 ISCA v2 Sureprint 8x60K oligo-array. Array-CGH University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University,, Sofia, Bulgaria. revealed a 0.4 Mb deletion of the 15q11.2 B
P1 -B
P2  region which contains only four highly conserved genes, TUBGC
P5 , NIPA1, NIPA2 and CYFI
P1 . The association of the concerned genes with the phenotype of our patient and of Introduction: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder a few known cases has been suggested earlier. Based on our results we can caused by genetic defects leading to loss of expression of the maternal copy confirm that haploinsufficiency of the TUBGC
P5 , NIPA1, NIPA2 and CYFI
P1  of the chromosome 15q11-13 imprinted region. Most cases are sporadic, genes could lead to epilepsy, developmental delay, generalized hypotonia being caused by de novo deletion of maternal chromosome 15q11-13 or by and dysmorphic features. Despite the small number of the affected genes, paternal uniparental disomy. FamilialE cSasHesG c a2n0 o1cc6u r|, BduAeR toC mELutOatNioAns, iSn PAiItN is |v WeryW diWffic.uElSt tHo Gse.tO upR aG correct clinical diagnosis in patients with2 B2
P15 - the UB
E3 A gene or in the imprinting center.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index B
P2  deletions due to the non-specificity of the symptoms, which emphasize This study demonstrates how a recurrent translocation t(1;12)(q43;q21.1) the application of the array-CGH in cases with similar phenotype. can result in different phenotypes involving both vascular and neurological This research was supported by Hungarian Scientific Research Fund: manifestations. 103983. 
P11 .017 
P11 .015 Case report: A novel mutation in Bardet-Biedl syndrome 8 Severe arterial tortuosity syndrome due to a rare SL
C2 A10 gene M. Mirjalili1,2, F. Harrazi1, S. Seyedhassani1; mutation 1Dr.Seyedhassani medical genetic center, Yazd, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of M. Kocova1, K. Kuzevska-Maneva1, R. Kacarska1, V. Anastasovska1, E. Sukarova- Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran, Islamic Republic of. Angelovska1, M. Ritelli2, M. Colombi2; 1Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Introduction: Bardet–Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive Italy. multi-systemic human genetic disorder characterized by six major defects including obesity, mental retardation, renal anomalies, polydactyly, retinal degeneration and hypogenitalism. In several cases of BBS, few other fea- Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a very rare autosomal recessive dis- tures such as metabolic defects, cardiovascular anomalies, speech deficits, order mainly characterized by tortuosity and elongation of the arteries and hearing loss, hypertension, hepatic defects and high incidence of diabetes by dyspnea, cyanosis, dysmorphic features, joint hypermobility and skeletal mellitus have been reported. The BBS displays extensive genetic hetero- anomalies. Infancy and childhood are the most critical for life-threatening geneity. To date, 19 genes have been defined as related to BBS. events, such as acute respiratory symptoms, due mostlSyL tCo2 Aco1m0 plications of In this study, we analyzed 18 BBS-related genes in a patient by NGS tech- stenosis of the pulmonary arteries. Vascular changes might cause aneurys- nique. ms or artery dissections later in life. The causal gene encodes the Materials and methods: Panel-based next generation sequencing as a reliab- facilitative glucose transporter 10 and nearly 100 patients and 23 mutations le tTecThCn8ique to detect mutations in 18 BBS-associated genes was used. are known. Results: NGS detected one novel mutation c.936delA in coding exon 11 We report a 10-year-old Macedonian girl who was referred due to easy fati- of gene that related to BBS type 8. Bioinformatic analysis (CADD gue and visible vascular pulsations on the neck. She had recurrent dyspnea score:22.6) confirmed that this mutation is pathogenic in nature. This de- and moderate cyanosis with effort, but no heart defect was diagnosed in ear- letion creates a frame shift that leads to earlyT TteCr8mination of aminoacid co- ly childhood. She was a slender girl with joint hypermobility, narrow face, ding, which is expected to affect the function of protein. high-arched palate and crowded teeth. EnlargeSdL,C e2lAo1n0ga ted, and extremely Conclusions: We found a novel mutation in gene that related to BBS tortuous large and medium size blood vessels were detected on ultrasono- type 8. This finding can be useful in genetic counseling and Prenatal diagno- graphy and magnetic resonance angiography. molecular analysis sis during next pregnancy. revealed homozygous c.254T>C(p.Leu85Pro) mutation in the patient. Her parents were unrelated heterozygous carriers. Interestingly, the same muta- 
P11 .018 tion was previously found in two Macedonian brothers with a severe clinical Homozygous truncating CE
P19  mutation causing novel Bardet-Biedl presentation. Detailed family history evaluation revealed that the present syndrome patient is a second cousin of these two brothers, with parents being first E. Yıldız1, S. Mumtaz2, M. Afzal2, S. Malik2, A. Tolun1; cousins. However, no consanguinity with the partners was reported. 1Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan. In conclusion, we describe a patient/family with a mutation causing severe ATS. Molecular analysis is important for genetic counseling and to define targeted clinical follow-up and timely cardiovascular surgery when needed. Introduction: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare, pleotropic ciliopathy with highly variable phenotype. Primary features are retinal dystrophy, 
P11 .016 obesity, post-axial polydactyly, urino-genital abnormalities and intellectual A recurrent translocation t(1;12)(q43;q21.1) drawn from a disabilities. We investigated a consanguineous BBS Pakistani family afflicted systematic survey of balanced translocations in Finns with a primary presentation of polydactyly and obesity and accompanying T. M. Luukkonen1,2, M. Pöyhönen3,4, M. M. Mehrjouy5, A. Palotie1,6, A. Anttonen7, T. intellectual disability, diabetes and behavioral problems. Varilo2,3; 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Dept. of Health, Materials and Methods: The disease locus was identified by linkage map- National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Clinical Genetics, University ping using SNP genotype data of 14 family members. Whole exome sequen- of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, cing for two affected subjects revealed rarCeE/Pn1o9ve l variants. Results: At the University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional disease locus, an approximately 4.5-Mb region at 3q29 yielding a multipoint Genome Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of LOD score of 3.69, homozygous nonsense c.194_195insA (p.Tyr65*) Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, mutation was identiCfCieDdC, 2fo8rB which all the affected individuals plus an unaf- MA, United States, 7Laboratory of Genetics, HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland. fected sibling were homozygous. Some affected members of the study family also carry thCeE rPa1r9e variant reported as a modifier of BBS p heno- type Reciprocal translocations are the most frequent human chromosomal ab- Conclusion: is a novel gene for BBS, with reduced penetrance.It en- errations. At least 6-9% of de novo balanced translocations are associated codes a coiled coil domain containing ciliary protein that localizes to the with abnormal clinical phenotypes. As an outcome of the Systematic Survey primary cilia as do some other BBS proteins. The protein sequence is totally of Balanced Chromosomal Rearrangements in Finns, we identified two un- conserved between human and chimCCpDaCn2ze8eB. The gene is expressed in seve- related families with balanced t(1;12)(q43;q21.1). ral organs. It has been associated with obesity with azospermia in a family. In collaboration with the ‘International Breakpoint Mapping Consortium Although the low frequency of the variant indicates that the pre- IBMC’, the breakpoint regions were narrowed down to ~1.3 kb and ~1.25 sence of the variant is not circumstantial, the variant did not correlate with kb intervals, respectively, using mate-pair sequencing. Sanger sequencing phenotype severity. Absence of any renal disturbance in the family can be in one family mapped the exact breakpoints to 239,567,377-239,567,379 attributed to the absence of expression of the gene in kidney. on chromosome 1 and 73,989,462-73,989,463 on chromosome 12. Analysis (Grant: Boğaziçi University Research Fund 7695) of the flanking sequences revealed a breakpoint intersecting Alu element on chromosome 1, and another Alu element in close vicinity of the breakpoint 
P11 .019 on chromosome 12. A new case of monozygotic male twins discordant for Beckwith- In the first family, carriers (n=6) manifest first with learning problems and Wiedemann syndrome caused by KvDMR1 hypomethylation later with neurological symptoms (chronic headache, balance problems, M. J. Sánchez-Soler1, M. C. Martínez-Romero2, V. López-González1, M. J. Ballesta- tremor, fatigue), episodic ataxia type III, and cerebral infarctions without Martínez1, J. Susmozas-Sánchez3, S. E. Boonen4, A. B. Skytte4, G. Glóver2, E. Guillén- Navarro5; identified predisposing factor. The carriers in the second family (n=4) de- 1Medical Genetic Sección, H. Clinic Universitary V. Arrixaca, IMIB-Arrixaca, El Palmar, monstrate a variable phenotype including tetralogy of Fallot, transient is- Spain, 2Centro de Bioquímica y Genética Clínica, H. Clinico Universitario V. Arrixaca, chaemic attack, valvular regurgitation, arrhythmia, migraine or hyperten- IMIB-Arrixaca, El Palmar, Spain, 3Servicio de Neonatología, H. Clinico Universitario V. sion. In both families thCeH RtrMan3slocation seems to co-segragate with the ab- Arrixaca, El Palmar, Spain, 4Department of Clinical Genetics Aarhus University Hospital, normKaClN pCh2enotype. No protein coding genes are affeAcTteXdN b7yL 3thBe breakpoints, Aarhus, Denmark, 5Consejería de Sanidad, Murcia, Spain. however, we identified (cholinenergic receptor, muscarinic) on chr1, and (voltage gated potassium channel) and (ataxin 7-like 32B2) 6on chr12 closest to the translocation breakEpSoiHntGs. 2016 | BARCELONIAn ,m SoPstA cIaNse s| WmoWnoWzyg.EotSicH twGi.nOs (RMGT) are concordant for genetic diseases,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index but more than 15 cases of MT discordant for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndro- developmental delay, hearing impairment, inguinal/umbilical hernia, joint me (BWS) have been described. Incidence of MT among BWS patients is hig- laxity, and recurrent fractures associated with decreased bone mineral den- her than among general population (2.5-8% vs0.3-0.4%), but it is unclear sity. His younger brother hPaLdS s3imilar manifestations. SNP array analysis de- wether the imprinting defect may trigger the twinning process, or it is the tected no pathogenic copy number variations. Exome sequencing revealed a other way around. novel missense variant in in both of the brothers, which was detected We report a case of male MT BWS discordant, naturally conceived without in their mother. The variant, altering highly conserved amino acid and loca- any significant family history. Mother presented gestational diabetes con- lized at the CH2 actin binding domPaLinS 31 of PL
S3  protein, was presumed to trolled by diet, and in 24 weeks ultrasound, severe hydrocephaly and po- be pathogenic through disrupting the interaction between PL
S3  and actin. lyhydramnios was detected in the 2nd twin. Delivery was at 26+6 weeks, Previously reported patients with mutations, loss-of-function type in and both were admitted to NICU. 1st twin (BWS) weighed 1000g (61th most, had osteoporosis with/without osteoporotic fractures, and only two percentile). He developed bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BDP) and apneas were described to haveP LnSo3n-skeletal features (epilepsy, spastic cerebral consequence of macroglossia, without other complications. He had capillary palsy). , Manifestations shared by the present brothers implicate a wider malformation on the forehead, coarse features, inguinal hernia, but neither phenotypic spectrum of abnormalities, though non-skeletal features in hemihypertrophy nor psychomotor delay. Methylation study performed in both of them might have been caused by other genetic factors. blood and buccal swab showed KvDMR1 hypomethylation. 2nd twin weigh- 
P11 .022 ted 1050g. He underwent surgery in the first month because of hydroce- A case report of 6p25p22 duplication associated with BOFs clinical phaly consequence of aqueduct stenosis. He also developed BPD, and mild features psychomotor limitations secondary to central nervous system infection fol- P. Rendeiro1, T. Lourenço2, R. Lemos1, C. Ventura1, S. M. Pereira1, J. Pinto-Basto1, J. Sá1, P. lowing the operation. Methylation study was normal in both samples. Tavares1; This is the first case in which KvDMR1 hypomethylation discordance has 1CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal, 2CGC Genetics, Lisboa, Portugal. been detected in blood sample, suggesting that the imprinting defect occur- red after the twinning process, maybe due to an inadequate maintenance of methylation state. Specific environmental factors or ART use were not Branchio Oculo Facial syndrome (BOFs_MIM:113620) is a rare autosomal documented, so other predisposing factors should be implicated. dominant disorder caused by haploinsufficiency of the transcription factor 
P11 .020 AP-2 alpha gene (TFA
P2 A). TFA
P2 A is known to activate gene transcription Unraveling unusual presentations of classical syndromes by exome crucial to embryo development, in particular, embryogenesis of the eye, ear, sequencing: the case of primary microcephaly face, body wall, limbs and neural tube. Three major clinical indications may A. Verloes1, S. Passemard2, M. Schiff3, Y. VIA
L2 , C. Dupont2, M. Ouachée4, J. Viala5, E. assist a clinical diagnostic of BOFs: branchial cleft sinus defects, ocular ano- Cuadro6, R. Kom6, S. Drunat2; malies, and characteristic facial anomalies, such as cleft or pseudo cleft lip 1Clinical Genetic Dept, PARIS, France, 2Clinical Genetic Dept, Robert DEBRE Hospital, and palate. Nevertheless, this disorder has been characterized with variable PARIS, France, 3Child Neurology Dept, Robert DEBRE hospital, PARIS, France, 4Clinical expression between patients. The genetic makeup of individuals with BOF Hematology Dept, Robert DEBRE Hospital, PARIS, France, 5Child Gastroenterology Dept, syndrome always compromises TFA
P2 A function and normally is presen- Robert DEBRE Hospital, PARIS, France, 6Dept of Pediatrics, Cayenne Hospital, Cayenne ted in the form of a microdeletion, a complex deletion/de novo insertion or (French Guiana), France. point mutation(s) within TFA
P2 A. We report a 2yo boy with classic clinical features of BOF syndrome and an interstitial duplication on 6p25.2p22.3. To the best of our knowledge, so far no patient with BOF syndrome has been We illustrate situations where exome sequencing allowed „salvage“ of dia- reported to carry a duplication on 6p25.2p22.3. gnoses missed because the typical clinical picture is absent. The first case Array CGH was performed on an Affymetrix platform, Cytoscan 750K. Data is a 10 years girl, from Guadeloupe island, with IUGR, congenital microce- analysis was performed on ChAS Software, Affymetrix (reference NCBI_ phaly, gastrostomy, and late onset susceptibility to infections. She had mul- hg19). Karyotype was performed on peripheral blood following standard tiple CAL spots, but no skin photosensitivity. Biallelic BLM mutations were protocols. found by exome, and the diagnosis of Bloom syndrome, was confirmed by Patient’s examination demonstrated clinical manifestations typical of BOF SCE study. We missed it because the facial pseudo-lupic rash was lacking, syndrome, including branchial, ocular and facial anomalies, such as right and disorality was of unusual severity. The second patient, a 4 years girl, cervical branchial cyst, blepharophimosis and dysmorphic features. Ar- had severe congenital microcephaly, progressive spasticity, profound ID, ray CGH revealed a 13.9Mb duplication at 6p25.2p22.3 (Chr6:4,066,234 and no Ichthyosis. Her EEG showed a disorganized pattern, but no epileptic 18,025,300), resulting in a complete duplication of TFA
P2 A and 75 other discharges. She never presented seizures. Her similarly affected elder brot- genes. Karyotype analysis allowed definition of the type of structural rear- her, died at 4 months of gastroenteritis. Seizures were not reported. In both, rangement present in the patient [46,XY,dup(6)(p25.2p22.3)]. MRI showed small brain without malformation. Conventional blood scree- nings (including AA chromatography) showed no abnormalities. CSF was 
P11 .023 not invetigated in the absence of epilepsy. By exome, we found biallelic mu- Cat eye syndrome often without cat eye? tations in PHGDH, coding the first enzyme in the serine synthesis pathway. G. Cardos1, R. Costache2, L. Oprea1, O. Mantescu1, M. Malageanu1, S. Grigore1, D. Craiu3, V. Very low serine level in CSF confirmed the diagnosis. Microcephaly, deep Radoi1,2; 1Synevo Central Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, 2Genetics Division, Carol Davila delay and spasticity are typical of serine synthesis defects, but the very early University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 3Pediatrics Neurology appearance of refractory epilepsy is considered as constant. We illustrate Division, Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. how ‚simple‘ diagnosis can be missed when missing key sign misplaces dia- gnostic thinkings. We also illustrate the danger of restricting access to tar- geted diagnostic DNA panels. The generalization of diagnostic exomes will Cat eye syndrome is a rare condition involving a partial trisomy or tetraso- certainly lead to expand the clinical spectrum of known Mendelian entities. my of part of chromosome 22, clinically characterized by higly variable con- 
P11 .021 genital malformations. The syndrome name is derived from a particular ap- PL
S3 -related bone disorder in brothers with syndromic features pearance of the vertical colobomas (“cat eye”) in the eyes of several patients. E. Nishi1,2, T. Kosho1,2, K. Masuda3, Y. Katoh3, K. Shirahige3,4, K. Izumi1,3; We present here a case of a patient diagnosed with cat eye syndrome, wit- 1Division of Medical Genetics, Nagano children‘s hospital, Azunimo city, Japan, hout “cat eye”. 2Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, A two-year-girl was ascertained through non-specific Japan, 3Research Center for Epigenetic Disease, Institute for Molecular and Cellular developmental delay, hypotonia, major anomalies (including anal atresia, Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 4CREST, Japan Science and spontaneously resolving ASD, possible Pierre Robin sequence characterized Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Austria. by microretrognathia and bifid uvula), plus minor craniofacial dysmorphism - including pre-auricular tags. It inspired an interesting and captivating dif- Plastin 3P (LPS
L3 S3
) is a protein involved in the formation of filamentous actin ferential diagnosis to the genetics team, considering disorders not limited bundles. Recently, a total of 21 individuals from 8 families have been repor- to: a possible cat eye syndrome, duplication 22q11.2 syndrome, Emmanuel ted with -related famPilLiaSl3 osteoporosis/osteoporotic fractures (van Dijk syndrome, or rather a variant of unbalanced translocation involving a chro- et al., 2013; Fahiminiya et al., 2014; Laine et al., 2015). We report on an addi- mosome 22 and another cytogenetic partner. tional family with a novel variant, identified through genetic screening Classical cytogenetics analysis revealed an acrocentric derived for syndromic developmental delay. supernumerary marker chromosome (GTG banding), satellited at one end The proband is a 12-year-old boy manifesting facial characteristics (hyper- fissuresE S bH roG 2 n0 as1 al6 i| B bA luR eC scE leL rO aeN A m, lS PA(IANg |N WORW baWnd.EinSg)H, aGn.dO mRaGde up of a lot - but not exclusively - hetero2ch2ro7- telorism, upslanted palpebral , ad t p , ), i dABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.026 The face of the developmental disorders of chromatin remodeling matic S. Douzgou1,2, S. Banka2,1; material (CBG banding). Spectral karyotyping identified its origin in chro- 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University Hospitals mosome 22 and chromosomal microarray showed a 3 MB partial tetrasomy NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United 22q11.1-22q11.21 encompassing the cat eye critical region. Kingdom, 2Institute of Human Development, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. The above mentioned chromosomal conditions originating in 22q abnormalities have an overlapping spectrum and sometimes they are a difficult call for the geneticist; further cytogenetic investigations are protean in such cases. Cat eye syndrome without cat eye (coloboma) may be more Developments in technology led to increased understanding of the gene- frequent than we have thought. tic basis of the Chromatin Disorders, a group of developmental disorders caused by disruption of chromatin remodelling (DDCRs). We used Facial  P11
.024 Dysmorphology Analysis technology (FDNA®) to objectively evaluate the CD C42
 as a new human disease gene associated with craniofacial dysmorphic features of DDCRs. We propose that a condition thrombocytopenia and intellectual disability should be recognizable by gestalt if it fulfills the following criteria: (i) the K. Kosaki1, T. Takenouchi1, T. Uehara1, S. Ida2, R. Kosaki3, N. Okamoto4; ‘syndromic face’ is significantly different from the average, general popula- 1Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, tion face (denoted as ‘severity’); (ii) the syndromic face is significantly dif- 2Department of Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, Osaka Medical Center and ferent from typical faces of other syndromes (denoted as ‘distinctiveness’); Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka, Japan, 3Division of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 4Department (iii) the variability between faces of patients with the same syndromic dia- of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute for Maternal and Child gnosis is minimal. Health, Osaka, Japan. As variability is difficult to assess without knowing the full spectrum of the conditions, we focused our analysis on the severity and distinctiveness of DDCRs by using published, 2D facial photographs of patients with 20 di- CD C42
 encodes critical regulator for the cell cycle and actin cytoskeleton stinct, molecularly confirmed DDCRs to create a common ‘facial photo crop’ formation. More than 5000 articles have been published concerning Cdc42 for DDCRs. This was proven to be distinct to the ‘average, normal face’. To in various organisms. The conditional homozygous knockout of Cdc42 in evaluate the severity and distinctiveness of the DDCR faces, we compared mice results in macro-thrombocytopenia and structural abnormality in each of the 20 syndromes’ facial photo crops (n=5) to 1) other syndromes the central nervous system. However, no human disorder associated with in the DDCR group (19 syndromes); 2) other dysmorphic syndromes not CD C42
 mutations has been described until our identification of two pati- in the DDCR group (100 other syndromes); 3) normal (1000 photographs). ents with de novo CD C42
 (p.Tyr64Cys) mutation [MIM 616737: Takenouchi- Methods included the mean area under the curve (AUC) to compare bet- Kosaki syndrome]. The two patients shared macro-thrombocytopenia, de- ween samples and ROC curve plotting the true positive rate as function of velopmental delay, lymphedema of the lower extremities, and contracture false positive rates. We report the results of this analysis and discuss its im-  P11
.027 of the fingers as common features. Characteristic facial features included plications. Early results of next-gen cytogenetics implementation in Portugal arched eyebrows, mild ptosis, eversion of the lateral portion of the lower D. David1, J. Freixo2, B. Marques1, I. Carvalho2, N. Tkachenko3, N. Oliva Teles3,4, M. eyelid, exotropia, midfacial hypoplasia, short philtrum, thin upper lip, and Marques1, M. Cardoso1, J. Fino1, A. Alves1, A. Fortuna3,4, S. Dória5, C. Pinto de Moura5, H. malocclusion. The present observation of the two unrelated patients with Correia1, I. Marques Carreira6, J. Sá7, R. Gonçalves2, J. Lavinha1, T. Kay2, M. Talkowski8,9,10, a strikingly similar phenotype and the same CD C42
 mutation establishes C. Morton9,10,11; that CD C42
 is a new human disease gene and that a mutation in CD C42
 1National Health Institute “Doutor Ricardo Jorge”, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Centro Hospitalar causes a recognizable syndromic form of thrombocytopenia. Differential de Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Centro de Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalhães, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4Unit for Multidisciplinary diagnosis of isolated thrombocytopenia and intellectual disability include Research in Biomedicine (UMIB/ICBAS), Porto, Portugal, 5Faculdade de Medicina, Jacobsen syndrome (11q23 deletion), Braddock-Carey syndrome (21q22), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 6Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de and Takenouchi-Kosaki syndrome. Takenouch-Kosaki syndrome caused by Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Centro Hospitalar de Coimbra, Universidade de Coimbra, CD C42
 mutation is clinically recognizable in that the size of the platelets is Coimbra, Portugal, 8Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, large and lymphedema is a unique feature. Lymphedema could be ascribed 9Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 10Broad Institute of MIT and to the CD C42
 mutation, since Cdc42 directly interacts with Rac1, the defect Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 11Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, of which leads to lymphedema in mice. United States.  P11
.025 Molecular characterization of the first Spanish case of Hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy (HJMD) Background: Most approaches are insensitive to the full mutational spec- F. Blanco-Kelly, L. Rodriguez da Silva-Jacy, I. Sanchez-Navarro, R. Riveiro-Alvarez, M. trum of chromosome rearrangements associated with human developmen- Lopez Martinez, M. Corton, C. Ayuso; tal abnormalities. Therefore, our aim is to introduce next-generation se- Servicio de Genética, ISS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. quencing (NGS) into clinical cytogenetics, creating a sequence-based Next- Gen Cytogenetics to catalyze a dramatic advancement in clinical diagnostics. Methods: Twenty families with chromosome rearrangement-associated di- Introduction: The CDH3 gene on 16q2 is responsible for two ultrarare au- seases, including two prenatal (PN) cases, have been enrolled. Fourteen of tosomal recessive disorders characterized by hypotrichosis and progressive these were also analyzed by NGS using large-insert paired-end libraries. macular dystrophy: Hypotrichosis with Juvenile Macular Dystrophy (HJMD) Results: The majority of these cases were confirmed to be balanced reci- and Ectodermal Dysplasia, Ectrodactyly and Macular Dystrophy (EEM). procal rearrangements, whereas 4 were complex chromosomal rearrange- Patients and methods: A Spanish male born in 1998 from non-consan- ments including 1 of chromothripsis. Thus far, over 50 breakpoints were guineous healthy parents sent to the Genetic Department from University identified disrupting protein coding genes, lncRNAs, or intergenic regions, Hospital Fundación Jimenez Díaz, with a suspected diagnosis of decalvant thus revealing candidate genes or genomic loci. These cases are further spinulous follicular keratosis (probable Siemens Syndrome) and inverse re- assessed for pathogenicity from positional effects on genes located within tinitis pigmentosa. Neither limb nor dental abnormalities were observed. topological domains (TADs) containing the breakpoints using DECIPHER Sanger sequencing of coding exons of ABCA4 and CDH3 were performed. predictions of haploinsufficiency. In one PN case, the 16q24 breakpoint dis- In addition, MLPA analysis using a commercial kit was used to study ABCA4 rupts ANKRD11, etiologic in the autosomal dominant KBG syndrome (OMIM exonic deletions or duplications. #148050), predicting an abnormal phenotype. The chromothripsis case, Results: First, differential diagnosis of isolated juvenile macular dystrophy submitted as 46,XY,t(7;14)(q22;q32.1),inv(15)(q21.2q26.1), proved by NGS was performed. Only a heterozygous missense p.Val2050Leu variant in to carry two further deletions, at 3p12 (5.3 Mb) and 15q14 (488 kb), as well ABCA4 was found after a comprehensive analysis of coding regions and gene as an insertion of 644.4 kb from 15q14 into 3p14. The inv(15) is in fact a rearrangements. A second allele was not found. complex rearrangement of 15q with eight breakpoints. Further CDH3 sequencing allowed to detect compound heterozygous vari- Conclusions: We demonstrate that NGS-based chromosomal rearrangement ants: a novel maternal missense change p.Val205Met, predicted as probably characterization leads to major improvements in identification of chromo- pathogenic by in silico analysis and a previously reported paternal frames- somal aberrations and in prediction of clinical outcomes of postnatally and hift c.830del p.Gly277Alafs*20. Clinical revision allowed reclassified this prenatally detected genomic rearrangements, and to contributions to hu- patient as HJMD. man genome annotation. Conclusions: This is the first report of a Spanish patient with HJMD and the Research grant: FCT HMSP-ICT/0016/2013 first report of a patient carrying mutations in the CDH3 gene in Spain. A new mutation has been described in CDH3. This work reflects the importance of b 2o 2th 8 the joint assessment of clinical signs and tEheS eHvaGlu 2at0io1n6 o f| t hBeA pRedCigEreLeO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG for a correct genetic study approach and diagnostic.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.028  P11
.030 CLAPO Syndrome: An update on phenotype and molecular approaches Identification of de novo variants in nonsyndromic cleft lip with/ R. Martín Arenas1, V. Martinez-Glez2, P. Lapunzina2, E. Vallespín2, V. Fernández- without cleft palate patients using whole exome sequencing Montaño2, Á. Del Pozo2, J. Silla-Castro2, K. Ibanez2, J. López-Gutierrez3, L. Rodriguez- N. Ishorst1,2, K. U. Ludwig1,2, D. Drichel3, S. Sivalingam1,2, A. C. Böhmer1,2, L. Gölz4, M. Laguna2; Alblas1,2, K. Keppler1,2, S. L. Mehrem1,2, K. Köhler1,2, A. Maaser1,2, B. Braumann5, M. 1INGEMM-IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain, 2INGEMM-IdiPAZ-CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Martini6, M. Knapp7, M. M. Nöthen1,2, T. Becker8,9, E. Mangold2; Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. 1Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Department of Orthodontics, Introduction: CLAPO syndrome (OMIM:613089) is a vascular/overgrowth University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Department of Orthodontics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6Department of Maxillo-Craniofacial Surgery, University of Bonn, disorder characterized by Capillary malformation (CM) of the lower lip, Bonn, Germany, 7Institute of Medical Biometry Informatics and Epidemiology, University Lymphatic malformation (LM) of the face and neck, Asymmetry, and Partial of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 8German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Overgrowth. Six cases have been reported so far. Inheritance pattern is still Bonn, Germany, 9Institute for Community Medicine, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, unknown, but somatic mosaicism is suspected. Germany. Methods and Results: We performed a retrospectively review of CLAPO patients diagnosed in our hospital (10 cases) between 2008 and 2015, the largest cohort to date. The hallmark clinical feature is the CM of the lower Non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/P) is one of the lip, expressed congenitally in all patients; all other features can be present at most common congenital malformations and has a multifactorial etiology. birth or develop at a later stage in life. Eight patients showed LMs involving To date, a number of common risk variants have been identified for dnes CnLo/vPo, oral mucosa and neck. LM seems to be more frequent in the oral cavity, speci- explaining about 24% of the genetic heritability. It has been suggested that fically in tongue, and it is commonly complicated with severe haemorrhagic some of the remaining genetic liability might be explained by rare events. Five patients showed asymmetric overgrowth at birth, and only one mutations, which is supported by the frequent observation of sporadic presented generalized overgrowth. As a preliminary molecular approach we nsCL/P cases and a higher nsCL/P recurrence risk in offspring compared performPeIdK 3NCGAS PexTpEeNriments (100x) in paired blood/tissue samples, using to parents. a custom panel covering about 300 vascular/overgrowth related genes, in- We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) in 50 sporadic nsCL/P cases cluding , , etc. No germinal/somatic mutations were detected. of Central European ancestry andXT their unaffected parents. Exome capture Conclusion: Here, we present an expansion of the phenotype of CLAPO syn- was performed using SureSelect Human All Exon V5 and libraries were drome, in which we more clearly define some of the originally described sequenced using 1x125bp paired-end sequencing. Raw ddaet an woveore processed clinical manifestations. We have also discarded, at medium reading depths, using the default BWA/GATK v.3.4 pipeline including VQSR and the geno- the presence of somatic mosaic mutations in genes known to cause clinically type refinement workflow. Annotadtieo nno ovfo the possible events was related syndromes. Our future approach includes increasing reading depth done using ANNOVAR. in candidate genes, for better detection of low mosaics, and to perform who- We identified 158 high-confidence variants of which 59 were either le exome NGS. missense or nonsense variants which did not map to regions of segmental duplications.  P11
.029 Validations were performed on all variants witdhe an oqvuoality-by-depth ≥ 4, ex- 28 de novo CNVs suggested as candidate regions for CL±P in a high prevalence area in South America cluding variants with bad WES reads in the regidoen n oofv ionterest. So far, we con- D. Mattos1, F. M. de Carvalho2, R. F. Fonseca1, F. A. Poletta3, A. R. Vieira4, P. Lapunzina5, E. firmed all 27 residual variants, including their status. E. Castilla3, I. Orioli1; Our preliminary results show the presence odf e novo mutations in nsCL/P 1ECLAMC (Latin American Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) and patients. We are currently performing further confirmation and follow-up INAGEMP (National Institute of Populational Medical Genetics) at Department of studies investigating the causality of the true variants. These results Genetics, Institute of Biology, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, will be presented at the conference. 2ECLAMC (Latin American Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) and INAGEMP (National Institute of Populational Medical Genetics) at LEMC (Laboratory  P11
.031 of Congenital Malformations Epidemiology), Oswaldo Cruz Institute/Oswaldo Cruz Sequencing the GRH L3
 coding region reveals rare truncating Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3ECLAMC (Latin American Collaborative Study mutations and the first common susceptibility variant for of Congenital Malformations) at CEMIC (Center for Medical Education and Clinical nonsyndromic cleft palate Research) and CONICET (National Council for Scientific and Technical Investigation), E. Mangold1, A. C. Böhmer1,2, N. Ishorst1,2, A. Hoebel1,2, P. Gültepe1,2, H. Schuenke1,2, J. Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4Departments of Oral Biology and Pediatric Dentistry and Klamt1,2, A. Hofmann1,2, L. Gölz3, R. Raff1, P. Tessmann1,2, S. Nowak1, H. Reutter1,2,4, J. Center for Craniofacial and Dental Genetics, School of Dental Medicine, University of Stavusis5, M. Ishida6, R. Seselgyte6, G. E. Moore6, M. M. Nöthen1,2, G. Borck7, K. A. Aldhorae8, Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 5Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute B. Lace5, P. Stanier6, M. Knapp9, K. U. Ludwig1,2; (INGEMM), IdiPAZ, La Paz Hospital and CIBER of Rare diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Spain. Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Orthodontics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, Children‘s Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Background: A high prevalence of cleft lip with or without palate (CL±P) was 5Medical Genetics and Mitochondrial Research Group; Latvian Biomedical Research detected in Patagonia (Argentina) and Amerindian ancestry appointed as a and study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 6Institute of Child Health; University College London, risk factor. In this presumably more homogenous population, we searched London, United Kingdom, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany, 8Orthodontic Department, College of Dentistry, Thamar University, Thamar, Yemen, for de novo copy number variation (CNV) in CL±P subjects. 9Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Method: 30 families with isolated CL±P (31 affected and 113 total individu- Germany. als) were genotyped on the Affymetrix Genome-Wide SNP 6.0 array. CNVs identification was performed on Genotyping Console and CHAS (Affyme- trix). From all identified CNVs from affected subjects, we filtered out those The most frequent subtypes of orofacial clefts are nonsyndromic cleft lip with lesser chances of pathogenicity according to the following criteria, con- with or without cleft palate (nsCL/P) and nonsyndromic cleft palate only sidering a minimum of 60% overlap: (1) mean-maker-distance higher than (nsCPO), both considered multifactorial. A common syndromic form of clef- 5kbp; (2) CNVs also present in healthy relatives; (3) common CNV from DGV ting is Van der Woude syndrome (VWS) where patients have CL/P or CPO, and (4) within 1mbp from telomeres and centromeres. often but not always associated with lower lip pits. Recently, ~5% of VWS Results: We detected 28 de novo CNVs larger than 200kbp, 6 of which over- patients were identified with mutations in the grainy head-like 3 (GRH L3
) lapped genes previously associated with CL±P. Five were deletions (no gene. To investigate GRH L3
 in nonsyndromic clefting, we evaluated 672 homogenous loss) and 23 duplications. Five segments were detected in 3 European patients with apparently nonsyndromic clefts (576 nsCL/P, 96 subjects and 7 were detected in 2 subjects, indicating recurring de novo du- nsCPO) sequencing the GRH L3
 coding region. We identified four novel trun- plications in unrelated individuals. cating GRH L3
 mutations in nine patients from four families, two of them de Conclusion: Results corroborates the role of the following genes to the ae- novo. All individuals harboring mutations had exclusively nsCPO. Most inte- tiology of CL±P: GLI2, PK P1
, MKX, PVR L1
, CDH1 and TYMS. 22 genomic restingly, in nsCPO patients we identified a higher minor allele frequency for segments not previously associated with CL±P were also identified, contri- rs41268753 (0.099), compared to controls (0.049; P=1.24×10-2). This as- buting to a more general framework of the CNV role in CL±P, evidencing the sociation was replicated in nsCPO/control cohorts from Latvia, Yemen and complex aetiology of the condition and the need for biological evidence of all the UK (Pcombined 2.63×10-5; ORallelic 2.5 (95% CI 1.6-3.7)), and reached CNVs appointed here and in the literature. genome-wide significance in combination with imputed data from a GWAS Funding: FAPERJ: E-26/102.797/2012, E-26/110.140/2013; CNPq: in nsCPO triads (P=2.73×10-9). Notably, this variant is not associated with 481069/2012-7, 306396/2013-0, 400427/2013-3. nsCL/P (P=0.45). Rs41268753 encodes the highly conserved p.Thr454Met ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPA (I GN E R| PW =W 5.2W ) w.E hS icH h G nu. mO eR roG us in silico prediction programs denote as 2d2el9e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.034 Further evidence of the c.314G>A (p.Arg105Gln) mutation in the terious, has a CADD score of 29.6 and increases protein binding capacity in SMARC E1
 gene as a rare cause of Coffin-Siris syndrome silico. Thus, our targeted sequencing approach has identified the first com- M. Sánchez Soler1, I. Valenzuela2, L. Fernández3, E. Vallespín3, T. Vendrell2, M. Ballesta- mon genetic risk factor for nsCPO, and the first gene with rare mutations Martínez1, V. López-González1, V. Fernández-Montaño3, F. Nieto3, K. Ibañez4, J. Silla- and a common risk variant for nsCPO in the coding region. Castro4, A. del Pozo4, F. Santos-Simarro5; 1Sección de Genética Médica, Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Clínico Universitario  P11
.032 Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2Genética Clínica, Àrea de Genètica Clínica i Copy Number Variations (CNVs) in patients with multiple Molecular, Hospital Universitari Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Genómica Estructural malformations and intellectual disability y Funcional, INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4Bioinformatics R. Staneva1, S. Hadjidekova1, M. Pancheva1, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella2, B. Rukova1, Z. section, INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 5Genética Clínica, Hammoudeh1, O. Antonova1, V. Damyanova1, M. Mihaylova1, R. Tincheva2, D. Toncheva1; INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Clinical genetics - University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. Introduction: Mutations in several components of the BAF complex have been identified in Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS), a rare congenital malfor- maAtiRoInD 1syBndrome characterized by developmental delay, coarse facial fea- Introduction: In recent years аrray CGH analysis seems to have been esta- tures and hair and digital abnormalitiSeMs.A MRoCsEt1 patients harbour mutations blished as an invaluable tool for diagnostics in the field of dysmorpholo- in gene (60-70%) but at least mutations in another 5 genes of the gy and intellectual disability. The data gathered the last decade allowed to complex have been detected. To date, mutations account for only further refine the interpretation of results and helped tо discriminate pa- 2% of the cases, with just two variants reported: c.218A>G (p.Tyr73Ser) in thogenic from normal variants. two patients and c.314G>A (p.Arg105Gln) in one patient and his affected Materials and Methods: 81 patients with multiple malformations, intellec- mother (the latter of uncertain pathogenicity). tual disability and normal karyotype were included in the study. Peripheral Material and methods: A cohort of 18 unrelated patients with features sug- blood sample was collected from every participant after signed written in- gestive of CSS has been screened using a custom next generation sequencing formed consent. Array CGH analysis was performed on Agilent ISCA 4x44k panel (BAF_v1.1 Roche NimbleGen) including the genes of the BAF complex v2.0 oligo-arrays by manufacturer’s protocol. Arrays were scanned on Agi- as well as other SinMtAerRaCcEti1ng genes. de novo lent G2505A scanner. Data was analyzed by Bluefuse Multi software v4.2. Results: We present two additional patients in whom the variant Variants were further classified based on size, frequency, type, gene content p.Arg105Gln in has been detected, confirmed to be in one and function into four groups - benign, probably benign, VUS and pathoge- case, while results of parental testing in the second will be presented in due nic. course. Clinical details of the patients as well as comparison to previously Results: 281 CNVs were identified. Average number of CNVs per patient is reported patients will be presented. 3,5. Pathogenic CNVs (n=13) were found in 13,6% (n=11) of our patients. Conclusions: Despite lack of functional studies, our resultsS sMuApRpCorEt1 the pa- Among pathogenic CNVs deletions were 69,2% (n=9), while duplication re- thogenicity of this variant and provide further insight into the clinical mani- presented 30,8% (n=4). Pathogenic CNVs sized greater than 1mb represent festations of these patients. The p.Arg105Gln mutation in seems 76,9% (n=10). 30,8% (n=4) of pathogenic variations were considered irre- to be a rare recurrent mutation responsible of CSS and should be included in levant to the phenotype. Benign CNVs (n=118) and probably benign CNVs the molecular screening of these patients. (n=110) were respectively identified in 69,1% (n=56) and in 72,8% (n=59) Grant sponsor: PI14/1922; ISCIII, Spain of the patients in our cohort. VUS (n=39) were identified in 35,8% (n=29) of patients.  P11
.035 Conclusion: Our study enriched the available data on the copy number va- Clinical features and mutation spectrum of Coffin-Siris syndrome in riations in Bulgarian population and helped to reclassify some of the VUS as Malaysia: A case series W. P. Ong1, M. A. M. Haniffa1, G. S. Ch‘ng1, Y. Tsurusaki2, N. Miyake2, N. Matsumoto2, W. T. probably benign. Keng1;  P11
.033 1Department of Genetics, Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2Department Severe Cockayne syndrome or COFS? (Or both?) of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, J. Behunova, F. Laccone; Japan. Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Introduction: Coffin-Siris syndrome(CSS) is a rare disorder charathcterised Background/Aim: The authors report on a case of severe form of Cockay- by intellectual disability, distinctive facies, hypoplastic/aplastic 5 finger- ne syndrome (CS) with a mutation in ERC C6
-gene, that had been described nails and/or toenails and growth retardation. Pathogenic variants in ARI- before by COFS (cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal) syndrome, and discuss a deli- D1A, ARID1B, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, SMARC E1
 of the SWI/SNF complex are neation between these two entities. known to cause CSS. CaseReport: A boy was born in term with a low-normal birth size Method: Between January 2013 and July 2015, 17 patients with clinical dia- (2500/48/32) and without cataract or arthroghryposis. Postnatally procee- gnosis of CSS underwent whole exome sequencing(WES) in search of the ded severe feeding difficulties (PEG), severe growth retardation (-5,5 SD) SWI/SNF complex genes. and microcephaly (-6,6 SD). In his age of 3,5 y he could not sit and stand Results: We report 12 individuals (5 males,7 females) with molecular confir- alone and showed no speech. His face was not typical „old-looking“, but sho- mation. All had developmental delay, dysmorphism with coarse facies, thick wed some dysmorphy and extreme dental caries. The trunk was hypotonic, lower lips, hirsutism and hypoplastic nails. Five patients had microcephaly; extremities hypertonic, with mild contractures of elbows and knees. Other 8 had failure to thrive; 9 had short stature; 2 had secundum ASD. Cases with findings presented cryptorchism, general brain atrophy (MRI), no photosen- non-typical features would also be highlighted. WES identified heterozy- sitivity and no retinopathy. DNA: Homozygote mutation in the ERC C6
-gene gous mutations in ARID1B in 10 probands, and in SMARCB1 in 1 patient. (c.2047C>T, p.Arg683*) Interestingly, a boy with features more in-keeping with CSS had a mutati- Discussion: A patient with the same mutation published as a COFS syndro- on in SMARCA2, the gene associated with Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome, me showed low-normal birth size, congenital arthrogryposis and cataracts highlighting the many similarities of these two syndromes. All were novel with sunken eyes, postnatally severe feeding difficulties, seizures, severe mutations. Seven were de novo, one child was adopted, four others have yet developmental and growth delay with microcephaly (-5 SD) and notable to be determined. The ARID1B mutations included 4 frameshift insertions, photosensitivity. On the other hand, a few patients with other mutations 3 frameshift deletions, 2 nonsense mutations and 1 splice site mutation. The in ERC C6
-gene had been referred as severe CS or CS/COFS, because their SMARCB1 and SMARCA2 mutations were missense mutations. The child congenital symptoms (IUGR, microcephaly, cataract, arthrogryposis) and with SMARCB1 seemed the worst affected with severe growth retardation absent neurological development fulfilled also the definition of COFS. and cognitive impairment. Conclusion: Severe Cockayne syndrome and COFS share highly overlapping Conclusions: Mutations in ARID1B are the predominant cause for CSS in Ma- features and the same molecular-biochemical characteristics, thus it might laysia. Due to overlapping phenotypes with Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome be helpful to overcome the historical separation and to recognize them as and chromosomal abnormalities, molecular confirmation directs accurate one entity. genetic counselling and expands the phenotypic spectrum. 230 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.037 Additional Clinical Findings in two sisters with LAMM syndrome M. Basdemirci1, A. G. Zamani1, S. Sener2, M. Tassoker2, H. Cetmili2, A. Zamani3, M. S. Material and Methods: We report a retrospective study of 160 children with Yildirim1; CHDs and MCA who were referred to the Genetic Department of Emergency 1Department of Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Necmettin Erbakan University, Clinical County Hospital Tirgu Mures, Romania, between 2006 and 2015. All KONYA, Turkey, 2Department of Radiology, Faculty of Dentistry, Necmettin Erbakan patients were clinically evaluated for the presence of dysmorphic features University, KONYA, Turkey, 3Department of Chest Disease, Meram Medical Faculty, and congenital anomalies. Karyotype analysis was performed in all patients Necmettin Erbakan University, KONYA, Turkey. from fresh peripheral blood. Results: Among the 160 children identified with CHDs, 55.6% females, with age ranging from 1 day to 15 years, 65 had a normal karyotype. Chromoso- Microtia and Microdontia (LAMM) syndrome is a rare condition, although its mal abnormalities were observed in 95 patients (59.4%), 84 (88.4%) were prevalence is unknown. Approximately a dozen affected families have been numerical (70 patients with +21, 5 with +13, 3 with +18, 2 with 45,X, 1 with identified. It is characterized by bilateral sensorineural congenital deafness 47,XYY, and 3 polisomy X) and 11 (11.6%) structural [2 with der(21;22) with labyrinthine aplasia, microtia and microdontia. Minor dysmorphologic and der(15;21), 3 with del(5p), del(13q), del(X)(q11), 2 with i(18q), i(18p), signs such as long face, micrognathia, anteverted ears and skin tags on the inv(9), r(4)]. The most frequent type of CHD associated with chromosomal upper part of the auricle can be observed in the patients. It is an autosomal abnormality were ventricular and secundum atrial septal defects. recessive condition and associated with homozygous or compound hetero- Conclusions: Our findings showed that conventional cytogenetic analysis is zygous mutations in the FGF3 gene. still useful in understanding the etiology of CHDs and multiple congenital A 29-year-old woman was admitted with microdontia, oligodontia and sen- anomalies. Furthermore, molecular cytogenetic techniques is needed for an sorineural hearing loss signs to the genetics department. Bilateral microtia accurate diagnosis, when karyotype is normal. with skin tag on the upper part of the left auricle as well as anteverted ears were observed in physical examination. Keratoconus was observed in oph-  P11
.040 thalmologic examination MRI of her inner ear showed bilateral complete Array CGH studies in postnatal diagnosis of 45 cases with multiple labyrinthine aplasia. A CT of the chest revealed a dilated azygos vein. Her congenital malformations including gastrointestinal tract defects sister also had the same symptoms. Parents were first degree cousins. Pe- E. Obersztyn1, A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, B. Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik1, M. Bartnik1, M. digree analysis showed autosomal recessive trait. Both the patient and her Smyk1, M. Kędzior1, J. Castaneda1, N. Bezniakow1, P. Wlasienko1, R. Śmigiel2, K. Żak1, E. Sawicka1, B. Nowakowska1; sister were diagnosed with LAMM syndrome. 1National Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University Wroclaw, In this report, we describe two sisters with autosomal recessive LAMM syn- Wroclaw, Poland. drome characterized by three major findings: complete labyrinthine aplasia, microtia and microdontia. Additional clinical findings, dental abnormalities, follow-up, management and mutation types of FGF3 gene will be discussed Introduction: Gastrointestinal tract malformations represent 5 -10% of con- in detail. genital defects among newborns. Esophageal atresia (EA), tracheoesopha-  P11
.038 geal fistula (TEF) and anal atresia are the most common, comprising 89% Identification of Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia genes by Whole of cases. Chromosomal aberrations have been reported in 6 -10% patients Exome Sequencing with GI defects whereas the etiology of most cases remains unknown. Ar- M. Kammoun1, P. Brady1, H. Van Esch1, J. Deprest2, K. Devriendt1, J. R. Vermeesch1; ray CGH is currently offered as a rapid method for identification of genomic 1Department of Human Genetics KU Leuven, leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Obstetrics changes with potential role in the etiology of birth defects.Our study‘s aim and Gynecology, University Hospitals Leuven, leuven, Belgium. was to evaluate the prevalence of pathogenic chromosomal aberrations in neonates with multiple congenital anomalies (preferentially gastrointesti- nal tract malformations) with or without dysmorphic features. The genetics of Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDH) is poorly under- Patients and methods: 45 patients were qualified for aCGH studies accor- stood. We hypothesize that Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) application ding to clinical inclusion criteria in the years 2013-2015. The investigation will advance our understanding of genes involved in CDH pathogenesis. was carried out using the oligoarray set (CytoSure ISCA 60k v2 OGT, UK). We performed WES on 13 patients from 9 different families. Dominant and Parental origin studies using FISH / aCGH were also performed. recessive models were taken into account for variants calling in all cases. We Results: We present a summary of our results including detailed clinical data, identified pathogenic variants in known CDH causal genes: ZFPM2, KMT2D type, localization and size of aberrant changes as well as their parental origin. and PORCN. In addition, we observed probably pathogenic variants in 3 ge- Copy number changes were identified in 8/45 (18%) patients. There were 4 nes thus far not yet known to cause CDH, including PIGN in a fetus with deletions (10q22.3q23.1mat; 6q22.3q23.3mat; 15q11.2mat; 17q11.2mat), complex bilateral CDH. 3 duplications (10p15.3p11.21(de novo); 2p23.1 (?);15q24mat) and one Similarly to the previous reports, ZFPM2 mutations are the most incrimina- case of supernumerary der(22), as a result of maternally inherited translo- ted in CDH and are also observed with a reduced penetrance and a variable cation (11;22). To our knowledge, anorectal atresia has not been previously expressivity in our families. This gene is a GATA4 activity modulator and reported in 10q22.3 deletion syndrome. Genotype-phenotype considerati- is subsequently important for diaphragm and heart development. PORCN ons are presented. gene lesions cause of X-linked Focal Dermal Hypoplasia that was previous- Conclusion: Our results confirm the utility of aCGH as a first - tier test in ly considered to be embryonic lethal in male. Interestingly, we are the first multiple congenital malformations. to report PORCN variant in non-mosaic males. Defective PORCN, leads to Supported by Polish Ministry of Science and High Education: 3942/E- an impairment of WNT trafficking through the cell which affects the down- 215/S/2015 stream genes dependent on this pathway. PIGN is involved in Glycosylphos-  P11
.041 phatidylinositol anchor biosynthesis. Prior to our report, PIGN mutations A missense mutation in the NIPBL gene isoform A cause a mild and were described in association with multiple malformations but seldom with atypical familiar case of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome CDH which we suggest to result from a more severe loss of function. As for B. Puisac1,2, L. Ström3, C. Baquero-Montoya4,1, T. Visnes3, M. Gil-Rodríguez1, M. the new candidate genes, they are known to cause X-linked Intellectual disa- Hernández-Marcos1,2, E. Teresa-Rodrigo1,2, P. Gómez-Puertas5, Q. Pan-Hammarström3, I. bility and the confirmation of their implication in diaphragm development Bueno6,2, F. J. Ramos1,6,2, J. Pié1,2; is ongoing. 1University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 2CIBERER, Zaragoza, Spain, 3Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Hospital Pablo Tobón Uribe, Medellín, Colombia, 5Center  P11
.039 of Molecular Biology „Severo Ochoa“, Madrid, Spain, 6University Hospital „Lozano Blesa“, Cytogenetic study in children with congenital heart defects and Zaragoza, Spain. multiple congenital anomalies: ten years of experience A. Boglis1, F. Tripon1, C. Banescu1,2; 1University of Medicine and Farmacy of Tirgu Mures, Tirgu Mures, Romania, 2Genetic Department of Emergency Clinical County Hospital Tirgu Mures, Tirgu Mures, Romania. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a congenital developmental disorder characterized by facial dismorphia, growth retardation, limb malformations and intellectual disability. Approximately 60% of patients have pathological variants in the NIPBL gene and many show the CdLS classical phenotype. Introduction: Chromosomal abnormalities often are detected among child- We report on two brothers with atypical mild CdLS phenotype who have ren with congenital heart defects (CHDs) when associate multiple congeni- a missense mutation in NIPBL [c.8387A>G; p.(Tyr2796Cys)]. Both patients tal anomalies (MCA), with an estimated prevalence of 6-13 cases of CHDs have brachycephaly, synophrys, long lashes, mild intellectual disability and per 1000 live births. The aim of this study was to determine the presence of an unusual broad bulbous nose. Interestingly, this last feature is described chromosomal abnormalities detected by conventional cytogenetic analysis in CdLS patients with mutations in the HDA C8
 gene. The mutation identified among children with CHDs and MCA.ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 231 in our patients is located at the last exon ( E47
) of the NIPBL gene and itABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index only affects to its isoform A. In order to better understand the genotype- in our patient is unique, suggesting a hitherto not unreported new syndro- phenotype correlation, we performed “in vitro” studies with the brothers´ mic picture. We considered that genes mapped within the duplicated re- fibroblasts that revealed a sensitivity to radiation similar than controls and gions (~60 genes) probable are contributing to phenotype, encompassing much lower than other CdLS patients with mutations in NIPBL. Moreover, genes already related to cleft palate and ectodermal dysplasia. The accurate pyrosequencing studies of different tissues of both cases ruled out the pre- diagnosis in this patient has led to specific investigations, resulting a more sence of somatic mosaicism. Overall, these results suggest that the position effective management. of the variant at the end of the NIPBL gene, that alters only the isoform A  P11
.044 of the protein, is likely the cause of the atypical mild phenotype of the two Reverse phenotyping of a patient with CRIPT gene mutation and brothers. This work has been funded by ISCIII-FIS (Ref. PI12/01318) and further delineation of the associated phenotype Gobierno Aragón (Ref. B20). B. Demeer1, A. Dadban2, P. Vabres3, A. Varenterghem4, J. Thevenon5, D. Bremond-Gignac6,  P11
.042 J. Rivière5, C. Thauvin-Robinet7, L. Olivier-Faivre7; 1genetics department/EA4666, Amiens, France, 2dermatology department, Amiens, Defining Cornelia de Lange syndrome type 4 phenotype: A young boy France, 3dermatology department, Dijon, France, 4Pediatric gastroenterology with RAD21 mutation department, Amiens, France, 5molecular genetics department, Dijon, France, P. Marin Reina1, M. Roselló Piera2, C. Orellana2, F. Martínez2, P. Ortega3, A. Pérez Aytés1; 6Ophtalmology department, Amiens, France, 7genetics department, Dijon, France. 1Neonatal Research Unit. Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Genetics Department. Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 3Pediatric Nephrology Unit. Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain. We report on a 3 ½ year old boy, with prenatal onset growth deficiency (height : -4SD), microcephaly (OFC :-3.5 SD) , transient neonatal pancytope- Introduction: Mutations in RAD21 have been associated to a mild phenotype nia, facial dysmorphism, feeding difficulties, developmental and speech de- of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS-4). We present a patient with a com- lay, global hyperlaxity, significant sleep disturbance, and genital, ocular and plex malformative pattern and a novel mutation in RAD21. extremities anomalies. He also presented with generalized pigmentation Patient description: The patient was referred to the genetics clinic at the age anomalies, and signs of ectodermal dysplasia. When last seen for follow-up of 2 years. He was born at 41 weeks to a 31 year old G2 P2
 mother and a 31 at 5 years old, he had developed epilepsy. Array CGH (Agilent 60k), cytoge- year old father. Birth weight: 3.620kg. After birth, hypospadias, preauricular netic diagnosis of chromosomal breakage syndrome and metabolic scree- tags and dysplastic kidneys were diagnosed. On the physical examination, ning were negative. Whole exome sequencing performed found a homozy- his weight was at 82th centile (13,5kg), height at 6th centile (83cm) and gous frame-shift mutation of the CRIPT gene, recently described as a novel OFD<1th centile (43cm, -3,79SD). He had bilateral clinodactyly of 5th fin- primordial dwarfism gene (Shaheen et al, 2014). The mutation (c.132delA), ger; absence of distal interphalangeal crease in 3th-4th fingers, limitation to described as “probably pathogenic”, was confirmed by sanger sequencing. elbows extension (radial luxation), ocular refractive defect and mild speech Both healthy consanguineous parents were proved to be carrier in the he- delay. Follow-up: Perthes disease. Chronic renal failure (Renal transplant at terozygous state. 4½ year old). He attends normal school with special support for speech (IQ: Few available clinical data of the 2 described patients shows very similar 75). clinical appearance with strikingly facial dysmorphism, growth deficiency, A study of next generation sequencing genetics with a custom panel of 1274 microcephaly, psychomotor delay, and ocular and extremities anomalies. genes associated to neurodevelopmental disorders showed that our patient Mottled hypopigmentation is noted in the older patient described. had a mutation in exon 2 of RAD21 gene (c.68G>A (p.Trp23Ter)) resulting in This description is an example of “reverse phenotyping”. The first descrip- a premature stop codon. This mutation is absent in both parents. tion of the CRIPT gene by Shahen et al, helped us to reach a diagnosis in Discussion: Very few patients with CdLS-4 have been reported. Comparing our patient. Nevertheless considering this new case the term of “primor- our patient with the previously reported, long philtrum, thick and arched dial dwarfism” seem to be too restrictive. For instance, cutaneous signs are eyebrows, short middle 5th finger phalanges, radial head anomalies and specific in our patient. Reports of additional patients will help to further mild developmental deficit emerge as the more common features. More pa- delineate the associated phenotype of this unique syndrome. tients are needed to an accurate delimitation of CdLS-4 phenotype.  P11
.045 Another case of de novo microdeletion 6q13-q15  P11
.043 I. Micule1, L. Kornejeva1, I. Inashkina2, B. Lace2; Multiple systems anomalies syndrome caused by a complex 1Childrens‘ Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Biomedical Research and Study rearrangement resulting in a 7 Mb deletion at 11q24 with two Center, Riga, Latvia. adjacent duplications in 11q23.3-q24.1 and 11q24.3-q25 - a case of Jacobsen syndrome? R. M. Zechi-Ceide1, N. M. Kokitsu-Nakata1, L. P. Maximino2, M. B. Rafacho3, A. C. V. Microdeletion of 6q13-q15 is rare, less than 30 patients have been reported Krepischi4, C. Rosenberg4, A. Richieri-Costa1; in the literature. Patients suffer from intellectual disability and a distinctive 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, pattern of major and minor anomalies. Here we report a patient with this University of São Paulo (HRCA-USP), Bauru, Brazil, 2Department of Speech Language microdeletion with aim to further delineate this microdeletion syndrome. and Hearing – Bauru Dental School, University of São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil, 3Post- The patient is a 6 months old Caucasian boy, born to healthy unrelated Graduation Program in Rehabilitation Sciences, Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, University of São Paulo (HRCA-USP), Bauru, Brazil, 4Department parents after IVF pregnancy. Diagnostic amniocentesis was done in 16th gw of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Biosciences Institute, University of São Paulo, São with subsequent FISH analysis for the most common aneuploidies due to Paulo, Brazil. the biochemical trisomy screening abnormalities. The results were normal and the pregnancy continued. US revealed agenesis of corpus callosum in the 21st gw and megacystis and dystopic right kidney in the 34th gw. Cesa- Orofacial cleft is the most common craniofacial anomaly, which can occur rean section was performed in the 37th gw, because of progressive oligohy- isolated or part of the clinical spectrum of hundreds of highly heterogeneous dramnios and breach presentation. syndromes. In many instances to establish the accurate diagnosis is a great At birth the child was edematous and hypotonic, he had respiratory distress challenge, mainly in countries where the access to molecular tests is restric- and tendency to hypoglycemia. Kidney hypoplasia and hydronephrosis were ted. Here, we reported a 9 years old Brazilian girl with short stature, ma- secondary to the posterior urinary valve. Brain MRI confirmed complete crocephaly, coarse facies, deep set eyes, midface hypoplasia, prominent jaw, agenesis of corpus callosum and gyrus cinguli, colpocephaly, smaller cere- cleft palate, delayed of eruption of teeth, short neck, sensorineural hearing bellar hemispheres and inferior vermis. He had umbilical and inguinal her- loss, recurrent pneumonia, eczema, progressive alopecia, multiples spots, nias, bilateral cryptorchidism. Presenting minor anomalies were up-slanted motor delay, speech delay, severe language impairment, learning difficulties palpebral fissures, low-set ears, long philtrum, micrognathia, narrow high and intellectual disability. Karyotype and cranial MRI were normal. Hema- palate, and wide halluces. tological tests showed anisocytosis and microcytosis. Array-CGH detected a aCGH (CGHTM- 4x180K) was performed and revealed a de novo microdele- complex rearrangement at 11q24, with a deletion of 7 Mb in 11q24.1-24.4 tion arr6q13q15(7,470,262,0-8,899,132,7)x1. flanked by two duplications: a 3,9 Mb duplication in 11q23.3-q24.1, and a At 6 months the boy has psychomotor retardation, generalized hypotonia, duplication of a 5,7 Mb segment in 11q24.3-q25. The deleted segment con- strabismus, and nystagmus. He developed renal failure during episode of tains 40 genes, including the genes BSX, NRGN, ETS-1, FLI-1 and ARHGA P32
, infection and peritoneal dialysis was initiated, which was interrupted when responsible for most significant morbidity problems in Jacobsen syndrome. his renal function improved on clinical recovery. There is an important overlap between the clinical signs of our patient and t2h3e J2acobsen syndrome; despite this, the wholeE oSf tHheG c li2n0ic1al6 m |a nBifAesRtaCtiEonLsO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.046 A partial deletion(Xp)/duplication(Xq) case due to maternal pericentric inversion(X) confirmed by microarray small deletion of about 700 Kb (LCRs E to F). This small deletion is usually O. Boz1, B. Sarikepe1, E. Ceylan1, G. Gonen1, E. Tepeli1, N. Semerci1, F. Duzcan1, O. Kirbiyik2, a de novo event, is rare (only five patients reported in literature) and shows B. Ozyilmaz2, G. Bagci1; a milder phenotype without growth restriction or cardiovascular defects. 1Pamukkale University, Department of Medical Genetics, Denizli, Turkey, 2Tepecik Materials and methods: The patient was a 10-year-old boy who was atten- Training and Research Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. ded in Clinical Genetics Unit because of mild intellectual disability. Both parents were phenotypically normal (mother with hypothyroidism) and he was born after 40 weeks of uneventful pregnancy. He had normal develop- Carrying a parental pericentric inversion can cause deleted/duplicated mental milestones but learning difficulties at school. An array-CGH analysis offsprings. According the literature, del(Xp)/dup(Xq) is a rare chromosomal was performed using a 60K platform (Perkin Elmer). FISH with LSI BCR pro- aberration in males due to maternal pericentric inv(X). be was used in patient and parents. A seven days old male patient was referred us because of dysmorphic fea- Results and conclusions: Patient had a deletion of about 700 kb in distal tures. He was born at 35 weeks gestation age by C/S because of oligohydram- 22q11.2 region (LCRs E to F) that was inherited from an apparently normal nios. Physical examination findings were narrow biparietal diameter, broad father. This deletion is rare and usually a de novo event. We report the se- nasal root and nasal bridge, depressed nasal tip, short columella, long,flat cond patient with an inherited deletion of this region. Our patient supports philtrum,thin upper lip and retromicrognathia. The patient’s karyotype was that this deletion is characterized by a mild phenotype and can be inherited 46,XY. We performed subtelomeric FISH analysis because of non-sendromic from an apparently normal parent. dysmorphic faetures. Two signals for Xqter were detected on each tip of X  P11
.049 chromosome , but no signal was detected for Xpter. His microarray analy- A case with atypical cutaneous finding expand the phenotype of the sis revealed that there were 3.7Mb deletion on Xp22.33p22.31 which con- 22q11.2 distal deletion syndrome tains 9 OMIM genes, 2.5Mb deletion on Xp22.33 pseudoautosomal region S. Ahn, J. Kim, S. Shin, S. Lee, J. Choi; which contains 23 OMIM genes, 2 Mb duplication on Xq28 which contains Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. 52 OMIM genes and 270Kb duplication on Xq28 pseudoautosomal region which contains 3 OMIM genes. Chromosomal analysis from both parents were performed for possible pericentric inversion of X chromosome and Introduction:Interstitial deletions of chromosome 22q11.2, including Di- another chromosomal aberrations. Paternal karyotype was normal, but his George and velocardiofacial syndrome, are the most common microdeleti- mother had pericentric inversion of X chromosome which was confirmed by ons. Recently, rare 22q11.2 distal deletion syndrome with distinct genomic subtelomeric FISH analysis. His brother also had pericentric inversion(X). and clinical features from DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome has been We present this case in order to contribute to the literature. It is important delineated. The 22q11.2 distal deletion syndrome is characterized by deve- to provide genetic counseling that pericentric inversion carrier parents have lopmental delay, pre-and postnatal growth restriction, facial dysmorphism, risk of deleted/duplicated offsprings and affected children. and mild skeletal anomalies. We report a patient with phenotype compa- Muss B.,Schwanitz G.Characterization of Inversions as a Type of Structural tible with the 22q11.2 distal deletion syndrome and with novel phenotype, Chromosome Aberration.Int J Hum Genet 2007;141-161 cutaneous hemangioma.  P11
.047 Materials and Methods:A 3-year-11-month old male was referred for gene- Patient With 22q11.2 Microdeletion and Atypical Clinical Features tic evaluation for moderate mental retardation and developmental delay. V. Šliužas1,2, Ž. Maldžienė1,2, B. Burnyte1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2, A. Utkus1,2; He had short stature, microcephaly, small forehead, high palate, tongue tie, 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius, Lithuania, clinodactyly, left cryptorchidism, and large strawberry hemangioma on his 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Vilnius, trunk. G-banding karyotype using peripheral blood was normal. For scree- Lithuania. ning of common microdeletion syndromes, multiples ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) using  P245
 microdeletion syndrome probemix was performed. We report on a girl with prominent expressive language impairment, mi- Results:MLPA showed heterozygous deletion only for one probe site in crocephaly, dental, ocular, anorectal anomalies and dysmorphic features. PPI L2
 gene at 22q11.21, which located distal to common deleted region of Array-CGH analysis has revealed microdeletion of chromosome 22 spanning DiGeorge syndrome. For confirmatory analysis of screening result, subse- ~2.5 Mb at 22q11.21q11.22 (20,098,507-22,556,733 hg19). FISH analysis quent MLPA using  P250
 DiGeorge probemix showed heterozygous deletion has confirmed de novo microdeletion origin. Huge variety of different size for two additional probe sites located in TO P3
B and HI C2
 genes. The dele- deletions in this particular site as well as high density of the genes in chro- tion involved low-copy repeats (LCR) 22-D region, distinct from recurrent mosome 22 forms variety of phenotypes for the DiGeorge, VCFS and rela- deletion of DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome, and contained 51 genes. ted syndromes. Clinical features of our patient distinguish from DiGeorge Conclusions:We have identified a rare 22q11.2 distal deletion syndrome syndrome, because deletion does not include HIRA and TBX1 genes. Mo- case with previously unreported cutaneous feature. Our finding can expand reover, the deletion detected in our patient genetically and phenotypically our knowledge of the clinical spectrum of the 22q11.2 distal deletion syn- distinguishes from previously reported central 22q11.2 deletions. Renal drome. MLPA is an easy and sensitive analytical method to diagnose these and urogenital anomalies that are common in patients with central 22q11.2 small-sized microdeletion syndromes. deletion have not been observed in our patient. Additionally, our patient has dental anomalies including hypodontia, abnormal shape and enamel  P11
.050 hypoplasia of the central incisor which have not been reported in patients DNMT3A p.Arg882His somatic mutation recurrently observed in adult with similar deletions. The distal breakpoint of the deletion coincide with acute myeloid leukemia can cause Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome common central 22q11.2 microdeletion breakpoint while the proximal bre- when present in germline akpoint of the deletion is atypical and is located more proximally than in R. Kosaki1, H. Terashima2, M. Kubota3, K. Kosaki4; previously reported patients with central 22q11.2 microdeletion. Our case 1Division of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Health and Development Hospital, Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan, 2Division of Neulorogy, National Center for Child confirms the statement that deletions of 22q11.2 region do not represent a Health and Development Hospital, Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan, 3Division of Neurogy, single clinical entity but vary depending on the specific mediating low copy National Center for Child Health and Development Hospital, Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan, repeats and the intervening gene content and emphasizes array-CGH me- 4Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. thod as the most powerful diagnostic tool.  P11
.048 A new case of distal 22q11.2 microdeletion of region LCR22 E-F DNA methylation plays critical role for both embryonic development and J. M. Carbonell-Perez1, M. E. Sanchez-Gutierrez1, J. Saenz-Hurtado1, E. Galan-Gomez2, P. tumorigenesis and is mediated through various DNA methyltransferases. Mendez-Perez2; Germline mutations in the de novo DNA methyltransferase DNMT3A cause 1Hospital Infanta Cristina, Badajoz, Spain, 2Hospital Materno Infantil, Badajoz, Spain. peculiar form of overgrowth syndrome, Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome (TBRS). Somatic mutations in DNMT3A are causally associated with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and p.Arg882His represents the hotspot. Muta- Introduction: There are different 22q11.2 distal microdeletions, depending tion spectrum in TBRS and AML never overlapped to date. Furthermore, on the mediating LCRs (D to H). They vary in size and position but in lite- no patients with TBRS have reported to have developed AML. We report a rature they have been considered as a single clinical entity. Recently, a clas- livebirth and survival of an infant with the TBRS phenotype who had the sification has been proposed based on size and gene content that proposes germline de novo DNMT3A mutation at the AML somatic mutation hotspot three different entities. They share some clinical features: Developmental p.Arg882His. The female patient had a birth weight of 3926 g (+2.2SD) delay, intellectual disability and mild dEySsmHoGrp 2hi0c 1fe6a t|u rBeAs. ROnCeE oLf OthNemA i,s Sa PAaINnd |l eWngWth Wof .5 E4
S HcmG (.+O2.R7SGD). Characteristic features included hypot2o3ni3a,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index round face, narrow palpebral fissures, ventricular septal defect, umbilical 17, 18 chromosomes. The mosaic duplication encompasses a region contai- hernia, sacral cyst, Chiari type I anomaly, and intellectual disability. At age 6 ning over 90 genes including the TBX1 gene, which overexpression might years, she had overgrowth with a weight of 29.2 kg (+3.2 SD) and a length of be responsible for the patient’s phenotype. SEPT5, G P1
BB, DGCR2, CLTC L1
, 125.8 cm (+3.1SD) and head circumference of 55cm (+2.8SD). Identification CD C45
L genes, which are responsible for the cell cycle division, cells proli- of the same variant (DNMT3A p.Arg 882 His) as both germline mutation feration and could be leukemia-related. We do hypothesize, that this dupli- associated with TBRS and somatic mutation associated with AML directly cation may influence the clonal events in the bone marrow and increase the links mechanistic basis of the two diseases for the first time. We conclude predisposition to pre-B-ALL.  P11
.053 that mutations responsible for TBRS and those for AML are likely to exert Duplication, partial duplication and triplication of 9p in children and the same mode of action: decreased methyltransferase activity and reduced their impact on phenotype (4 cases) DNA binding activity. From a clinical standpoint, our observation indicates K. Adamová1, V. Curtisová1, P. Čapková1, M. Holzerová2, M. Jarošová2, A. Šantavá1, J. surveillance for hematologic abnormalities is needed among patients with Srovnal3; TBRS. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital and Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Hemato- Oncology Clinic, University Hospital and Palacky University,  P11
.051 Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University A novel mutation of TB C1
D24 identified in a Turkish family with Hospital and Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. DOORS syndrome E. Atli, H. Gurkan, S. Demir Ulusal, Y. Karal, E. I. Atli, H. Tozkir; Trakya University, Edirne, Turkey. We present four cases of aberrations of the short arm of chromosome 9 de- tected postnatally in children and the impact on their phenotype. We describe two cases of full trisomy 9p, one case of partial trisomy 9p and Introduction: Deafness, onchodystophy, osteodystrophy and mental retar- one case of tetrasomy 9p. In two patients isochromosome i(9p) and isodi- dation (DOOR or DOORS) syndrome (OMIM 220500) is a rare autosomal centric chromosome idic(9q) were present. Only one aberration arosed as recessive disorder of unknown cause. Small or absent nails and hypoplastic a consequence of balanced chromosomal tranlocation in mother all other terminal phalanges are seen in most individuals. The syndrome is also as- cases were the novo. Patients were examined by G- banding, FISH and CGH sociated with seizure disorder. Approximately 50 affected individuals have or array CGH. been described in the medical literature. Half of the patients with all clinical Trisomy 9p is a rare chromosomal syndrome (Rethoré sy) originally repor- features have mutations in TB C1
D24. ted in the medical literature in 1970 and first proposed as a distinct syndro- Materials and Methods: A 18-month-old girl case born to a G3 P2
A1 female at me in 1975. It is one of the most frequent autosomal rearrangements com- term with NSVD as 2200 gr. Her parents were second degree consanguinous. patible with long survival rate. It arises either as a consequence of balanced Microcephaly, short neck, broad forehead, pointed chin, hypertelorism, high CHA in parents or the novo and is asociated with mental retardation and narrow palate, preauricular tag, flat nasal bridge, open nose wings, absent characteristic facial dysmorphism. There is some discrepancy in the litera- fingernails were determined in physical examination. Optometry, EEG and ture regarding the consistency of clinical features present with relation to cranial MR results were normal in our patient. The patient had hearing loss, the size of the duplicated segment. mental retardation and tonic-clonic seizures for 7 times. Tetrasomy 9 is a very rare chromosomal disorder first described in 1973 Results: Cytogenetic analysis revealed 46,XX,inv(9)(p11q13) karyotype. (Ghymers et al). Isochromosome or isodicentric chromosome is present in We performed sanger sequencing for TB C1
D24 (OMIM 613577) gene with most cases. Phenotype features of tetrazomy 9p are variable among affected deep intronic in-house designed primers. We identified a homozygous sin- individuals including varying degrees of growth retardation, abnormal facial gle base alteration c.1415 G>A (p.G428R) in TB C1
D24 gene. This mutation features, and mental retardation. Death in the neonatal period is common. was found in the proband’s parents.  P11
.054 Conclusions: To our knowledge, the c.1415 G>A mutation has not been re- Interstitial deletion and duplication of 15q25.2-q25.3 ported previously. The c.1415G>A was considered to be damaging by SIFT C. B. Mueller-Hofstede, N. Lichey, U. E. Siebers-Renelt, P. Wieacker, A. Röpke; software, probably damaging (score 1.000) by Polyphen, and disease-cau- Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany. sing by Mutation Tester and the CADD scaled c-score was 34. Therefore, our finding is considered as the first case report of this mutation. We report on a girl with acomplex chromosomal rearrangement in the regi-  P11
.052 on of 15q25.2-q25.3 detected by array CGH analysis.Clinically, the girl pre- 6,6 Mb de novo 22q11.1- q11.22 duplication in a patient with sented at the age of 23 months because of global developmental delay and anomalous pulmonary venous drainage, intestinal malrotation and failure to thrive. Birth-weight, length and head circumference wer.e in the pre B acute lymphoblastic leukemia normal range. After birth, difficulties of feeding and hypotonia were obser- L. -. Cimbalistiene1,2, B. Aleksiuniene1,2, V. Dirse3, I. Tamuliene4; ved. Hereafter she develop ed moderate psychomotoric retardation At pre- 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical sentation she showed short stature, microcephaly, dystrophy and unspecific Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, craniofacial dysmorphism. 3Hematology, Oncology and Transfusion Medicine Center at Vilnius University Hospital Chromosomal analysis generated inconspicuous results. Array CGH analy- Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 4Centre for Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, sis uncovered a complex rearrangement with an interstitial 1,6 Mb deletion Childrens Hospital, Affiliate of Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, in 15q25.2 adjacent to a 607,9 kb duplication in 15q25.2-q25.3. The imba- Lithuania. lances were confirmed by qPCR in the child and excluded in both parents. FISH analysis using two BAC clones revealed a small paracentric inversion (inv(15)(q25.2q25.3)) in the mother. The 22q11.2 duplication syndrome is an extremely variable disorder ran- Isolated deletions in 15q25.2 have already been described in individuals ging from normal to cognitive deficits, dysmorphic facial features, congeni- with intellectual disability. Inverted duplications associated with terminal tal defects and overlaps with some features of DiGeorge/ Velocardiofacial deletions resulting in the loss of the subtelomeric region are reported for syndromes. different chromosomes (Zuffardi et al. 2009). To the best of our knowledge We present a patient with dysmorphic features, congenital defects who was an interstitial inverted duplication with deletion has been described only diagnosed with pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia (pre-B-ALL). The pro- once in 1p36.1 (Milosevic et al. 2014). In contrast to our patient there was band is the first child of non-consanguineous parents was born with birth no predisposing chromosomal abnormality in both parents. weight 3900 g, height 59 cm. Anamnestially he had the surgeries of ano- We report on a rare case of interstitial inverted duplication with deletion malous pulmonary venous drainage and the intestinal malrotation. At the of 15q25.2-q25.3 resulting from a maternal paracentric inversion. This un- age of 4, pre-B ALL and secondary hyperparathyroidism were diagnosed. derlines the necessity of an additional cytogenetic workup of the parents The following dysmorphic facial features were noted: mild ptosis, broad flat including FISH analysis for the detection of predisposing structural rearran- nose, down slanting palpebral fissures, opened mouth. His psychomotor de- gements. velopment was normal.  P11
.055 Chromosome analysis revealed a mosaic karyotype 47, The 3rd W522X mutation in EIF2AK3 gene from Turkey: a new XY,+mar[85]/46,XY[15]. To further determination the chromosomal origin patient with Wolcott-Rallison syndrome of the marker chromosome whole-genome SNP array was carried out and A. Unal, T. Bahsi, A. Bakır, E. Percin; identified a de novo 6.6 Mb gain at chromosome region 22q11.1-q11.22. Gazi University, Medical Genetics Department, Ankara, Turkey. The additional genome-wide analysis of patient bone marrow confirmed germline 22q11.1-q11.22 duplication, and revealed other somatic aberra- t2 io3 n4 s - 9.8 Mb in size deletion and hyperdiploidE yS wH itG h t 2 ris0 o1 m6 ie | s B ofA 6,R 1C 1,E 1L 4O , N IA nt, r S odP uA ctI iN on | : W WoW lcoW tt-. RE aS llH isoG n. O syR ndG rome (WRS), also known as multipleABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index epiphyseal dysplasia with early-onset diabetes mellitus is a rare autoso- tricular canal defect. Here, we performed whole exome sequencing in one mal recessive multisystemic disorder. Its characteristic clinical features are of the two sisters, and identified compound heterozygosity for inactivating permanent neonatal or early infancy insulin-dependent diabetes and later mutations in the DYN C2
LI1 gene. Sanger analyses confirmed these variants onset skeletal dysplasia. Other frequent clinical manifestations are hepatic in both affected sisters and in a third member of the family, who displayed and renal dysfunction, mental retardation, cardiac abnormalities, exocrine an overlapping phenotype. Our finding indicates that inactivating DYN C2
LI1 pancreatic dysfunction, primary hypothyroidism and neutropenia. Although mutations can underlie Ellis-van Creveld phenotype. WRS is a rare disease, it is the most common cause of permanent neonatal  P11
.058 diabetes mellitus (PNDM) in consanguineous families. The exact frequency Alternations in genes expression microarray in esophageal atresia of this rare syndrome is unknown because patients may die before showing tissues - the role of cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and Rho the characteristic features of the syndrome. cell motility signaling pathways Case: This report presents a case of WRS in an 8-year-old girl with neonatal A. Jakubiak, P. Leszczynski, P. Skiba, M. M. Sasiadek, R. Smigiel; diabetes and short stature whose elder brother died ofE dIFia2bAeKt3es mellitus at Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. 2-months-old age before having a molecular diagnosis. Results: We found a homozygouEs IWF25A2K23X mutation in gene in our patient which was only found in another two unrelated Turkish families. Esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal fistula belongs Discussion: W522X mutation in gene seems to be confined to Tur- to common congenital anomalies. EA may occur as isolated (IEA) or syndro- key and may be a common mutation in WRS patients from this country. In mic (SEA). EA etiology is complex and still unexplained. It is suggested that this paper, we compare the clinical features of the patients having W522X multifactorial mechanism combined with epigenetic factors play role in EA mutation with other patients reported to date. Except the characteristic etiology. features as diabetes mellitus and epiphyseal dysplasia, all the WRS patients The material for study was RNA extracted from esophageal tissue acquired show extensive phenotypic variability that correlates poorly to genotype from newborns with esophageal atresia. The control group was RNA extrac- which suggests that there is no correlation between any spesific mutation ted from esophageal tissues taken from aborted fetuses and stillborn neo- and the clinical manifestation.  P11
.056 nates without congenital defects. In first step the gene expression profiling Paternal uniparental disomy as an etiologic cause of Ellis van Creveld in IEA and SEA vs control was done. The expression analysis was performed syndrome by microarray methods (Agilent SurePrint G3 Human GE). After the func- M. C. D’Asdia1, V. G. Naretto2, B. Torres1, G. Botta3, A. Sciarrone4, A. Onori1, I. Torrente1,5, B. tional analysis of signaling pathways (by KEGG database and DAVID) two Marino6, L. Bernardini1, A. De Luca1; pathways were chosen - cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and Rho 1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2S.C. Genetica Medica - U. A.O. - U. Città della Salute cell motility signaling pathway and nine genes (CC L2
, LIF, TNF, TNFRSF6B, e della Scienza, Torino, Italy, 3Servizio di Anatomia Patologica. Presidio Ospedaliero LIMK1 ARHGEF1, ARHGEF11, TLN1, VCL) were analyzed by real-time PCR O.I.RM.-Sant‘Anna A.O.-U Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, Italy, 4Centro di (The LightCycler® 480 System, Roche). Microarray examination was per- Ecografia e Diagnosi prenatale. A.O.-U Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, Italy, 5Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 6Department of formed on 26 tissues, real-time PCR was done in group of 20 tissues (10 Pediatrics, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy. of IEA and 10 of SEA). Statistical analysis after Real-time PCR was done by Rest2009 Software, Qiagen GmbH. In microarray we identified about 4800 up and down regulated probes bet- Ellis-van Creveld (EvCS; OMIM 225500) syndrome is an autosomal recessive ween IEA and controls and about 5000 up and down regulated probes bet- disorder characterized by a disproportionate limb dwarfism, chondroecto- ween SEA and controls. About 2300 probes occurred both in IEA and SEA dermal dysplasia, congenital heart disease, postaxial polydactyly, and dys- groups. Analysis after real-time PCR showed down-regulation for ARHGEF1 plastic fingernails and teeth, resulting from loss-of-function mutations in gene in IEA vs. control and for LIF gene in SEA vs. control. EVC or EV C2
 genes. We report a fetus presenting with micromelia, narrow  P11
.059 thorax with short ribs, and polydactyly of hands on ultrasound scan at 21 Trio-based whole exome sequencing reveals de novo causative weeks’ gestation. The pregnancy was terminated at this stage and autopsy mutations in esophageal atresia revealed brachydactyly, postaxial polydactyly of both hands, short ribs, ab- R. Zhang; normally short long bones, and dysplastic iliac wings. Fetal tissue was coll- Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. ected fresh in order to perform molecular assays. Sequence analysis of the 21 coding exons of EVC gene revealed that the fetus was homozygous for a frameshift mutation, NM_153717.2:c.1388del;p.(Thr463Serfs*37). DNA Esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) from parental blood samples was analyzed to confirm the carrier status of occur approximately 1 in 3500 live births representing the most common the parents. Analysis of the samples showed that the mutation identified in malformations of the upper digestive tract comprising five anatomical sub- the fetus was not present in the mother. The simplest explanation for this types classified on the basis of the location and the type of anastomosis that would have been a maternally inherited deletion. SNP-array testing was exists between the trachea and the esophagus. The etiology is yet poorly performed to determine the gene copy number and analyze the haplotype understood. in the 4p16.2 region in which EVC gene is located. The results showed no Here we performed whole exome sequencing in 34 case-parent-trios with deletion, but the haplotype revealed the uniparental isodisomy of chromo- EA/TEF to identify disease causing de novo events. WES was performed some 4. Characterization of the homozygous nature of the mutation through using a 100bp paired-end read protocol as per the manufacture’s recom- parental genotyping and SNP-array analysis allowed us to confirm that uni- mendations on an Illumina HiSeq2000 sequencer. Data analysis was done by parental isodisomy of the paternal chromosome 4 carrying the mutated EVC bwa-aln, gatk, samtools and the de novo probability tool DeNovoGear using gene played an etiologic role in the disease. the VARBANK pipeline (CCG, Cologne).  P11
.057 Using standard filter criteria our preliminary analysis identified 28 appa- Mutations in DYN C2
LI1 cause Ellis-van Creveld phenotype M. Niceta1, M. C. Digilio2, K. Margiotti1, M. L. Dentici2, F. R. Lepri3, F. Pantaleoni1, S. rent de novo variants in 17 unrelated patients. Of these we confirmed 26 de Barresi1, A. Palma1, P. Bencivenga1, A. De Luca4, A. Novelli3, E. Bertini5, B. Dallapiccola6, novo variants with Sanger sequencing. Of these CHD7 has been previously M. Tartaglia1; associated with syndromic EA/TEF phenotypes. Currently we evaluate the 1Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, IRCCS, remaining variants for their possible involvement in the development if EA/ Rome, Italy, 2Medical Genetic Unit, Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, TEF in large EA/TEF patient cohorts. Italy, 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 4IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 5Department  P11
.060 of Neurosciences, Unit of Molecular Medicine, Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, IRCCS, Utilization of whole exome sequencing for undiagnosed diseases in Rome, Italy, 6Scientific Directorate, Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Hong Kong Italy. C. Mak, H. Chung, Y. Chu; Department of Paediatrics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. DYN C2
LI1 encodes a component of the dynein-2 complex of intraflagellar transport (IFT), which is crucial for proper ciliogenesis. Biallelic, probab- Introduction: In the past few years, undiagnosed diseases programs world- ly inactivating, mutations in DYN C2
LI1 have previously been reported to wide have had increasing success in finding the etiology of pediatric di- cause a broad phenotypic spectrum, including Jeune syndrome and diver- seases. However, in Hong Kong, whole exome sequencing (WES) is not fun- se phenotypes within the spectrum of “short-rib thoracic” dysplasias. We ded by the government and there is yet to be a large collaborated effort to previously described two sisters exhibEitSinHg Gfea 2tu0re1s6 fi t|t iBnAg ERllCisE-vLaOn CNreAve, lSd PAuINtil i|z eW thWis Wtec.hEnSoHlogGy.. OWRe pGiloted the use of WES in pediatric patients2 s3up5- syndrome but also presenting with hydrometrocolpos and partial atrioven-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.062 Any direct role of FANCA in mitochondria? ported by research funding and collaboration with overseas centers. R. Bottega1, S. Ravera2, M. Faleschini1, R. Bortul1, E. Cappelli3, C. Dufour3, M. Zweyer1, A. Materials and Methods: 70 pediatric patients with undiagnosed diseases Savoia1; were recruited through the genetic clinic, and singleton DNA samples were 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy, sent for WES in collaboration with an overseas laboratory. After initial ana- 2Biochemistry Lab., Department of Pharmacy, University of Genova, Genova, Italy, Genova, Italy, 3Clinical and Experimental Hematology Unit, G. Gaslini Children’s lysis of the variant based on the phenotype, segregation analysis for candi- Hospital, Genoa, Italy, Genova, Italy. date pathogenic variants was performed locally. Results: Using a singleton WES strategy followed by targeted parental San- ger sequencing, pathogenic variants were found in over 30% (n=21) of the Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disorder characterized by chromosomal patients, including conditions recently identified with mutations identified instability, congenital abnormalities, pancytopenia, and predisposition to in causative genes e.g. ASX L3
, DDX3X, PIGO, PURA etc. We shall present cancer. Though they play a role in DNA repair processes, the FA proteins are some illustrative patients and address the challenges of implementing this likely to have other functions. Indeed, FA cells show defective mitochondria technology in our local healthcare system. associated with increased levels of reactive oxygen species and apoptosis. Conclusions: With limited resources, we piloted the application of WES for In order to provide insights into the role of FANCA, one of the FA proteins, undiagnosed pediatric diseases in Hong Kong. Importantly our strategy of we investigated its localization and found that it resides not only in the nu- singleton WES followed by targeted parental Sanger sequencing has make it cleus and the cytoplasm but also in mitochondria. We also analysed its ex- less costly compared to trio-based WES and yet achieving a diagnostic rate pression of in cells derived from patients. Unexpectedly, proteins affected by comparable to those reported overseas. amino acid substitutions are stably expressed in the cytoplasm, suggesting Acknowledgement of grant support: This work was supported by grants that they could be hypomorphic, exerting some role in the mitochondria. from the S K Yee Medical Foundation and The Society for the Relief of Consistent with this hypothesis, the mitochondrial phenotype is less severe Disabled Children. in cells carrying one or two missense alleles than in those completely lak-  P11
.061 king FANCA (null cells). Novel Mendelian disorder associated with the impaired function of The energetic and respiratory metabolism of mitochondria was restored or the RNA exosome partially restored when null FANCA cells were transfected with wild type N. Di Donato1,2, T. M. Neuhann3, A. Kahlert1,4, B. Klink1, K. Hackmann1, I. Neuhann5, B. or missense mutant forms of FANCA, respectively, further strengthening the Novotna6, J. Schallner6, I. A. Glass2,7,8, S. E. Parnell9, A. Benet-Pages3, A. M. Nissen3, W. hypothesis of a role of FANCA in mitochondria. Berger10, J. Altmüller11, H. Thiele11, B. H. F. Weber12, E. Schrock1, W. B. Dobyns2,7,13, A. The potential role of the FA proteins in mitochondria has long been neglec- Bier14, A. Rump1; ted despite evidence for defects of this organelle in FA cells. Finding that 1Institute for Clinical Genetics, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Center for Integrative FANCA localizes in the mitochondrion leads the way into investigations that Brain Research, Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, could explain the increased redox status and apoptosis observed in FA. 3Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany, 4Department of Congenital Heart Disease  P11
.063 and Pediatric Cardiology, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, Screening of Fanconi Anemia associated genes reveals BRI P1
 5MVZ Prof. Neuhann, Munich, Germany, 6Sozialpaediatrisches Zentrum, Klinik fuer mutation frequency may be higher than expected in patients from Kinder und Jugendmedizin, Universitaetsklinikum Dresden, Dresden, Germany, Turkey 7Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children‘s Hospital, G. Bagirova, G. Toksoy, S. Avci, Z. Uyguner, U. Altinoglu, S. Basaran, H. Kayserili; University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 8Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, Turkey. 9Department of Radiology, Seattle Children‘s Hospital, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 10Institute of Medical Molecular Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren, Switzerland, 11Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 12Institute of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 13Departments Introduction: FA is recessively inherited chromosomal instability syndrome of Pediatrics and Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, characterized by bone marrow failure, congenital malformations and can- 14Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany. cer predisposition. Pathogenic variants of FANCA are attributed to 60-70%, while BRI P1
 is associated in approximately 2% of the FA patients. Material and method: Targeted gene panel is design to cover all the coding Retinitis pigmentosa in combination with hearing loss can be a feature of exons of 17 FA genes plus flanking exon-intron regions up to 10 bp. Genetic different Mendelian disorders. We describe a novel syndrome caused by analysis is performed on Ion Torrent PGM platform, and detected mutations biallelic mutations in the “exosome component 2” (EXOS C2
) gene. Three and/or alterations considered to be pathogenic are verified by Sanger and individuals from two unrelated German families presented with a previous- screened in family for segregation with inheritance pattern. ly undescribed disorder encompassing childhood myopia, early onset reti- Results: 6 out of 14 alleles found to carry mutations. Two different homo- nitis pigmentosa, progressive sensorineural hearing loss, hypothyroidism, zygous mutations (c.894-2A>G and c.4261-2A>C) in FANCA and one com- short stature, brachydactyly, recognizable facial gestalt, premature aging, pound heterozygous [(c.205+5G>T)+(c.761_764delAGCA)]mutations in and mild intellectual disability. Whole exome sequencing revealed homozy- BRI P1
 gene are identified, accounting to three DEB positive patients. gous and compound heterozygous mutations in EXOS C2
 in all three patients Conclusions: 72 different mutations of BRI P1
 gene are known and out of who shared a large 6.7 Mb rare haplotype on chromosome 9 encompassing 14 are involved in germ line bi-allelic FA. c.761_764delAGCA identified in EXOS C2
. our study is novel and attained to be the second deletion that is reported EXOS C2
 encodes the “ribosomal RNA-processing protein 4” (RR P4
) - one in the context of FA, striking the DEAD-2 domain of the encoding protein of the core components of the RNA exosome. The RNA exosome is a multi- that is different than the former (c.2255_2256delAA), damaging the HELIC protein complex that plays key roles in RNA processing and degradation. domain. One of the discovered amino acid substitutions p.Gly30 by Valin located The results of the limited number of individuals tested in this study, reveals within the N-terminal domain of EXOS C2
 would change the inter-atomic di- that the DEB positivity assures the definitive diagnosis and if the DEB test stance between the mutated EXOS C2
 residue and neighboring amino acids is ignored, mutation detection rate is calculated to be 42%, when presently of EXOS C4
 and, therefore, destabilize EXOS C2
-EXOS C4
 interaction. A similar known FA genes are analyzed, in which that the 28% holds for FANCA and mechanism was proposed for the recurrent mutation p.Gly31Ala in the NT the 14% holds for BRI P1
 associated mutations. domain of EXOS C3
. Intriguingly, the EXOS C2
-associated phenotype shows  P11
.064 only minimal overlap with the previously reported diseases associated with A de novo 13q31.1q.31.2 deletion spanning MIR17HG associated with mutations in the RNA exosome core component genes EXOS C3
 and EXOS C8
. Feingold syndrome type 2 and keratoconus Taken together, we report on a novel condition that is caused by altered RNA F. Sirchia1,2, E. di Gregorio1, B. Pasini1,2, E. Grosso1, A. Brusco1,2, D. Carli1,2, G. Gai1, V. Naretto1, A. Zonta1, G. Restagno1; exosome function and expands the spectrum of clinical consequences of im- 1Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, Torino, paired RNA metabolism. Italy, 2University of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Turin, Italy. We report on a 58-year old woman with microcephaly, mild dysmorphic features, bilateral keratoconus, digital abnormalities, short stature and mild cognitive delay. The phenotype was suggestive for Feingold syndrome type 2, an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by a variable combination of microcephaly, digital abnormalities, short stature and mild-to-moderate 236 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONiAnt,e SllePcAtuIaNl d| iWsabWilitWy. .MEISRH17GH.GO iRs Gthe gene known to cause the disease (FGLD S2
, MIM614326).ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Karyotype analysis showed a deletion on chromosome 13q, further defined tified within 3 genes, FRA S1
, FREM2 and GRI P1
, all involved in mesenchy- by Array-CGH to span a 17.3-Mb region on 13q31.1q.31.2, including the mal-epidermal adhesion during embryonic development. This descriptive MIR17HG gene. The deletion was proved to be de novo by real-time qPCR. study analyzed the prenatal ultrasound and fetal phenotype in 35 cases of Feingold type 2 is a very rare Mendelian syndrome, described in few pati- FS. Termination of the pregnancy was performed in 24 cases, intra-uterine ents worldwide. Our proband shows a never reported association between death was diagnosed in 8 cases, between 16 and 36 weeks of pregnancy, and FGLD S2
 and keratoconus. We noted that the 17.3-Mb deletion on chromoso- 3 cases died after birth. All cases presented dysmorphic features with nose me 13q partially overlap with the keratoconus 7 locus, identified by linkage and ear dysplasia. Complete or abortive cryptophtalmia and renal anomaly analysis on Ecuadorian families (MIM614629). Thus we suspect that haplo- (agenesis, hypoplasia or dysplasia) were present in 34/35 cases, syndacty- insufficiency of a gene nearby MIR17HG, defined by the overlapping seg- ly in 33/35, bronchopulmonary anomalies in 30/34, genital anomalies in ment between our deletion and the linkage region is causing keratoconus. 30/35, and sexual phenotype was frequently difficult to establish. Multiple Nine genes are included in this segment. Among these, the best candidates anomalies were observed in the digestive tract: low set ombilicus (23/34), are MBN L2
 and IPO5. MBN L2
 encodes a muscleblind protein responsible for anal atresia/stenosis (16/33), intestinal malrotation (10/33) and ompha- terminal differentiation of muscle and photoreceptor tissues. IPO5 encodes locele (6/35). Ultrasound results were available in 24 cases. Reported ano- a protein nuclear transport and it is expressed in human cornea. malies were oligoamnios (18), ascites (8), renal anomalies (19), broncho- In conclusion, we describe a possible contiguous gene syndrome phenotypi- pulmonary anomalies (11), ophthalmologic anomalies (4), ear dysplasia (2) cally characterized by Feingold syndrome type 2 and keratoconus, due to a and syndactyly (2). The fetal and postnatal phenotype of FS is very specific, large deletion on 13q overlapping MIR17HG and a still to be identified gene while ultrasound diagnosis is complicated by the presence of oligoamnios. for keratoconus. This study shows that cardinal FS diagnosis criteria are rarely found on pre-  P11
.065 natal ultrasound. Evidence for low set ombilicus, microphtalmia, and genital A novel synonymous mutation in FGFR1 causes Hartsfield syndrome anomalies should lead to consider the diagnosis of FS. C. Courage1,2, J. Neidhardt3, F. Dallèves2, J. Lemke4; 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Division of Human Genetics,  P11
.067 University Children‘s Hospital, Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland, 3Institute of Human Frontonasal dysplasia in two girls with EFNB1 gene duplications Genetics, University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, I. V. Kanivets1,2,3, V. G. Solonichenko3, S. N. Stavtseva4, F. A. Konovalov1,2, D. V. Pyankov1,2, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. S. A. Korostelev1,2; 1Genomed Ltd, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2FSBI „Research Centre for Medical Genetics“, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Filatov Children‘s clinical hospital, Moscow, Hartsfield syndrome is a rare clinical entity characterized by the triad of Russian Federation, 4Z.I. Kruglaya Regional Children‘s Clinical Hospital, Orel, Russian holoprosencephaly, ectrodactyly and cleft lip/palate. In addition to these Federation. symptoms patients with Hartsfield syndrome can show developmental de- lay of variable severity, isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH), central diabetes insipidus, vertebral anomalies, eye anomalies and cardiac Frontonasal dysplasia occurs in patients with various genomic abnorma- malformations. Mutations in FGFR1 have been described to cause a wide lities, including chromosomal rearrangements, point mutations and copy phenotypic spectrum such as Hartsfield syndrome, hypogonadotropic hypo- number variations (CNVs) affecting single genes. We examined two girls, gonadism with or without anosmia, Jackson-Weiss syndrome, osteoglopho- aged 1 year and 5 months, with developmental delay, frontonasal dyspla- nic dysplasia, Pfeiffer syndrome and trigonocephaly type 1. sia, and other congenital anomalies. In addition to frontonasal dysplasia, Here we describe a novel synonymous mutation in FGFR1 identified by exo- the 1-year old girl had hypotonia, deformed low-set ears, hemangioma of me sequencing in two siblings born to non-consanguineous healthy Swiss upper lip. In the 5-months old girl, additional phenotypic features inclu- parents. The male patient presented with lobular holoprosencephaly with a ded plagiocephaly, camptodactyly and umbilical hernia. Chromosomal mi- single maxillary incisor, ectro-/syndactyly on both feet, syndactyly on both croarray analysis (CMA) using SNP array (Affymetrix Cytoscan 750k) was hands, craniosynostosis of the sagittal suture, delayed puberty and develop- performed as a first-line test according to ACMG recommendations. Both mental delay. His younger sister was diagnosed with diabetes insipidus, in girls appeared to have a copy number gain of EFNB1 gene: a 1-year old girl addition to syndactyly of the right foot and an aortic isthmus stenosis. A cra- had 3 copies (molecular karyotype: arr Xq13.1(67,923,907-68,158,871)x3, nial MRI showed agenesis of corpus callosum and colpocephaly. The novel size 235 kb), and a 5-months old girl had 4 copies (molecular karyotype: arr synonymous missense mutation c.1029G>A (p.Ala343Ala) FGFR1 detected Xq13.1(67,863,904-68,457,240)x4, size 693 kb). According to the OMIM da- in both affected siblings, was excluded in DNA extracted from leukocytes of tabase, point mutations and deletions (but no duplications so far) in EFNB1 the parents and their healthy sister. Therefore, we assume a gonadal mo- gene were described in X-linked dominant Craniofrontonasal syndrome saicism or somatic mosaicism including germ cells of this mutation. In one (304110) with prevalence in female patients. of the FGFR1 isoforms this guanine to adenine substitution is located in a The use of CMA allows identification of genes having clinically significant specific splice acceptor region, which we currently are functionally valida- dosage effect associated not only with copy number losses, but with gains ting in vitro. as well. This may lead to a revision in the testing strategy for patients with  P11
.066 distinctive facial features. Fraser syndrome: fetal presentation and prenatal diagnosis from a  P11
.068 series of 35 cases Input of exome sequencing in clinical and molecular characterization A. Tessier1, M. Sarreau2, F. Pelluard3, G. André3, A. Beaufrère4, S. Blesson5, M. Bucourt6, of patients referred for Fronto-Nasal Dysplasia P. Callard7, I. Creveaux8, P. Dechelotte4, T. Frebourg1, B. Gilbert-Dussardier9, C. Jeanne- D. Lehalle1,2,3, P. Kuentz3, J. Thevenon3,1,2, D. Bonneau4, M. Fradin5, M. Gérard6, A. Pasquier10, F. Guimiot11, A. Laquerrière12, P. Loget13, C. Mechler14, M. Perez15, P. Tixeront16, Goldenberg7, T. Martin-Denavit8, A. Masurel1,2, M. Rio9, S. Whalen10, B. Bessière11, E. R. Van Der Luijt17, S. Patrier12, A. Guerrot1; Bieth12, V. Cormier-Daire9, F. Demurger5, P. Edery8, D. Geneviève13, S. Julia12, D. Lacombe14, 1Inserm U1079, Rouen University and Department of Genetics, Rouen University S. Marlin9, S. Odent5, J. Plaisancié12, A. Putoux8, C. Thauvin1,2,3, L. Faivre1,2,3, P. Callier3; Hospital, Normandy Centre for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, 1Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies du 2Department of Obstetrics, Angoulême Hospital, Angoulême, France, 3Department of Développement (TRANSLAD), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France, Foetopathology, Bordeaux Pellegrin University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 4Department 2Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes of Pathology, Clermont Ferrand University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, France, Malformatifs de l’Interrégion Est, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France, 5Department of Genetics, Tours University Hospital, Tours, France, 6Department of 3Equipe GAD, EA4271, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, Foetopathology, Jean Verdier Hospital, Bondy, France, 7Department of Pathology, Tenon 4Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU d‘Angers, Angers, France, 5Service de Génétique Hospital, Paris, France, 8Department of Molecular Genetic, Clermont Ferrand University clinique, CHU de Rennes - Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 6Service de Génétique, Hôpital Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 9Department of Genetics EA3808, Poitiers Clémenceau, CHU de Caen, Caen, France, 7Service de Génétique, CHU de Rouen - Hôpital University and Poitiers University Hospital, Poitiers, France, 10Departement of Pathology, Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France, 8Service de génétique, CHU de Lyon HCL - GH Est - Caen University Hospital, Caen, France, 11Department of developmental biology, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Bron, France, 9Département de Génétique, Université Paris UMR1141, Robert Debré University Hospital and Paris Diderot University, Paris, France, Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut IMAGINE UMR_ S1163
, Hôpital Necker-Enfants 12Department of Pathology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 13Department of Malades, Paris, France, 10Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique et de Pathology, Rennes University Hospital, Rouen, France, 14Department of Pathology, Louis Cytogénétique, Unité fonctionnelle de génétique clinique, Paris, France, 11Département Mourier Hospital, Colombes, France, 15Department of Foetopathology, Department of d’Histologie-Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, Medical Genetics, Montpellier University Hospital, Montpellier, France, 16Department France, 12Département de Génétique, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 13Service of Pathology, Poitiers University Hospital, Poitiers, France, 17. Department of Genetics, de Génétique Médicale, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 14Service de Génétique Utrecht Medical Center University, Utrecht, Netherlands. Clinique, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. Fraser syndrome (FS) is a rare autosomal recessive malformation disorder Introduction: Frontonasal dysplasias (FND) are facial malformations cha- described for the first time in 1962. Major criteria are cryptophtalmos, syn- racterized by hypertelorism, median facial cleft and nasal tip anomalies. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 237 dactyly, respiratory and urinary tract anomalies. Mutations have been iden- Their rarity and the lack of molecular basis in most entities explain clinicalABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and genetic heterogeneity. Mutations in ALX genes family are responsible unrelated parents born post-term after uneventful pregnancy. At 10 weeks, for autosomal recessive (ALX1, ALX3, ALX4) or dominant (ALX4) FND. Cra- she was hospitalized for marked craniofacial dysmorphism, cleft palate, bi- nio-fronto-nasal syndrome (CFNS), acromelic FND and Teebi syndromes are lateral microphthalmia with cataract, interventricular and interatrial sep- caused by mutations in respectively EFNB1, ZSWIM6 and SPEC C1
L. Molecu- tal defects with patent ductus arteriosus. Growth was delayed. Cranial CT lar basis of oculo-auriculo-fronto-nasal (OAFNS), oculo-cerebro-cutaneous scan confirmed craniosynostosis involving the coronal sutures. At clinical (OCCS) and Pai syndromes are not known. examination diagnosis was suggested based on craniofacial characteristics Materiel and methods: We report a series of 35 patients referred to sequence including brachycephaly with midface hypoplasia, low frontal hairline, syn- ALX genes. Sanger sequencing of ALX1, ALX3 and ALX4 was performed in 14 ophrys, microphthalmia, posteriorly angulated ears, bifid nasal tip, promi- individuals and identified one ALX3 heterozygous mutation in one patient. nent columella, dental abnormalities, arched narrow palate with bifid uvula, Based on the phenotype, we identified 24 FND, 2 CFNS, 5 OAFNS, 2 OCCS, generalized hypertrichosis and short stature. Left cutaneous syndactyly of and 2 Teebi syndromes. Sanger sequencing of EFNB1 was performed in both toes 2-3 was evident. We requested an audiogram revealing left sided con- individuals presenting with CFNS. Trio exome sequencing was performed in ductive hearing loss. GCMS is exceedingly rare with core features consisting seven patients. in craniosynostosis, ocular and ectodermal derivatives defects. Autosomal Results: We identified de novo EFNB1 mutations in the two CFNS patients, recessive inheritance was suggested since the disease recurred in two pairs as well as new mutations in known genes (YWHAE, OTX2 and SPEC C1
L) in of sisters. So far, no gene associated to this syndrome exists thus radically patients respectively labeled as FND, OCCS and Teebi syndrome, and a de limiting diagnosis and reproductive options in affected individuals and their novo variant in a candidate gene in a fetus with FND. Replication cohorts are families.  P11
.071 being sequenced. Growth retardation, delayed bone age and mild developmental delay Conclusion: This series and these results highlight the input of exome se- in a patient with microduplication at 2p25.1- case study quencing in the identification of molecular basis in syndromes with FND, K. Wojciechowska1, A. Poluha1, B. Wiśniowiecka2, B. Nowakowska2, J. Kowalczyk1; leading to a better clinical description of these rare entities and allowing to 1Childrens University Hospital, Lublin, Poland, 2Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, broaden the phenotypic spectrum of known syndromes. Poland.  P11
.069 Genetic and genomic analysis in patients affected by Gorham-Stout disease and general lymphatic anomalies More than 20 patients have been reported in the literature with duplication L. Rodriguez Laguna1, M. Crespo1, V. Fernandez-Montaño1, R. Martín-Arenas1, E. of the short arm of chromosome 2. The affected patients had both different Vallespín1, A. del Pozo1, K. Ibañez1, J. Silla-Castro1, G. Herranz1, G. Oliva-Molina1, R. Mena1, sizes of the duplications and they also have different clinical features. Recur- M. Gomez1, I. Rueda-Arenas1, J. Nevado1, P. Lapunzina2, J. López-Gutiérrez3, V. Martínez- rent phenotypic features include growth retardation, delayed bone age and Glez2; mild developmental delay. We report a 12- year-old female patient with 180 1INGEMM-idiPAZ, Madrid, Spain, 2INGEMM-idiPAZ-CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, kbp duplication at 2p25.1 which she inherited from her mother. Our patient 3Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. is noted to have severe growth retardation, delayed bone age and mild deve- lopmental delay. Also her mother has relatively low height. Investigation with whole-genome oligonucleotide microarray CGH analy- Introduction: Gorham-Stout disease (GSD) and general lymphatic anoma- sis which was performed using clinical 60K microarrays from Oxford Gene lies (GLA) are potentially fatal conditions with significant mortality rates, Technology (CytoSure ISCA v2) revealed duplication spanning of approxi- characterized by lymphatic malformations (LMs) and different patterns of mately 180 kbp and between breakpoints rs9,955,335 and rs10,136,171 at osteolysis. The genetic causes are still unknown, but somatic mosaicism is 2p25.1. suspected. This duplicated region contains GRH L1
, KLF11, CY S1
 genes as well as a part Methods and Results: Our database includes 78 GSD and 52 GLA patients. of the TAF1B gene. All experiments included paired blood/tissue samples. Genomic dose ex- Litteareture review revealed that GRH L1
 gene plays an important role in periments (Illumina SNP BeadChips) did not detect common UPD/CNV re- epithelial development and epidermal differentiation. KLF11 is involved in gions (germinal or somatic). Mutational screening using NGS experiments the regulation of cell growth and differentiation and it is a glucose- inducible (Exome and TruSight One, Illumina), was performed in 18 PpIaKt3ieCnAts. In-house regulator of the insulin gene.TAF1B is a component of RNA polymerase I bioinformatics tools were developed to call somatic variants. A list of 578 core factor complex. candidate genes was obtained —48 were somatic—. No mutations Our patient is the first reported patient with a duplication of above- mentio- —known to be associated to cystic LMs— were detected, but variations in ned genes and her clinical features conform the symptoms which are pre- other four PI3K associatePdIK g3eCnAes were found. As a second step we designed sent in most of the reported patients with different duplications at the short a custom NGS panel with a 1.000X vertical coverage, including the 578 can- arm of chromosome 2. didate genes as well as associated genes and other vascular/lym-  P11
.072 phatic genes. We present here a preliminary candidate gene list. Novel missense FGFR1 mutation in a patient with Hartsfield Conclusion: Use of NGS ―at large reading depths— and specific bioinforma- syndrome tic algorithms for detecting somatic variations in paired blood/tissue samp- M. Piotrowicz1, A. Sowińska-Seidler2, A. Jamsheer2, L. Jakubowski1; 1Department of Genetics, Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital Research Institute, Lodz, les, is the appropriate methodology for gene discovery in entities caused by Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, mutations in somatic mosaicism form. We have obtained a candidate gene Poznan, Poland. list, including four PI3K associated genes, taking us closer to the cause of GSD/GLA. Our future approach includes the isolation of lymphatic endothe- lial cell from LMs in GSD/GLA patients as a necessary tool for further genetic Hartsfield syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by the associa- and functional analysis. tion of holoprosencephaly (HPE) and ectrodactyly, with or without cleft lip/  P11
.070 palate, and variable additional abnormalities. Dominant or recessive FGFR1 The eighth patient with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss Syndrome loss of function mutations have been recently shown to give rise to Harts- S. Lanciotti1, C. Coco2, F. Brancati3; field syndrome. 1Section of Genetics, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University, In this paper, we report a sporadic case of a male subject with Hartsfield syn- Rome, Italy, 2Altamedica maternal-fetal Medical Centre, Rome, Italy, 3Section of Genetics, drome who presented with ectrodactyly, semilobar HPE, bilateral cleft lip Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, Gabriele D’Annunzio and palate, bilateral vesicoureteral reflux, cryptorchidism, mental retarda- University, Chieti, Italy. tion, and facial dysmorphism composed of flat facial profile, dysplastic ears, and thin vermilion border. No causative abnormalities were found at the cytogenetic level, including karyotype and 1.4 M array CGH. Upon molecu- Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss Syndrome (GCMS; OMIM%233500), firstly descri- lar screening of FGFR1 gene by means of Sanger sequencing, we detected a bed in 1960 in two sisters, is a neglected condition reported in the medical novel heterozygous missense c.1868A>G (p.Asp623Gly) variant, which was literature in only seven females. GCMS associates craniosynostosis (coro- subsequently confirmed to occur as a de novo mutational event. The variant nal), ectodermal dysplasia features including hair (diffuse hypertrichosis, was predicted to be damaging to the protein function by the common bio- synophrys, coarse hair) and teeth (abnormally shaped, hypodontia, mi- informatic algorithms used for pathogenicity assessment (MutationTaster2, crodontia) abnormalities, microphthalmia, conductive deafness, minor con- SIFT, Polyphen2). Additionally, the variant was not annotated in ExAC, EVS genital heart defects and hypoplastic labia majora. All patients show normal or dbSNP databases, however a substitution within the same amino acid po- intelligence. Although craniofacial manifestations are characteristic partial sition (p.Asp623Tyr) was already described in another case of Hartsfield overlap with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome exist. We report the eighth case of 238 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONsAy,n dSrPoAmIeN. | WWW.ESHG.ORG GCMS diagnosed at the age of 14 years. She was the second child of healthyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Our paper provides a detailed clinical presentation of newly identified male aberrations included five deletions and two duplication in genes related to individual affected with Hartsfield syndrome and expends the mutational HPE. Three individuals had deletions involving SHH on 7q, one individual spectrum associated with this extremely rare genetic condition. had a duplication involving SHH on 7q, one individual had a deletion on 18p Funding: This work was supported by a grant from the National Centre involving the TGIF1 gene, and another individual had a duplication on 13q for Research and Development (LIDER/008/431/L-4/12/NCBR/2013) to involving the ZI C2
 gene. Our results also showed that microdeletions/du- Aleksander Jamsheer. plications in the major HPE genes SHH, TGIF, and ZI C2
 are causative for the frank HPE phenotype, being the SHH the major one ( 9.5% in SHH, 1,9% in  P11
.073 TGIF, and 1,9% in ZI C2
). As HPE patients are surviving longer, we believe Case report: A novel CCB E1
 gene mutation for Hennekam that an effort to search for CNVs is a valuable tool for genetic counseling lymphangiectasia syndrome when analyses for mutations in the known HPE genes are negative. F. Harrazi1, M. Yavari1,2, S. Seyedhassani1; 1Dr.Seyedhassani medical genetic center, yazd, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of Grants: Fapeg Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran, Islamic Republic of.  P11
.076 TBX3 and TBX5 duplication: a family with an atypical overlapping Holt-Oram/Ulnar-Mammary syndrome phenotype Introduction: Hennekam lymphangiectasia syndrome is a rare autosomal M. Holder-Espinasse1, E. Thomas1, A. Davies2, N. Timoney3, A. Frigiola4, M. Logan5; recessive condition. Onset is usually in childhood. The syndrome presents 1Clinical Genetics Department, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Genetics with lymphedema, intestinal lymphangiectasia, intellectual deficit and facial laboratories, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Plastic Surgery Department, dysmorphism. The diagnosis of Hennekam is suspected on the basis of cli- St Thomas Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Cardiology Department, St Thomas nical phenotypic features. PhenotypicC CaBbEno1rmalities relate to impaired pre- Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 55. Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics. natal and postnatal lymphatic flow resulting from mCCuBtaEt1ions in the collagen King‘s College London, Guy‘s Campus, London, United Kingdom. and calcium-binding EGF-domain 1 ( ) during lymphangiogenesis. In this study, we analyzed the DNA sequences of CgCeBneE 1in a patient aged 3 years old with Hennekam syndrome. Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a rare autosomal dominant heart-hand syn- Materials and methods: The entire coding regions of the gene were drome due to mutations in the TBX5 transcription factor. A wide spectrum aCnCaBlEy1zed for mutations by PCR-based direct DNA sequencing. of TBX5 mutations has been previously reported, mostly resulting in null Results: One novel homozygous mutation IV S7
(+12) A>G at position 640 on allele and haploinsufficiency, but some mutations also affect the nuclear lo- gene has been detected. The heterozygosity of the parents for this calisation of the TBX5 protein or its interaction with co-factors and down- IV S7
 was confirmed by direct sequence analysis. Bioinformatic analysis con- stream targets. TBX5 duplications have been previously reported in asso- firmed our studies. ciation with atypical HOS phenotypes. Ulnar-Mammary syndrome (UMS) Conclusions: This mutation occurs in the deep intronic positions. Activation is also a rare autosomal dominant condition due to mutations in the TBX3 of an intronic cryptic acceptor site and creation of an intronic ESE site could gene. Clinical variability is the rule for both HOS and UMS and incomplete be created by the mutation. Complementary assessment such as functional penetrance has often been reported. Contiguous chromosome 12q24 deleti- study should be considered for suggestion of prenatal diagnosis. ons comprising both TBX5 and TBX3 genes have been identified but to our knowledge, mirror duplications have never been described.  P11
.074 We report on a large family with at least 10 affected individuals presenting A Turkish girl with Hennekam Syndrome with a 399kb duplication at 12q24.21 identified on array-CGH and compri- A. I. Gurler, T. Bahsi, D. Karaer, K. Karaer; sing TBX5 and TBX3 genes, over 3 generations. Patients are presenting with dr ersin arslan Training and Research Hospital medical genetic, gaziantep, Turkey. variable limb anomalies involving both the radial and the ulnar rays and in- teresting cardiac findings such as hypertrabeculation of the left ventricular cavity, possibly in keeping with left ventricular non compaction, tachycar- Hennekam syndrome is an autosomal recessive syndrome, characterized by dia, persistent arterial duct or aortic stenosis... Additional findings such has generalized lymphatic dysplasia (ie. lymphedema and lymphangiectasia), accessory nipples were also noted. Fluorescent in situ hybridisation is cur- variable intellectual disability and characteristic dysmorphic features. Re- rently pending to confirm the breakpoints of the 12q24.21 duplication and cent studies reported patients with Hennekam Syndrome having mutations the underlying mechanism. We will also attempt to look at allele-specific in CCB E1
 gene. expression and to sequence around the breakpoints to explain the molecu- A 7 years-old girl was referred to our center because of mild intellectual lar contribution to the clinical findings. disability and dysmorphic features. She was borned to healthy 2nd degree  P11
.077 cousins relative parents. The child had chylous acid, lymphatic congestion Chitayat Syndrome: hyperphalangism, facial anomalies, hallux valgus, and dysmorphic features (bilaterally epicanthus, hypertelorism, flat nasal and bronchomalacia results from a recurrent c.266A>G (p.Tyr89Cys) bridge, full cheeks, flat malar region, long philtrum). A mutation analysis of variant in the ERF gene CCB E1
 gene was requested. The results revealed a previously published se- M. Balasubramanian1, J. A. Bernstein2, H. Lord3, S. Levesque4, F. Thuriot4, A. Wenger2, G. quence variant a missense c.520C>T (p.Cys174Arg) in a homozygous state. Sillon5, H. Guturu2, D. L. Sureka2, G. Bejerano2,6,7, D. Chitayat8; The patient we describe here has a lymphatic dysplasia with mild intellec- 1Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Stanford Children‘s tual disability and dysmorphism caused by mutation in CCB E1
, highlighting Health, Lucile Packard Children‘s Hospital, Stanford University School of Medicine, the phenotypic variability that can be seen with abnormalities in this gene. Stanford, CA, United States, 3Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, The Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom,  P11
.075 4Department of Pediatrics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, 5Department of Medical Genetics, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Microdeletions/duplications in patients with holoprosencephaly QC, Canada, 6Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United phenotype States, 7Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United L. A. Ribeiro-Bicudo1, N. A. Bergamo1, B. S. Maranhão1, J. T. Arruda1, V. M. Torres1, J. States, 8The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics Marino1, B. F. Gamba2, A. R. Costa3; and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital; Division of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, 1Federal University of Goias, Goiânia, Brazil, 2Sao Paulo State University, Botucatu, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children; University of Toronto, Toronto, Brazil, 3Sao PauloUniversity, Bauru, Brazil. ON, Canada. Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a malformation sequence in which the cerebral Background: In 1993, Chitayat et al., reported a newborn with hyperpha- hemispheres fail to separate into distinct left and right halves, resulting in langism, facial anomalies, and diffuse bronchomalacia. We have identified 2 midline structural anomalies of the central nervous system and face. Nu- more families with similar findings. Characteristic features include bilateral merous different heterozygous mutations have been identified in HPE pa- accessory phalanx resulting in shortened index fingers; hallux valgus; facial tients, including missense, nonsense, deletion, and frameshift mutations features including prominent eyes, hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge located throughout the gene. In addition, in a recent study of over 200 pa- and upturned nose; respiratory compromise due to bronchomalacia neces- tients with isolated HPE, 22% were found to have copy number variations sitating ventilatory support; pectus excavatum. (CNVs). However, the majority of etiologies of isolated HPE have yet to be Methods: Trio-based exome sequencing was performed in 3 unrelated fami- determined. lies. Putative de novo variants were identified from exome data using DeNo- In the present work, the MLPA technique was performed in 52 individuals voGear software and validated using Sanger sequencing. within the HPE spectrum who presented negative mutational screening test Results: The same variant c.266A>G p.(Tyr89Cys) Refseq NM_006494.2 in for the major HPE genes, and anomalEieSs HwGer e2 f0ou1n6d |i nB sAevReCn EcaLsOesN. TAhe, sSe PAEINRF |: Wde WnovWo .(EPSatHieGnt. 1O&R2G) and inherited from affected father (Patie2nt3 39),ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index was identified. The p.Tyr89Cys is an aromatic polar neutral to polar neutral inflow from cosmopolitan populations. As a consequence, founder populati- amino acid change, highly conserved across species and lies within the func- ons maintain a relatively homogeneous genetic background that is amenab- tionally important ets-domain of the protein. This variant has never been le for genetic studies and novel gene discovery. reported (1000 genomes, dbSNP build 144, EVS or EXAC). The recurrent Materials and Methods: We have performed exome sequencing in families c.266A>G p.(Tyr89Cys) ERF missense variant causes Chitayat syndrome. within two founder populations of Amish and Mennonite ancestry seen for Discussion: ERF has been shown to suppress ets-induced transformation genetic evaluation at the Clinic for Special Children in Strasburg, PA, USA. and be regulated by phosphorylation throughout the cell cycle via ras/ We sequenced the exomes of the proband, parents, and all available affected MAPK signalling pathway. ERF variants have been associated with com- and unaffected siblings. We performed pedigree-based variant analyses and plex craniosynostosis. In contrast, none of the patients with the c.266A>G segregation in order to identify candidate disease genes. p.(Tyr89Cys) variant have craniosynostosis. Results: As expected for founder populations, we identified known and no- Conclusions: We report the molecular aetiology of Chitayat syndrome con- vel recessive disease genes, including a case of two recessive disorders se- sistent with the classical triad of hyperphalangism, characteristic face and gregating together in this population. In addition, we have also identified se- respiratory abnormalities. We discuss potential mechanisms for this dis- veral novel genes responsible for previously unreported rare disorders and tinctive phenotype associated with p.Tyr89Cys substitution in ERF and ex- novel variants in recently reported intellectual disability and developmental plore why this variant does not present with craniosynostosis. delay genes such as ARID1B, SETB P1
, PURA, SYNGA P1
, among others. Conclusions: We demonstrate the utility of genomic sequencing in indivi-  P11
.078 duals with genetic disorders and their family members to reach a fast and Recessive inactivating mutations in TBCK, a Rab GTPase-activating accurate molecular diagnosis and identify novel disease genes in the context protein that modulates mTOR signaling, cause severe infantile of a relatively homogeneous genetic background provided by founder popu- syndromic encephalopathy lations such as the Amish and Mennonites. The spectrum of variation obser- V. Caputo*1, J. X. Chong*2, I. G. Phelps2, L. Stella3, L. Worgan4, J. C. Dempsey2, A. Nguyen2, S. Paolacci1, V. Leuzzi5, R. Webster6,7, A. Pizzuti1, C. T. Marvin2, G. E. Ishak8, S. Ardern– ved ranges from autosomal recessive homozygous variants specific to these Holmes7, Z. Richmond9, M. J. Bamshad2,10,11, X. R. Ortiz-Gonzalez12, M. Chopra §9,13,14, D. populations to sporadic de novo variants, often occurring in genes known to Doherty §2,11, M. Tartaglia §15; be related to intellectual disability. 1Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Università La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States,  P11
.080 3Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche, Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Intragenic CASK deletion found in mosaicism in a female patient Rome, Italy, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool, Australia, J. Sá, R. Lemos, C. Ventura, S. M. Pereira, J. Pinto-Basto, P. Tavares, P. Rendeiro; 5Dipartimento di Pediatria e di Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Università La Sapienza, CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal. Rome, Italy, 6T.Y. Nelson Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, the Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 7Institute of Neuroscience and Muscle Research, the Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 8Department of CASK gene encodes for calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein ki- Radiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 9Department of Genomic nase, essential for normal brain development. Disruption of CASK gene is Medicine, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, Sydney, Australia, 10Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 11Division of associated with Mental Retardation and Microcephaly with Pontine and Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children‘s Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States, 12Division of Cerebellar Hypoplasia (MICPCH, MIM 300749), where patients present a Neurology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and Department of Neurology, Perelman remarkably consistent phenotype, including severe intellectual disability/ School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 13School developmental delay, severe postnatal microcephaly and a distinctive facial of Genomic Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 14Shanghai First Maternity phenotype. and Infant Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Pudong, Shanghai, China, We report a 2-year-old female infant with a 109 Kbp intragenic deletion in 15Area di Ricerca „Genetica e Malattie Rare“, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù - IRCCS, CASK gene found in mosaicism, within approximately 25% of the cells. To Rome, Italy. the best of our knowledge, this is the first case to report mosaicism in a female carrier of intragenic CASK deletion. Array CGH was performed on an Affymetrix platform, Cytoscan 750K. Data Infantile encephalopathies are a group of clinically and biologically hete- analysis was performed on ChAS Software, Affymetrix (reference NCBI_ rogeneous disorders for which the genetic basis remains largely unknown. hg19). MLPA was performed on peripheral blood following standard pro- Here, we report a previously unrecognized syndromic neonatal encephalo- tocols. pathy characterized by profound developmental disability, severe hypoto- Patient’s clinical report included postnatal microcephaly and reasonable nia, seizures, diminished respiratory drive requiring mechanical ventilation, psychomotor development, but slow in the motor area. Neurological ex- brain atrophy, corpus callosum dysgenesis, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, amination results were normal. Array CGH revealed a genomic profile with and facial dysmorphism. Biallelic inactivating mutations in TBCK (TB C1
 a 109 Kbp deletion at Xp11.4(41,480,031-41,589,514), involving CASK, domain-containing kinase) were independently identified by Whole- Exome GPR34 and GPR826 genes. MLPA analysis confirmed a CASK intragenic de- Sequencing (WES) as the cause of this condition in four unrelated families. letion encompassing exons 4 to 12. Additionally, MLPA also detected a mo- Matching these families was facilitated by sharing phenotypic profiles and saic state of the deletion, in about 25% of the cells, which was not possible WES data in a recently released web-based tool (Geno2MP) that links phe- to identify on aCGH. Parents were later studied with normal outcome and, notypic information to rare variants in families with Mendelian traits. TBCK therefore, the variant was established as de novo. These results, with high is a putative GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for small GTPases of the Rab probability, explain the subtle phenotype of moderately slow motor deve- family and has been shown to control cell growth and proliferation, actin lopment found the infant. cytoskeleton dynamics, and mTOR signaling. Two of the three mutations are predicted to truncate the protein (c.376C>T [p.Arg126*] and c.1363A>T  P11
.081 [p.Lys455*]), and loss of the major TBCK isoform was confirmed in primary An infant with a ring chromosome 11 and 11q24 deletion fibroblasts from one affected individual. The third mutation, p.Arg511His, O. Altiok Clark1, B. Nur2, B. Karaman3, A. Toylu1, E. Mihci2, S. Berker Karauzum4; alters a conserved residue within the TB C1
 domain. Structural analysis im- 1Akdeniz University School of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University School of Medicine Division of Pediatric Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, plicates Arg511 as a required residue for Rab-GAP function, and in silico 3Istanbul University School of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, homology modeling predicts impaired GAP function in the corresponding Turkey, 4Akdeniz University School of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and mutant. These results suggest loss of Rab-GAP activity is the underlying me- Genetics, Antalya, Turkey. chanism of disease. In contrast to other disorders caused by dysregulated mTOR signaling associated with focal or global brain overgrowth, impaired TBCK function results in progressive loss of brain volume. Ring chromosomes (RCs) are uncommon findings with a frequency of less  P11
.079 than 1:30,000, occuring mostly sporadically. Ring formation is caused when Exome sequencing of rare diseases in founder populations and both arms of a chromosome break and reunion, leading to the loss of distal identification of novel disease associated genes segments. Phenotypic abnormalities observed in patients with ring chro- C. Gonzaga-Jauregui1, E. Puffenberger2, C. Van Hout1, K. Brigatti2, A. King1, K. Praveen1, mosomes may correlate with the deleted regions. Ring chromosome 11 is M. Kuebler2, J. G. Reid1, J. D. Overton1, S. Mellis1, A. Shuldiner1, F. Dewey1, K. Strauss2; has only been described in 20 cases in the literature. All of these cases have 1Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Tarrytown, NY, United growth failure and some degree of intellectual disability, in addition to other States, 2Clinic for Special Children, Strasburg, PA, United States. abnormalities. Herein, we report a 5 month-old infant with 46,XY, r(11) (p15.5?q24?)[47] /46,XY, dic r(11)(p15.5?q24?)[3] karyotype. FISH analy- sis with subtelomeric probes for 11p and 11q revealed a terminal deletion I 2n 4tr 0oduction: Founder populations derive froEmS aH sGm a2ll0 n1u6m |b eBrA oRf CinEitiLaOl NoAn, 1 S1
PqA. AIdNd i|t iWonWallyW, a.rEraSyH cGom.OpaRraGtive genomic hybridization refined the individuals and are often culturally or geographically isolated from geneABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index deletion to a 8.8Mb region at 11q24.2q25 (126,120,523-134,924,542), with (p.K128TfsX50) mutation which was inherited from his mother. 42 RefSeq genes including disease causing genes such as TIRAP, KIRRE L3
 Conclusion: In the literature, coincidence of these two syndromes have not , ET S1
, FLI1 , KCNJ1 , KCNJ5, BARX2, ST14, NTM, OPCML, JAM3, ACAD8, been previously reported. This case is presented to emphasize blended phe- B3GAT1. The phenotype is significant for thrombocytopenia, which dis- notypes could be resulted from several concomitant single-gene disorders sapeared spontenously at 6 months, hypospadias, atrial septal defect, and in the same patient. mild motor retardation which has some overlapping features with Jacobsen  P11
.084 syndrome that is associated with 11q23 deletion. Kabuki syndrome: a Spanish case series To the best of our knowledge, there have only been 21 cases, including our V. Seidel1, S. García-Miñaúr2, E. Vallespín2, V. Martínez-Glez2, G. Gordo2, A. Naughton3, G. own, of constitutional R C11
 described. Herein we discuss the genes that in- Malone3, P. Lapunzina2, F. Santos-Simarro2; volved with the deletion and phenotypic features associated with Jacobsen 1Clinical Genetics/ Pediatrics, Hospital MI Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 2INGEMM- Syndrome. CIBERER, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom.  P11
.082 Investigating potential non-Mendelian inheritance patterns in ciliopathies: the case of Joubert Syndrome Introduction: Kabuki syndrome is a clinically heterogeneous multiple con- I. G. Phelps1, M. Grout1, J. Dempsey1, C. Isabella1, D. O‘Day1, I. Glass1, B. O‘Roak2, J. Shendure1, C. enter for Mendelian Genomics3, D. Doherty1, R. Bachmann-Gagescu4; genital malformation syndrome with distinctive facial features and develop- 1University of Washington-Dept of Pediatrics, Seattle, WA, United States, 2OHSU- mental delay. Two histone methyltransferase genes have been identified as Molecular & Medical Genetics, Portland, OR, United States, 3University of Washington, causes, KMT2D and KDM6A. Seattle, WA, United States, 4University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich, Switzerland. Material and methods: We present 20 cases diagnosed with Kabuki syndro- me, seen at two large hospitals in Madrid, Spain. Results: Age at diagnosis ranged from 5 months to 16 years. 17 cases had a Introduction: Non-mendelian inheritance, “triallelism” and digenicity/oli- molecular confirmation (16 KMT2D and 1 KDM6A mutation, all de novo), genicity (=heterozygous variants in ≥2 different JS genes), as well as genetic 2 will be presented in due course and one was negative for both genes. modifiers, have been reported in various ciliopathies. We investigated their Of the 16 KMT2D mutations 11 were truncating. Molecular details will be possible occurrence in Joubert syndrome (JS), a ciliopathy characterized by provided. The combination of congenital anomalies, developmental delay a distinctive hindbrain malformation, and typically caused by biallelic muta- and characteristic facial features was variable but the distinctive eyebrows tions in one of >25 genes. and long palpebral fissures reminiscent of the Kabuki make-up of Japanese Methods: We sequenced 25 JS genes in 386 individuals with JS and 175 con- theatre were present in all. Additional features found in our series, rarely trols using targeted capture and next-generation sequencing. or not previously described as part of the syndrome, were trigonocepha- Results: Two rare deleterious variants (RDVs) in one JS gene were identi- ly in one case, unilateral corneal opacity and iris coloboma in another, and fied in 248/386 individuals (64%) (“recessively solved patients”). We found autoimmune cholangitis in the girl with KDM6A mutation. One patient died no indication of triallelism, since 0/69 unaffected siblings carried the same at 10 years from complications of her heart anomalies. Interestingly, one two RDVs as their affected relative. We identified 24/138 unsolved patients case with a milder phenotype and not so characteristic facial dysmorphism with RDVs in ≥2 JS genes as candidates for oligogenicity, while 14/175 con- was found to be a mosaic for a KMT2D frameshift mutation c.1275delA trols carried RDVs in ≥2 JS genes. RDV types and patterns differed between (p.Gln425Hisfs*10) in 30-40% of blood. unsolved patients and controls. Finally, we investigated whether additional Conclusions: This is the first series of cases with Kabuki syndrome in Spain. heterozygous RDVs in JS genes, present in 108/248 (43%) solved patients, Additional cranial, ophthalmological and hepatic features are shown. A case acted as genetic modifiers. Pair-wise comparisons between samples sharing with mosaicism for Kabuki syndrome is presented. identical causal RDVs identified no correlation between number of RDVs  P11
.085 and disease severity. Under the mask of Kabuki-like syndromes: a pilot Czech study Conclusion: Our data offer little support for triallelism or oligogenicity as J. Paderova, J. Drabova, A. Holubova, M. Vlckova, M. Havlovicova, R. Pourova, M. clinically-relevant alternative inheritance mechanisms in JS, and the num- Malikova, A. Puchmajerova, V. Caganova, A. Krepelova, M. Macek sr., M. Macek jr.; ber of additional RDVs in “solved patients” does not correlate with pheno- Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Prague - 2nd Faculty of typic severity. In patients with possible oligogenic inheritance, future work Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. will focus on identifying 2nd RDVs in genes with single RDVs and functional work to assess effects of candidate oligogenic and modifier variants. Grant support: NIH-R01N S064077
 and SNSF-PZ00 P3
_142404/1. Introduction: Kabuki (make up) syndrome (KABUK; OMIM 148920) is  P11
.083 mainly due to autosomal de novo pathogenic variants. Distinctive facial fea- Might the inheritance pattern of a syndrome mislead the clinician? tures and the degree of intellectual disability are broad making its clinical Two different syndromes in a patient E. Isik1, T. Atik1, S. E. Keskin2, S. Gokben2, H. Onay3, O. Cogulu1, F. Ozkinay1; diagnosis difficult even for experienced clinical geneticists, in particular in 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Pediatric Kabuki-like phenotypes. Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Material and Methods: A representative cohort of Czech KABUK / Kabuki- Subdivision of Pediatric Neurology, Izmir, Turkey, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty like patients was examined (2013-2015) by Sanger DNA sequencing, MLPA, of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, Izmir, Turkey. array CGH, followed by next-generation sequencing-based (NGS) gene panel assays (TruSight One, Illumina). Correlation of molecular genetic- and cyto- genetic test outcomes was compared to the reliability of clinical diagnosis. Introduction: Joubert syndrome (JS) and Cowden syndrome (CS) are two In addition, 3D digital phenotyping of facial gestalt was carried to KfuMrtTh2eDr different single gene disorders. JS, a rare autosomal recessive ciliopathy syn- characterise these patients. drome, is characterised by hypotonia, ataxia, developmental delay and ocu- Results: In 24 KABUK / Kabuki-like cases pathogenic variants in lomotor apraxia. Nineteen genes responsible for the JS have beenP idTeEnNtified. were detected in 9 patients. Array CGH revealed likely pathogenic CHNUVWs Eo1n, CS, an autosomal dominant syndrome, is characterised by macrocephaly, cGhRrIoNm1osomes X and 15, respectively, in 2 patients. NGS detected liEkFeTlyU pDa2-, subcutaneous lipomas and susceptibility to cancer development. gene tEhDoNgRenAic variants in genes associated with intellectual disability ( mAHuIt1a tgioennes are rPeTspEoNn sible for the CS. In this study, we present a patient who ), including genes coding for mandibulo-facial dysostosis( showes clinical features of both JS and CS, and carries mutations in both ). Nonetheless, in 5 cases their underlying genetic etiology has not and genes. been elucidated, while in the remainder familial consent for further testing Case Report: A five year-old-boy was reffered to pediatric genetics subdi- is pending. vision cause of intellectual disability and epilepsy. He was born to cons- Conclusion: Array CGH and broad NGS-based gene panels have a high dia- angioneous parents. On physical examination, his weight and height were gnostic yield in KABUK/Kabuki-like phenotypes. Genomic testing may fo- below the 3rd percentile and where as his head circumference at the 97th ster elucidation of otherwise ambiguous clinical diagnoses. 3D facial gestalt percentile. He had generalised hypotonia, macrocephaly and subcutaneous phenotyping proved to be a useful tool for further stratification of such pati- lipomas. On cranial MRI, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and molar tooth sign ents and eventual prioritisation of detected variants. wAHerI1e detected. The diagnosis of JS was established and molecular analysis Supported by: 00064203, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022OPPK, LD14073 and NF- revealed a homozygous c.2742_2744delTCT (p.Leu915del) mutation on the CZ11-PDP-3-003-2014. gene, on of the JS genes. Because macroPcTepEhNaly and subcutaneous lipomas were unusual for JS, an additional genetic disease, CS, waEsS cHonGsi d2e0re1d6 i n| BthAe RpCatEieLnOt. NSaAng, eSr PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 241 sequencing of revealed a heterozygous novel c.381_385delGGAAAABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.086  P11
.088 KAT6A syndrome: expanding the phenotypic spectrum An unusual prenatal presentation of Kleefstra syndrome with P. R. Blackburn, N. J. Boczek, M. A. Cousin, G. J. Beek, E. W. Klee, D. Babovic-Vuksanovic; congenital diaphragmatic hernia Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. S. Giangiobbe1, M. F. Bedeschi1, F. Ciralli2, M. G. Patricelli3, C. Cesaretti1, L. Ronzoni1, M. Calvello1, F. Lalatta1; 1Clinical Genetic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Introduction: KAT6A syndrome or autosomal dominant mental retardati- Milan, Italy, 2Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Department of Clinical Science and Community Health, Università degli Studi di Milano and Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda on 32 (MRD32, OMIM#616268) is a novel disorder caused by mutations in Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Medical Genetic, Molecular Biology and the K(lysine) acetyltransferase 6A (KAT6A) gene, characterized by micro- cytogenetics lab., Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy. cephaly, developmental delay, hypotonia, and intellectual disability. So far, only ten children have been reported. We describe a male patient with the c.3385C>T variant who shares many of the same clinical features as well as Introduction: Kleefstra syndrome (KS) is characterized by intellectual disa- arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC), previously undescribed in KA- bility, hypotonia and distinctive facial features. It can be caused either by T6A syndrome. a 9q34.3 deletion that includes the EHMT1 gene or by a EHMT1 mutation. Materials and Methods: The patient was born with bilateral cryptorchidism, Several additional clinical findings have been observed in KS patients. We inguinal hernia, hypotonia and craniofacial dysmorphism. The echocardio- describe a case of an unusual prenatal presentation of KS with congenital gram revealed an atrial septal defect (ASD) and patent ductus arteriosus diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), never reported before as part of the KS phe- (PDA). He had contractures of the hands, feet, hips, knees, and elbows. The notypic spectrum. karyotype and aCGH were normal. Molecular testing for myotonic dystro- Case description: A 34-year-old woman with unremarkable family and me- phy, Prader-Willi syndrome, Rubinstein-Taybi, and Freeman-Sheldon syn- dical history was referred to our department at 21 weeks of gestation of her drome was negative. Whole exome sequencing revealed a de novo variant second pregnancy for genetic counseling. The pregnancy was uneventful in KAT6A. until 20 weeks of gestation when morphologic ultrasound detected mode- Results: This is the 4th reported case of KAT6A syndrome with the rate left CDH, which was then confirmed by a level II scan. CGH analysis on c.3385C>T (p.R1129*) truncating variant. Given the frequency of this mu- amniocytes revealed a 3,9 Mb de novo deletion on 9q34.2-34.3 that included tation and the fact that it falls within a CpG dinucleotide suggests that it the EHMT1 gene. A female fetus was delivered vaginally at 35 weeks with a may be prone to spontaneous deamination and likely represents a hotspot weight of 2100 g and an Apgar score of 9-10. Post-natal echocardiography mutation in this disorder. showed complex cardiac septal and valvular defects. Conclusions: Here we present a new case of KAT6A syndrome in a patient She died a week after from cardiorespiratory failure. with AMC, thus expanding the clinical spectrum of this newly described dis- Conclusions: The deletion we detected also encompasses the CO L5
A1 gene, order. Heterozygous truncating mutations in the related KAT6B gene cause whose loss likely contributed to the development of CDH. CDH may thus genitopatellar syndrome (OMIM#606170) characterized by congenital con- be part of the phenotypic spectrum of KS due to deletions that extend over tractures of the lower extremities and undeveloped patellae, suggesting that several genes; penetrance seems incomplete as the two cases previously KAT6A and KAT6B may have overlapping roles in development. reported in the literature with similar deletions did not develop CDH. As  P11
.087 in our case, CDH presence may have a negative prognostic impact on the Diagnosing a rare case of KAT6B related disorder using targeted syndrome. massively parallel sequencing  P11
.089 T. Szemes1,2,3, J. Radvánszky4,2, D. Ďurovčíková5, M. Hikkelová6, M. Hýblová3,2; Kleefstra syndrome diagnosed in an unusual way 1Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Y. K. Terzi1, A. Ozcan1, I. Erol2, Z. Yilmaz Celik1; Slovakia, 3Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, 4Institute of Clinical and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Centre, Slovak Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatric Neurology, Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Slovak Ankara, Turkey. Medical University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Alpha medical Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. Introduction: Launch of new techniques enabled the diagnosis of genetic Introduction: Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson (SBBYS) syndrome and disorders more precisely. Every method has its own advantages and disa- genitopatellar (GTPT) syndrome are clinically similar disorders with certain dvantages, thus the diagnostic laboratory uses all methods in an order to overlapping symptoms. They are currently considered distinct clinical enti- make the correct diagnosis. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplifica- ties which have been shown to be caused by de novo truncating sequence tion (MLPA) analysis is a method used in detection of deletions or duplica- variants resulting from nonsense and frameshift causing DNA changes in the tions of genes. Here we report an 11-year-old boy consulted to our depart- KAT6B (lysine acetyltransferase 6B) gene. ment due to mental retardation and dysmorphic features with a suggested Materials and methods: Family trio with affected child manifesting serious diagnosis of Di George syndrome. multiple congenital anomalies with unsettled diagnosis was analyzed using Materials and methods: Peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures were set up multiple method approach including array-CGH and two commercial gene- as well as DNA isolation and following MLPA analysis. panel based MPS assays. Identified genetic variants were evaluated using Results: The boy was the second child of a 41-year-old mother and father. GeneTalk and HGMD software. Conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed a normal karyotype. We did not Results: Among several likely benign genomic variants, we were able to detect deletion of the Di George region during analyses, however we detec- identify a de novo truncating c.4592delA (p.Asn1531Thrfs*18) variant in ted a heterozygous deletion of EHMT1 gene which is used as a reference the last KAT6B exon supporting observed phenotypic features overlapping gene in the commercial kit ( P250
-B2 DiGeorge Lot No: 0614). SBBYS syndrome and GTPT syndrome. Conclusions: MLPA method is a sensitive and handy tool for diagnosis of mi- Conclusion: We were able to identify a novel genetic variant associated with crodeletion syndromes as well as other conditions that result from genomic an overlapping SBBYS syndrome and GTPT syndrome. Our findings also sug- imbalances. We diagnosed the patient incidentally while looking for another gest that the clinical distinction between these disorders may be blurred abnormality. When we re-evaluated the patient after the results, we obser- and thus conventional clinical classification can be problematic. Based on ved the dysmorphic features were consistent with the diagnosis. Although our observation we support opinion that disorders associated with KAT6B coincidental findings might be harmful in some circumstances, in this ex- pathogenic mutations should be referred to as “KAT6B spectrum disorders” ample off-target effect of MLPA help us to make diagnosis. or “KAT6B related disorders”, rather than their current distinct classificati- on into SBBYS syndrome or GTPT syndrome.  P11
.090 Lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndrome: Description of two families reveals great phenotypic variability A. Beleza-Meireles, E. Hughes, M. Harrison, D. Josifova; Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndrome (LADD) is an autosomal-domi- nant condition characterised by abnormalities of the lacrimal and salivary glands, teeth and hands. Only about 60 cases have been described in the literature. Mutations in the FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGF10 genes cause LADD 242 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONsAy,n dSrPoAmIeN. W |e W reWpoWrt .tEwSo HfaGmi.lOialR FGGF10 related cases and provide litera- ture review.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Case 1 is a 12 year old girl presenting with dry mouth secondary to salivary performed, with normal results, and Karyoarray® (Agilent 60K) revealed glands hypoplasia. She also had absent lacrimal ducts, small ears and dental a 1 Mb duplication of 8q22.1, involving genes GDF6 and SD C2
. To the best anomalies. Molecular analysis revealed an exon 3 deletion in FGFR10. Her of our knowledge this is the second case report of the association between father, who carried the mutation, had blocked tear ducts as a child. His mo- Leri’s pleonosteosis and duplication of 8q22.1, expanding the clinical spec- ther and brother have teeth abnormalities. Her cousin through her paternal trum of this disease, and supports the putative genetic basis of this conditi- uncle was independently diagnosed with LADD syndrome. on. Specialists in these fields (rheumatology and genetics) should be aware Case 2 is an 11 year old girl with complete absence of salivary glands, wi- of this disease for proper assessment and genetic counseling. despread dental decay, obstructed tear ducts, and cognitive and behavioral difficulties on the autistic spectrum. She developed focal seizures secondary  P11
.093 to focal cortical dysplasia identified on brain MRI. Her father underwent se- A de novo missense mutation in LMNA associated with a segmental veral surgical procedures to improve the patency of his nasolacrimal ducts progeroid phenotype in a Turkish patient in childhood. He was found to have agenesis of the parotid and right sub- M. C. Ergoren1, S. G. Temel2,3, F. Uysal4, M. Schotik5, J. Altmüller6, P. Nürnberg6, G. Yigit7, B. Wollnik7, E. Cil4; mandibular glands, although he was asymptomatic. Both were found to have 1Near East University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Nicosia, the p.Arg78Leu mutation in FGFR10. Cyprus, 2Near East University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology & This report underlines the phenotypical variability that may be present as a Embryology, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Department result of FGFR10 mutations, ranging from LADD syndrome to aplasia of the of Histology & Embryology, Bursa, Turkey, 4Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, lacrimal and salivary glands (ALSG). ALSG and LADD may represent variab- Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Bursa, Turkey, 5University of Cologne, Institute for le presentations of the same clinical spectrum caused by FGF10 mutations. Developmental Biology, Cologne, Germany, 6University of Cologne, Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 7University Medical Center Göttingen, Institute of Human  P11
.091 Genetics, University, Göttingen, Germany. Novel likely pathogenic mutation in FGFR2 causes Lacrimo-Auriculo- Dento-Digital syndrome M. J. Nabais Sá1,2, A. M. Fortuna1,2, G. Soares1; Mutations in the LMNA gene encoding lamin A/C are associated with a wide 1Department of Medical Genetics, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto de Magalhães/ spectrum of phenotypes affecting different tissues and organ systems. The Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in clinical features of these disorders can overlap, however are generally cate- Biomedicine, Abel Salazar Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. gorized into two groups: dilated cardiomyopathy, neuromuscular disorders; and premature aging, lipodystrophy disorders. The Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome and mandibuloacral dysplasia are segmental progeroid syndromes caused by mutations within LMNA. Dominant LMNA mutations Introduction: Lacrimo-Auriculo-Dento-Digital syndrome (LADD; MIM# have also been reported in patients with a less well-characterized so called 149730) is extremely rare, with only approximately 60 patients reported atypical progeroid syndrome. to date. It is caused by heterozygous mutations in FGF10, FGFR2, or FGFR3, We report a 15 years old female who initially presented with progeroid which result in abnormalities of the eyes, ears, teeth and limbs. Phenotypic features, growth retardation and facial dysmorphism including prominent expressivity is highly variable and genotype-phenotype correlations are not eyes, full cheeks, marked retromicrognathia, high arched palate, beaked known. Here, we present the clinical and molecular characterization of a fe- nose, sclerodermoid atrophic skin, and sparse thin scalp hair. Additionally, male patient with a novel likely pathogenic variant in FGFR2. she presented with limitation of extension of both wrists and elbows, and Case Report: The 2-month-old girl was referred to the Medical Genetics con- slight scoliosis. Physical examination revealed low weight and short stature sultation due to bilateral agenesis of the thumbs. She had low-set, simple and although she has regular menstruation cycles she has poor breast de- ears and a cup-shaped right ear. Parents reported alacrimia and absence of velopment. Her ECG showed a structurally normal heart, with normal left lacrimal puncta was observed. Lower central incisors were peg-shaped. Cli- ventricle diameter and ejection fraction and no sing for dilated cardiomyo- nical diagnosis of LADD syndrome prompted direct sequencing of FGF10, pathy, but severe tricuspid regurgitation and mild mitral regurgitation. Trio FGFR2 and FGFR3. A novel, de novo heterozygous missense variant was exome sequencing revealed the presence of a de novo heterozygous missen- identified in FGFR2 (NM_000141.4): c.1928C>A, p.(Ala643Glu). Ala643 is se mutation, c.176T>G resulting in a leucine to arginine change at codon 59. conserved down to fruitfly and is in the tyrosine kinase domain of the fibro- Three female patients have been described with a LMNA mutation affecting blast growth factor receptor. Bioinformatic prediction tools supported po- leucine at position 59; interestingly however, our patient does not show pri- tential pathogenicity of the change. We propose that p.(Ala643Glu) reduces mary ovarian failure and dilated cardiomyopathy as described in the other the receptor activity via a dominant-negative effect. patients, indicating variable expression of phenotypic presentation. Conclusion: This clinical case expands the spectrum of genetic variants that cause LADD syndrome. The confirmation of the clinical diagnosis enabled  P11
.094 precise genetic counselling to the parents. Given a low recurrence risk, in Perinatal presentation of Loeys-Dietz Syndrome due to a novel the subsequent pregnancy, they opted to do prenatal diagnosis by ultra- mutation in TGFRB2. Further delineation of the neonatal phenotype sound to exclude major malformations associated with LADD syndrome. I. Valenzuela1, P. Fernandez1, F. Munell2, A. Sanchez3, G. Giralt4, A. Linde5, T. Vendrell1, E. Tizzano1;  P11
.092 1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Disease Unit, Hospital Vall Leri’ s pleonosteosis associated with a duplication of 8q22.1, a case d´Hebron Barcelona, Spain., Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Neuropediatrics. Hospital report from Argentina Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Neuroradiology, Hospital Vall d´Hebron S. Menazzi1, A. P. Solari1, L. Espeche1, M. A. Mori2, J. Nevado2, S. Rozental1; Barcelona, Spain., Barcelona, Spain, 4Department of cardiology, Hospital Vall d´Hebron 1National Medical Genetics Centre, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2INGEMM-La Paz University Barcelona, Spain., Barcelona, Spain, 5Department of Neonatology, Hospital Vall d´Hebron Hospital, Madrid, Spain. Barcelona, Spain., Barcelona, Spain. Leri’s pleonosteosis is an autosomal dominant congenital rheumatic disease Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is an autosomal dominant connective tissue associated with digital anomalies (including contractures and limited moti- disorder characterized mainly by cardiovascular, craniofacial and skeletal on), facial dysmorphism, chronic pain, short stature, spinal nerve compres- features. sion and scleroderma-like skin. This entity has been reported in a family We report on a patient whose prenatal examination implied the diagnosis of with a microduplication of 8q22.1 [Banka et al]. arthrogryposis multiplex congenita and neonatal assessment showed cra- We describe a 36-year-old woman with a duplication of 8q22.1 with facial niofacial and cardiovascular findings that suggested the diagnosis of LDS. dysmorphism (short palpebral fissures, hypoplasia of the ala nasi), brachy- The clinical diagnosis was confirmed by detection of a de novo mutation in dactyly, growth in 3rd centiles, mild intellectual disability and digital and the TGFRB2 gene c.1381T>C (p.Cys461Arg) previously unreported in data- vertebral anomalies. She did not finish primary school and has a non-spe- bases and predicted to be pathological and deleterious using five in silico cified behavior disorder, and was reluctant to being interviewed or exami- predictive programs. ned. She had 3 healthy siblings with normal phenotype, her parents were Few prenatal and neonatal cases of LDS have been reported in the literature. non-consanguineous and her mother had similar dysmorphic features. The Our patient presented aortic root dilatation, arterial tortuosity and muscu- patient had recently been diagnosed with hypothyroidism, had conductive loesqueletal anomalies. Remarkable craniofacial defects include hypertelo- hearing loss (due to tympanic perforation), a deviated nasal septum and a rism, blue esclerae, strabismus, bifid uvula and cleft palate. Two interesting lumbosacral transitional vertebrae with disc protrusion at  L3
- L4
. Her hands findings previously underreported were facial milia and multiple central and feet X-ray revealed short and broad phalanges and metacarpals. nervous system cysts mainly in the anterior horns of the lateral ventricles. Karyotype analysis with G-banding anEd SMHLPGA (2 S0
A1L S6
A |P B03A6R anCdE P L0
O70N) Awe, rSe PA WIN e a| lW so W revW iew.E tS hH e cG li. nO icR alG manifestations to delineate a recognizable2 p4h3e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.097 A case with Meckel-Gruber syndrome (dysencephalia notype at this stage. In the published cases with neonatal presentation, aor- splanchnocystica) caused by a novel mutation in CE P290
 gene. tic root dilatation was the first sign in 30% of patients. In the remaining A. Bakır, V. Topçu, E. S. Çakar; cases, (70%), muscle and skeletal findings were the initial manifestation. Zekai Tahir Burak Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. This suggests that when arthrogryposis multiplex congenita is detected in a foetus or in a neonate the differential diagnosis should include the possibili- ty of LDS even though no cardiologic finding at diagnosis. Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is a rare pleiotropic autosomal recessive It is important to delineate the clinical manifestations of neonatal LDS to developmental disorder which was first described by Johann Friedrich Mek- allow a prompt diagnosis and subsequent management to prevent detri- kel in 1822 and G.B. Gruber in 1934. More than 200 cases have been repor- mental complications. ted worldwide with an incidence ranging from 1:13.250 to 1:140.000. It’s characterized with typical manifestations of occipital encephalocele, bilate-  P11
.095 ral polycystic kidneys and post-axial polydactyly. Here, we report a foetus, Delination of a Marker Chromosome by aCGH in a Patient with product of a consanguineous marriage who was demonstrated to have olig- Undiagnosed Intellectual Disability and Neurodevelopmental ohydramnios, encephalocele and multicystic kidney detected by USG in an- Disorder tenatal assessment at the 17th week of gestation. The foetus was diagnosed R. Celik1, I. Suer2, A. Koparır2, A. Onul1,3, A. Yüksel4, M. Ozen3,5,6; 1Biruni University, Reyhan Genome Center., Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS). Parents approved termination of pregnan- Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics., cy due to multiple foetal anomalies. A skin biopsy was taken during posta- Istanbul, Turkey, 3Biruni University , Department of Medical Genetics/Molecular Biology bortal examinCaEtPio2n9.0 Molecular genetic analysis of fetal DNA using NGS re- and Genetics., Istanbul, Turkey, 4Biruni University., Istanbul, Turkey, 5Department of vealed a novel mutation in homozygous condition, c.1915G>T (p.Glu639*), Medical Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul University., Istanbul, Turkey, in exon 20 of . DNA analysis from peripheral lymphocytes of parents 6Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine., Houston, TX, showed the same mutation in heterozygous condition. United States.  P11
.099 Meier-Gorlin syndrome: GMNN mutations causing autosomal- Introduction: Complex small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) dominant primordial dwarfism compared to pre-replication complex are one of the subgroups of sSMC and consist of more than one chromo- gene mutations underlying autosomal-recessive primordial dwarfism some. Identifying the origin of marker chromosome is very important for E. M. H. F. Bongers1, S. A. de Munnik1, J. Schoots1, L. C. Burrage2,3, S. R. Lalani2, W. clinicians to better manage the patients. Charng2, J. R. Lupski2,3,4, H. G. Brunner1, D. Lugtenberg1, Y. Yang2,5; 1Dept of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Material and Methods: A 32 month-old girl admitted to our center for deve- 2Dept of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United lopment disorder and mental/motor disabilities. Conventional cytogenetic States, 3Dept of Pediatrics, Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 4Human technique was used for cytogenetic analysis. aCGH analysis applied by Illu- Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, mina Human CytoSNP 12 Beadchip. 5Exome Laboratory, Baylor Miraca Genetics Laboratories, Houston, TX, United States. Results: Patient’s clinical features include microcephaly, distinct eye struc- ture, broad nasal root, micrognathia, highly arched palate, and small extre- mities. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a de novo marker chromosome with Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS) is a genetically heterogeneous microcephalic an unknown origin. SNP array analysis determined by Illumina Human Cy- primordial dwarfism syndrome known to be caused by biallelic loss-of-func- toSNP 12 Beadchip showed two duplications: 12.7 Mb duplication covering tion mutations in one of five genes encoding proteins involved in DNA repli- 15q11.1-q13.3 and 542 Kb covering 22q11.23-q12.1. According to the De- cation initiation (OR C1
 [origin recognition complex 1]/OR C4
/OR C6
/ CDT1 cipher database 15q11.1-q13.3 duplication was reported to be associated and CD C6
). Thus far, mutations in these genes with an autosomal-recessive with hypotony, deep philtrum, highly arched palate, intellectual disability, inheritance pattern have been established in abodeu tn 8o0v%o of individuals with hypothalamo-hypophyseal tract abnormalities, seizures and optic atrophy. primary clinical hallmarks of MGS, includiGnMg NsNhort stature, microtia and On the other hand the phenotypic features of 22q11.23-q12.1 were repor- small/absent patellae. Recently, we identified heterozygous (two ted as abnormal face and neonatal hypotony. truncating and one missense) mutations in by whole-exome sequen- Conclusion: In conclusion, we were able to determine the source of marker cing, encoding the DNA replication inhibitor geminin in three individuals chromosome previously undetermined. We propose a targeted array analy- fulfilling thde ec nlionvicoa l diagnostic cGriMteNrNia of MGS. A gain-of-function mecha- sis to uncover marker chromosomes. nism was shown to result in autosomal-dominant MGS. The three indivi-  P11
.096 duals with mutations in demonstrate a more severe growth Additional findings in the Matthew-Wood syndrome retardation compared to 38 individuals with pre-replication complex gene P. Ozyavuz Cubuk1, L. Ho2, B. Reversade2,3, E. F. Percin1; mutations, fullness of the peri-orbital region, lumbar hyperlordosis and de- 1Gazi University Hospital, Medical Genetics Department, Ankara, Turkey, 2Institute velopOmRCen1tal deGlMayN aNnd/or cognitive impairment, a rare finding in autoso- of Medical Biology, Human Embryology Laboratory, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore, mal-recessive MGS. Based on the severity of the phenotypeG, MwNe Nspeculate 3Department of Paediatrics, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. that and mutations might perturb DNA replication to a greater extent than the other MGS-associated genes, and perhaps mutati- ons have a more profound effect on the replicatGivMe NbNu rst and cell growth Introduction: Matthew–Wood syndrome (MWS), also termed microphthal- required for brain development, head size expansion, and height. The iden- mia, syndromic 9 (MCOP S9
, MIM 601186), is an autosomal recessive disor- tification of autosomal-dominant MGS caused by mutations expands der characterised by ocular, respiratory and cardiac abnormalities. Muta- the genetic heterogeneity of MGS, helps identifying the molecular etiology tions in retinoic acid 6 gene (STRA6) have been reported in clinically dia- in additional individuals, and provides further insights into the relationship gnosed patients with MWS. Here we presented a case with MWS, who has between DNA replication, cell growth, and organismal development. characteristic findings of the syndrome as well as dextrocardia and bilateral streak gonads which was not defined previously in this syndrome.  P11
.100 Case: The proband was a stillborn girl baby with normal intrauterine grow- Exome sequencing diagnosed a family with two rare recessive th. Postmortem examination and autopsy showed that bilateral anopthal- diseases mia, bilateral pulmonary agenesis, complete tracheoesophageal fistula, D. Svaneby, M. M. Aagaard, A. B. Bojesen; complex cardiac defects, dextrocardia, malrotation of the colon, right cystic Clinical Genetics Department, Vejle, Denmark. renal dysplasia and bilateral streak gonads. Results: Molecular analysis showed a homozygous exonic missense C>T mutation in STRA6 gene (NM_022369) at coding position 878 (c.878C>T, A non-consanguineous family had four children, two severely affected sons, p.Pro293Leu, rs118203958). a healthy son and daughter. The phenotypic characteristics of the affected Discussion: It is known that dextrocardia and streak gonads are undefined sons are; severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, micro-lissencephaly, seizu- in patients with MWS to date, but they are a part of PAGOD syndrome which res, growth retardation, and skin affection. Previous genetic investigation demonstrates significant phenotypic overlap with MWS. The etiology of PA- revealed a MYH7B mutation in the first affected son, but no explanation for GOD syndrome is unknown but hypothesis that a vitamin A metabolic de- the brain malformation was found. Despite normal prenatal ultrasound and fect. This situation suggests that these two new findings completely arise MRi scans, the second affected son was born. Exome sequencing was then as a result of vitamin A deficiency. It should be made the molecular tests in performed to reveal the genetic cause for the micro-lissencephaly. similar cases because of it will not allow to be made differantial diagnosis Material and Methods: We performed exome sequencing on the parents and with only clinical diagnosis. the affected sons. We analyzed data according to inheritance pattern and 244 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG phenotype defined by HPO terms.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results: The two affected sons harbor mutations in two genes, both in Conclusions: The difference of PCS cells ratio of the proband (55%) and the compound heterozygotic form. Two mutations in MYH7B, a frames- unaffected mother (35%) shows that there is a relationship between PCS hift deletion and a non-sense mutation (chr20:g.33567201C>T and cell ratio and MVA phenotype. PCS cells are generally greater than 50% chr20:g.33586952ACAG> -) and two mutations in RTTN, a splice-site and in MVA patients. Although, authors have focused on that the second allele a missense mutation (chr18:g. 67813014C>T and chr18:g.67833426T>G). haplotype 6G3 (26020GT, 1046GA, D15 S994
) may be associated with the Pathogenic MYH7B mutations have been associated with hypertrophic car- MVA phenotype, G1046A (paternal) polymorphism was determined in the diomyopathy, while expected pathogenic RTTN mutations affecting both second allele in our proband. So, further studies are needed to clarify the alleles have recently been associated with growth retardation and a severe relationship between the BUB1B mutations and PCS/MVA phenotypes. brain phenotype with microcephaly..  P11
.104 Conclusion: We diagnosed two different recessive diseases in two severely Mosaic 19q12q13.11 deletion associated with mild intellectual affected brothers with a complex phenotype using exome sequencing. In ca- disability and congenital malformations ses with a well-defined phenotype and inheritance but no obvious matching O. S. Kurinnaia1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, M. A. Zelenova2,1,3, K. S. Vasin2,1,3, Y. B. Yurov2,1,3, I. syndrome, two diseases are to be considered. Together, the two recessive Y. Iourov2,1,4; diseases can explain the phenotype in this family, highlighting the strength 1Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics named after Y.E Veltishev at the Pirogov of parents-offspring exome sequencing to diagnose two rare recessive di- Russian National Research Medical University, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian seases in the same family. Federation, 2Mental Health Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow State University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Department of  P11
.102 Medical Genetics, Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II (MOPDII) Health, Moscow, Russian Federation. with 46,XY complete gonadal dysgenesis: co-occurrence of two rare condition in a single patient A. Gezdirici1, T. Akcay2, A. Jackson3; Introduction. Since chromosome 19 is one of the most gene-rich in a human 1Department of Medical Genetics, Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research genome, most of the rearrangements are severely deleterious or incompa- Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Kanuni Sultan tible with life. For instance, chromosome 19q13.11 microdeletion syndrome Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3MRC Human Genetics is generally associated with intellectual disability, speech disturbances, pre- Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. and post-natal growth retardation, microcephaly, ectodermal dysplasia, and male genital malformations. Here, we describe a similar mosaic case. Materials and Methods. Cytogenetic and molecular karyotyping with bioin- Background: Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II formatic analysis were used to address the case of an 8-year-old boy with (MOPDII) is a form of microcephalic primordial dwarfism characterized by mild intellectual disability, ADHD, epilepsy, congenital malformations (i.e. extreme pre and postnatal growth retardation, severe microcephaly, skele- pectus excavatum, hydrocele and inguinal hernia, flatfoot, sinus node dys- tal dysplasia, abnormal dentition, insulin resistance, and increased risk for function) and facial dismorphisms (low-set dysplastic auricles, almond- cerebrovascular disease. MOPD II is caused by mutations in PCNT, encoding shaped eyes with downslanting palpebral fissures). pericentrin, which anchors a wide range of centrosomal proteins and prote- Results. A mosaic 19q12q13.11 deletion (29,373,242-34,341,260) was de- in complexes during cell division. tected in about 70%UQ oCf RthFSe1 c ells (encomp assing almost 5 Mb and 20 OMIM 46,XY complete gonadal dysgenesis (46,XY CGD) is characterized by a genes). Using bioinformatic analCyCsiNs,E w1 e were able to define ca ndidate genes 46,XY karyotype, normal female external genitalia, completely undeveloped for the index case: (involved KinCTmDe1ta5b olic pathways and neurode- (streak) gonads, no sperm production, and presence of normal mullerian generative diseases pathways), (involved in cell cycle,p53 signaling structures. and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways) and (a negative regulator of A P2
- Methods and Results: Here, we report a 12 years old female patient who has alpha regulating neural crest formation during early development). severe pre and postnatal growth retardation, severe microcephaly, retro- Conclusions. Despite the deletion at the 19q13.11 deletion syndrome regi- gnathia, relatively large nose, high-pitched voice, skin hyperpigmentation, on, neither the critical region nor most of the described cases have matched left hip dysplasia, clitoral hypertrophy with diagnosis of MOPDII. Mutatio- the deletion described. Additionally, since there have been no descriptions nal screening of the PCNT gene showed c.3465-1G>A homozygous splice on similar mosaic deletions, we concluded that this is the first case of mosaic acceptor site mutation. This mutation is highly likely pathogenic variant but 19q12q13.11 deletion that lead to an atypical neuropsychiatric phenotype. which is not described in the literature so far. Interestingly, she has 46,XY Supported by the Russian Science Foundation (grant: 14-15-00411).  P11
.105 karyotype and SRY FISH was found positive. Abdominal MRI revealed hypo- 45,X/47,XX,+18 mosaicism in a young girl: clinical presentation and plastic uterus and ovaries. We thought that the patient has second genetic different distribution of cell lines in peripheral blood lymphocytes etiology for this situation. Whole exom sequencing (WES) is ongoing. and skin fibroblasts Conclusion: To our best knowledge, this is the first report with combined P. Battaglia1, A. Capucci1, I. Loddo1, A. Tanzariello1, L. Serra2, M. Lanari2, O. Calabrese1; phenotypes of MOPDII and 46,XY CGD. We present this case because of the 1UOC Genetica Medica - AUSL Imola, Imola, Italy, 2UOC Pediatria - AUSL Imola, Imola, coexistence of two rare condition in the same patient. Italy.  P11
.103 Identification of a heterozygous BUB1B mutation in a family with mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome The female proband, the third child of healthy, unrelated parents, was born G. Kayhan, M. A. Ergun, F. E. Percin; at term after an uneventful pregnancy, except mild IUGR during the last Medical Genetics Department, Gazi University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. month. Birth weight was 2530g, length 45cm (<3°P). Psychomotor develop- ment was normal, with mild language delay (first words at 3 years). Men- arche occurred at 11 years and 5 months, characterized by menorrhagia. Introduction: Mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome (MVA) 1 is caused She was referred for clinical and cytogenetic evaluation at the age of 14 be- by biallelic mutations in the BUB1B gene and characterized by severe mi- cause of short stature and anemia. crocephaly, developmental delay, increased risk of malignancy and mosaic On clinical examination, height was 135,5 m (<<3°P), weight 50,5kg (50- aneuploidies involving multiple different chromosomes. Also, heterozygous 75°P), occipitofrontal circumference 53cm (50°P). mutations of BUB1B gene cause premature chromatid separation (PCS) She presented round face, short neck, thin upper lip, short philtrum, narrow trait. Opposite of this classical knowledge, heterozygosity f or mutations in palate, short hands, several nevi on face and trunk, left fourth metatarsal the BUB1B gene has been previously identified in 7 unrelated MVA fami- shortening, scoliosis and mild myopia. lies. H ere we present a new MVA family with heterozygousmutation in the Cytogenetic investigation performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes sho- BUB1B gene. wed the presence of a mosaicism 45,X/47,XX,+18 characterized by two cell Case:The proband was 11-year-old male with severe microcephaly, intel- lines (85% trisomy 18 and 15% monosomy X), confirmed by FISH analysis. lectual disability and Eisenmenger‘s syndrome. Two siblings with the same The distribution of cell lines was found to be reversed in skin fibroblasts, findings had died. where FISH analysis with pericentromeric specific probes showed the pres- Results: Whole exome sequencing identified heterozygous c. C580
T ence of three cell lines: monosomy X and trisomy 18 cell lines in 78,3% and (p.R194X) mutation (maternal) in the BUB1B gene. Karyotype analysis 19,6% respectively, and a female normal cell lines in 2,1%. showed various aneuploidies in 25% of his cells. The proband, mother and Constitutional mosaicism for two distinct chromosome aneuploidies is a father showed 55%, 35%, 0% PCS cells in the lymphocyte culture, respec- rare cytogenetic abnormality. Clinical manifestations depend on the distri- tively. There was no mutation in the CEEP S5
H7 Gge n2e0 r1el6at e| dB wAitRhC MEVLAO2.NA, SPAbINut i|o nW oWf thWe .aEnSeHupGlo.iOd cReGll lines in different tissues. In our proband2, 4th5eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.108 Nucleotide excision repair diseases : from Nobel prize 2015 to the prevalence of monosomy X cell lines and the presence of a normal cell line in unraveling of uncommon and incomplete patient phenotypes skin fibroblasts, better correlates with the mild clinical picture. N. Calmels1, M. Spitz2, G. Greff1, N. Kempf1, S. Samimi1, C. Obringer3, J. Tarabeux1, M. Miguet1, L. Mary1, D. Bessis4, J. Gardeazabal5, B. Gener6, I. Llano-Rivas6, A. Mazur7, B.  P11
.106 Keren8,9, C. Depienne8,9, J. Muller1,3, J. Mandel1, V. Laugel2,3; Case report: Tandem duplication in ZEB2 in a patient with suspected 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Genetique, Hopitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Institut Mowat-Wilson syndrome de Genetique Medicale d‘Alsace, Strasbourg, France, 2Service de Pediatrie, Hopitaux K. Wittkowski, A. Munzig, M. Ziegler, S. Chahrokh-Zadeh, D. Wahl, I. Rost; Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Laboratoire de Genetique Medicale- Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics (AHC), 82152 Martinsried, INSERM U1112, Institut de Genetique Medicale d‘Alsace, Faculte de medecine de Germany. Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 4Departement de Dermatologie, Hopital Saint-Eloi, Montpellier, France, 5Servicio de Dermatología. Cruces University Hospital. BioCruces Health Research Institute, Bizkaia, Spain, 6Servicio de Genética. Cruces University Hospital, BioCruces Health Research Institute, Bizkaia, Spain, 7Department of Pediatrics, Mowat-Wilson syndrome is a multiple congenital anomaly syndrome mainly Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Faculty of Medicine, University of , Rzeszow, characterized by typical dysmorphic features, severe intellectual disability, Rzeszow, Poland, 8AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, microcephaly and Hirschsprung disease. In addition, organic anomalies and Paris, France, 9Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Inserm, CNRS, UM 75, U 1127, seizures are common. MutaZtiEoBn2s of the ZEB2 gene were identified as disea- UMR 7225, ICM, Paris, France. se-causing and haploinsufficiency of ZEB2 has been reported to cause Mo- wat-Wilson syndrome. The gene encodes a transcription factor which is involved in the development of the neural crest and derived structures. Compromised nucleotide excision repxaeirro (dNeErmR)a a pcitgivmiteyn (tdoesucimphered by Aziz We report on a 3-year old boy, born to healthy parents, presenting with a Sancar, 2015 Nobel laureate) causes various autosomal recessive diseases complex valvular heart defect, short stature, microcephaly, craniofacial dys- including the cancer-prone disorder (XP) and the morphia, absent speeUcBhE a3nAd delayed motor development. Initial genetic in- severe multisystem condition, Cockayne syndrome (CS). Clinical recognition vestigations of AngelmTCanF4-syndrome (methylation assay, deletion-/UPD-te- and molecular characterization of these defects remain challenging, due to sting, sequencing of gene) and Pitt-Hopkins syZnEdBr2ome (sequencing overlapping symptoms and genetic heterogeneity. Our goal was to develop a and MLPA analysis of gene) revealed negative results. single mutation-screening strategy for these diseases. We performed molecular genetic diagnostics of the gene consisting We set up a NGS assay based on the enrichment of 16 NER-related genes of Sanger sequencing and MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe am- by multiplex amplification coupled with sequencing on PGM(Ion Torrent). plification) analysis. By MLPA analysis we identified a heterozygous dupli- We prospectively analyzed the samples from an international cohort of 40 cation of exon 9. Quantitative PCR confirmed this single exon duplication. patients referred for suspected NER-related disorder and we compared the Analysis of both parents revealed that the deletion had occurred de novo corresponding phenotypes to our personal cohort of 126 NER patients pre- in the patient. By sequencing an RT-PCR fragment we could demonstrate viously characterized by classical sequencing. on RNA level that both copies of exon 9 are arranged in tandem. This dupli- We identified causative mutations in 43% of cases, including patients with cation results in a translational frame ZshEiBft2 and a premature translational very mild, incomplete or combiPnOeLdH phenotypes and uncommon genotypes termination signal. It has not yet been described in literature and databases. (Table1). Four unrelated XP patients from the Basque country revealed a As the tandem duplication of exon 9 of probably leads to loss of func- EcoRmCCm3o(XnP sBp)licingE mRCuCt5at(iXoPnG )in demonstrating a new founder effect. tion of one allele it is likely to cause the clinical appearance of the patient. We also identified two patients linked to the very rarely implicated genes  P11
.107 and . PIG-o-pathies, a new cause of mental retardation, hypotonia, seizures Targeted NGS is efficient for the molecular diagnosis of NER-related dis- and congenital anomalies orders. It is particularly useful for phenotypes with combined features or E. Zonneveld-Huijssoon, P. M. van Hasselt, A. Bloem, L. de Vries, M. van Haelst, K. unusually mild symptoms. Molecular characterization allowed appropriate Lichtenbelt; clinical follow-up of the patients, and helped refining the clinical spectrum UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. of NER diseases. Granted from Agence de Biomedecine. HGNC Number Final New Distinctive characteristic gene name of diagnosis mutations Introduction: Whole exome sequencing reveals increasing numbers of new (legacy patients discovered name) in this disease genes. Genes of the GPI-bioanchor synthesis-pathway are being re- study ERC C8
(CSA) 5 Cockayne 6 2 patients with unusual mild ported as new causes for a number of syndromes. At this moment, at least syndrome clinical presentation 10 genes of this pathway are reported in OMIM with a known phenotype. ERC C6
(CSB) 4 Cockayne 2 syndrome Methods: We recently diagnosed three patients with a PIG-o-pathy (PIGA, POLH 4 Xeroderma 2 Founder effect in Northern pigmentosum Spain PIGV and PIGN) and applied an immunological assay for the expression ERC C2
(XPD) 2 Xeroderma Refining the clinical follow-up of GPI-coupled proteins, which allows for functional testing of variants of ERC C3
(XPB) 1 p Ui Vg -m see nn st io tis vu em 1 Mild clinical presentation. unknown significance in GPI-bioanchor genes. Additionally, we made an syndrome Only 9 patients described worldwide overview of all clinical features that have thus far been reported in the lite- ERC C5
(XPG) 1 XP/CS 1, the first Only 20 patients described rature in PIG-o-pathy patients and categorized them based on occurrence complex splicing worldwide. mutation and pivotalness for the diagnosis.  P11
.109 Results: The expression of GPI-coupled proteins was reduced in our patient Diagnostics of neurofibromatosis - atypical cases with two PIGN variants of unknown significance. Moreover, this patient sho- J. Štika1, V. Hořínová2; wed persistent restricted diffusion in structures in the mesencephalon and 1synlab genetics s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic, 2Hospital Jihlava, Jihlava, Czech Republic. diencephalon on brain MRI till 15 months of age. We here show that com- mon features like severe developmental delay, hypotonia, seizures and more distinguishing pivotal features like elevated alkaline phosphatase, vesicou- Introduction: The occurrence of cafe-au-lait spots (CALS) in the skin is aNssFo1- rethral reflux, hypoplastic nails and anorectal anomalies are associated with ciated with a number of severe clinical syndromes. Among them, the most PIG-o-pathies. common is neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF), caused by mutations in the Conclusion: An immunological assay can be useful in the interpretation of gene. variants of unknown significance in genes of the GPI-bioanchor synthesis Materials and Methods: Two unrelated children, female and male, with mul- pathway. Moreover, as the common features in PIG-o-pathies are aspecific, tiple CALS but without further clinical signs of NNFF1 were examined. The same the more pivotal features reported here may further help in establishing the clinical phenotype was also found in other members of the two families. In diagnosis. Whether the observed brain MRI changes are specific for PIG-o- these individuals, a mutation analysis of the gene based on amplicon pathies remains to be elucidated. next generation sequencing (GS-Junior, Roche) with primers amplifying all exons and exon-intron boundaries was performed. Ligated adaptors were used for library preparation. c.2970_2972delAAT Results: Two different mutations were found in the two families. In the fema- le proband´s family, a previously reported mutation, was identified. Similacr.l3y1 t0o3 oduerlA ciansseT,T itT Cwas reported in connection with atypical NF with CALS with no otheNrF s1i gns of clinical disease. In the second family, a new mutation, , segregating with CALS was identified. Conclusion: Two different mutations were found in two families with 246 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONaAty, pSicPaAl NINF m| WaniWfesWted.E bSyH mGul.tOipRle GCALS not accompanied by other appa-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.112 Clinical exome sequencing: Improving genetic diagnosis of complex rent signs of clinical disease. One ofN thFe1m was identified as a new mutation. diseases The result show that patients with multiple CALS with apparently no other A. Arteche1, L. Rausell1, M. Galvez2, M. Bermejo1, M. Lazaro1, M. Molero1, A. Gomez1, L. signs of NF should be examined for mutations. Cabrera1, P. Marín-García1, C. Ruiz1, J. Garcia-Planells1, M. Garcia-Hoyos1; 1Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna, Spain, 2Gencellpharma, Bogota,  P11
.110 Colombia. NF1 microduplication in two identical twins: description of the phenotype and comparison with previous described cases O. Garcia Campos1, P. Garcia Murillo2, A. Verdú Pérez1, C. Catalli2; The human exome represents 1-2% of the entire human genome and is esti- 1Neuropediatric service, Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain, 2Genetic department, mated to contain 85% of the mutations causing Mendelian diseases. Next Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain. generation sequencing (NGS) offers rapid sequencing of the whole-exome compared to traditional molecular testing. Thisundoubtedly, contributes to significant advances in the study of etiology, origins, and causes of complex Introduction: NF1 deletions are a well-known cause of Neurofibromatosis genetic diseases. NGS gives us the possibility not only to make previously type 1, due mostly to non-allelic homologous recombination between low- unthinkable genetic diagnosis but also to reduce costs without affecting ac- copy repeats on the flanking regions. Despite this mechanism, very few ca- curacy. ses of NF1 duplication have been described. In this study, we present the genetic characterization of a patient with hete- Materials and Methods: Two identical twins came to the attention of the rogenous clinic using whole-exome sequencing (WES). neuropediatric service for developmental and speech delay and minor dis- Our patient is a 12 years-old girl (46, XX), phenotypically characterized by morphic traits. Additional clinical and instrumental studies were perfor- precocious aging since her childhood, hyperelasticity, cutis laxa, and in- med. Genetic round-up included standard karyotype and CGH-array. Review creased susceptibility to fractures. WES was carried out using the TruSight of the literature was performed and we attempted comparison of the pheno- One kit (Illumina) that targets the coding regions of >4,800 genes associated type of the present cases with similar ones. with known clinical phenotypes (12Mb of the genome). Results: Array-CGH detected a small 17q11.2 duplication involving the enti- All variants, detected at >20X depth and with >30% of heterozygosity, were re NF1 gene in one twin. MLPA study confirmed the presence of the dupli- annotated and classified according ACMG guidelines, and were prioritized cation in her sister. Systematic review of published cases allowed oriented considering our patient´s phenotype. exploration in search of previously described features. We detected parti- The exome analysis revealed a non-previously reported nonsense change al discordance of the phenotype, i.e. normal enamel and presence of some in homozygosis (c.190C>T; p.Gln64*) in the gene GORAB (MIM*607983). café-au-lait spots which has not been described before. This GORAB gene had been previously associated with Geroderma Osteo- Conclusions: Phenotypes associated to NF1 duplication are highly variable dysplasticum (MIM#231070), an autosomal recessive disease that perfectly and only few unspecific features like global developmental delay are shared matches the phenotype of our patient. by patients. Differences are probably due to small differences in additional The targeted exome sequencing that analyses all known clinically relevant microduplicated genes, while other features could be age-related. Extensive genes, is a useful tool for the genetic diagnosis in patients with heteroge- follow-up is warranted and, although clinically distinct from its reciprocal nous phenotype in whom no clear genetic causes were suspected. NF1 syndrome, careful evaluation of neurocutaneous symptoms is sugge- sted.  P11
.113 Genetic variants near the GREM1 locus are associated with a clinical  P11
.111 subtype of nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate Molecular screening of NFIX in patients with Sotos-like overgrowth A. C. Böhmer1,2, S. T. Ahmed3, N. B. Sangani3, S. Varghese3, J. Klamt1,2, H. Schuenke1,2, P. (Malan syndrome): 4 new mutations affecting the DNA-binding Gültepe1,2, A. Hofmann1,2, M. Rubini4, K. A. Aldhorae5, R. P. Steegers-Theunissen6, A. Rojas- domain Martinez7, R. Reiter8, G. Borck9, M. Knapp10, M. Nakatomi11, D. Graf12,13, E. Mangold1, H. I. Dapía, J. Tenorio, G. Gordo, P. Arias, T. Consortium, P. Lapunzina; Peters3, K. U. Ludwig1,2; Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM), Madrid, Spain. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Introduction: The Nuclear-Factor I-X (NFIX) is a member of the nuclear Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Department of Biomedical and Specialty Surgical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 5Orthodontic Department, College of Dentistry, factors-I (NFI) family proteins, involved in gene expression regulation. De Thamar University, Thamar, Yemen, 6Department of Epidemiology, Radboud University novo heterozygous variants in NFIX may cause two different syndromes: Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Marshall-Smith syndrome (MSS; MIM #602535) or a less severe Sotos-li- Medicine, School of Medicine, and Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Ciencias de ke phenotype, recently proposed to be referred as Malan syndrome (MIM la Salud, Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico, 8Department of #614753). The overgrowth phenotype (Malan syndrome) has recently been Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Section of Phoniatrics and Pedaudiology, associated to NFIX haploinsufficiency due to point mutations clustered University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, around exon 2 (which encodes the DNA-binding domain) or due to who- Germany, 10Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 11Division of Anatomy, Kyushu Dental University, Kitakyushu, le gene deletions. Frameshift and splice-site variants around exons 6-8 are Japan, 12Orofacial Development and Regeneration, Institute of Oral Biology, Center for thought to be causing a more severe phenotype as they may escape non- Dental Medicine, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 13Departments of Dentistry sense-mediated RNA decay. To date 25 mutations have been described in and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, association to the MSS phenotype. Only 20 have been reported in relation to Edmonton, AB, Canada. the overgrowth phenotype so far. Methods: We performed molecular analysis of the NFIX gene by conventio- nal sequencing in a group of patients with overgrowth features but unclear Nonsyndromic clefts are a common birth defect of multifactorial etiology. clinical diagnosis. The effect of the mutations was predicted “in silico” by The most common type is cleft lip, which occurs with or without cleft palate different bioinformatics tools. (nsCLP and nsCLO, respectively). The genetic architecture of both types is Results: 5 heterozygous mutations in the NFIX DNA-binding domain were not yet fully understood. identified, 4 of them not previously reported. The patients showed some So- Here we performed a meta-analysis on genetic and clinical data from three tos-like clinical features but no NSD1 abnormalities. All patients presented large cohorts and identified strong association between a region on chromo- a significant delay in speech. some 15q13 and nsCLP (P=8.13×10-14 for rs1258763; relative risk (RR): Conclusions: Genetic testing of NFIX should be considered in patients with 1.46, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.32-1.61)) but not nsCLO (P=0.27). The Sotos-like features but no NSD1 alterations. To date the number of patients 5 kb region of strongest association maps intergenically between Gremlin-1 suffering from NFIX-related diseases is scant, thus further studies will be (GREM1) and Formin-1 (FMN1) genes. GREM1 is an antagonist in the BM P4
 necessary in order to establish a specific clinical phenotype. pathway which has been implicated in facial genesis. Based on analyses of Grants: FI S15
/1481 the murine Grem1 expression pattern during embryonic craniofacial deve- lopment, we further subdivided the nsCLP patient cohort and observed a more than two-fold increase in risk for patients displaying clefts of both the lip and soft palate but with an intact hard palate (RR: 3.76, 95% CI: 1.47- 9.61, Pdiff<0.05). Notably, in four of six multiplex-families with rare muta- tions in GREM1, the rare allele also co-segregated with the clinical subtype. In silico annotation such as chromatin interaction analyses further support GREM1 as plausible candidate gene at 15q13. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 247 This study identified a non-coding region at 15q13 as the second, genome-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index wide significant locus for nsCLP, after 13q31. Moreover, the data suggest a unaffected mosadice fnaothveor in an autosomal dominant fashion. This is the first genetic contribution to a rare clinical nsCLP entity which specifically invol- report of molecular diagnosis made for CMDD - wormian bone type. Array- ves clefts of the lip and the soft palate which develop at different embryolo- CGH detected a unbalanced translocatirodn as the cause of microce- gical time points. phaly with severe developmental delay in the 3 child. WES andael nyosevso, linka- ge and array-CGH enabled accurate molecular diagnosis of three distinctive  P11
.114 phenotypes segregating as a dominant, recessive or occurring in one Novel variants in “old” and “new” genes in patients with primary consanguineous family. clinical diagnosis of Noonan syndrome. M. Gos1, A. Landowska1, A. Abramowicz1, S. Rzońca1, J. Sota1, T. Gambin2, S. Fahiminiya3,  P11
.116 J. Klapecki1, N. Bezniakow1, A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, J. Pilch4, M. Bodzioch5, J. Oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum: High-Throughput Analysis Wierzba6, A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk7, R. Śmigiel8, R. Posmyk9, M. Piotrowicz10, E. Obersztyn1, E. Rubinato1, D. Vozzi1, I. Gandin1, A. Morgan1, A. D‘Eustacchio2, M. La Bianca2, V. Pecile2, J. Majewski3, J. Bal1; P. Gasparini1, F. Faletra2; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 1Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, 2Institute of Computer Science, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS ‚Burlo Garofolo‘, Trieste, Italy. 3Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Department of Pediatric Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 5Department of Neurology, Jagiellonian University School of Medicine, Kraków, Poland, 6Department and Clinic of Pediatrics, Hematooncology, Oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum (OAVS) is a developmental disorder af- Oncology and Endocrinology, Department of General Nursing, Medical University fecting structures derived from the first and second branchial arches during of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland, 7Department of Pediatric Neurology and Rehabilitation, blastogenesis. The phenotype is clinically heterogeneous and it is typically Medical University of Białystok, Białystok, Poland, 8Department of Social Pediatrics, characterised by craniofacial anomalies (ear malformations, hemifacial mi- Wroclaw Medical University, Wrocław, Poland, 9NZOZ Genetics, Center for Clinical crosomia, mandible anomalies, orofacial cleft), hearing loss, ocular defects Genetics, Białystok, Poland, 10Department of Genetics, Polish Mother‘s Memorial (epibulbar dermoids, microphthalmia) and vertebral defects. There is also Hospital - Research Institute, Łódź, Poland. a high rate of associated anomalies in other organs/systems such as heart defects, renal and central nervous system malformations. Both genetic and environmental factors are thought to contribute to the OAV spectrum, ho- Noonan syndrome (NS) is a multisystem disorder caused by mutations in wever, the mechanism and etiology are still poorly understood. Linkage and genes encoding elements of RAS/MAPK pathway. The aim of our study was array analysis have detected several candidate loci for this genetically hete- the identification of the molecular defect underlying NS phenotype in Po- rogeneous condition (including deletions, duplications, unbalanced translo- lish patients. The classic Sanger sequencing and next generation sequencing cations, partial trisomies of chromosomes 7, 8, 9, 10p, 22), but no recurrent techniques were apPpTlPieNd1 1to SaOnSa1lyzReA oFn1ly seleRcItTe1d genes or exome /clinical chromosomal abnormalities have been identified so far. exome, respectively. The aim of our study is to identify candidate genes potentially involved in The mutations in , , and genes were identifieSdO Sin1 the pathogenesis of this condition. To achieve our goal we selected five un- 115, 23, 16 and 7 dpea tnieonvots, respectiveRlyA. FA1mong the identified mutations, related patients presenting with the classical OAVS phenotype and without several unpublished beforRe IwT1ere found including: familial variant in pathogenic Copy Number Variations (CNVs) detected by High-Density SNP- - p.Thr734Pro and variants in : p.Gly169Arg and p.Gly361Ala. array (HumanOmniExpress BeadChip, Illumina, CA). Then, Whole Exome Also two new variants in were found: p.Gly31Arg and p.Lys23Glu in Sequencing analysis (Ion Proton™-LifeTechnologies) was carried out in all residues affeKcRtiAnSg protNeRinA Sstructure or interaction with GTP/GDP, respec- patients. CNV analysis was carried out by CoNIFER (http://conifer.source- tively. Further Sanger sequencinNgR oAf Sselected genes revealed the presence of forge.net) with a confidence value ≥1.5. Preliminary data shows no possibly mutation in and genes in 3 and 2 patients, respectively. A novel pathogenic variants in genes shared by at least three out of five patients. de novo variant p.Glu153Lys in gene was identified. Further analysis are currently undergoing. Updated data will be presented Till now, the exome/clinical exome sequencing performed for 54 patients and discussed. allowed toR iAdeSAnt2ify molecular cause of the disease in 20 (37%) patients, in- cluding vdaer inaonvtos in genes related to RAS/MAPKK DpMat6hAway (eg. p.Arg366Ter  P11
.117 variant in ), to other dysmorphic clinical eLnZtTitRie1s like Kabuki syndro- Two novel MID1 mutations and the variable expression of me (eg. c.4032_4034+1del variant in ) or novel NS candi- developmental delay in X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome date genes (eg. familial variant p.Ser247Asn in ). The application of N. Maia1,2, M. Nabais Sá3,2, N. Tkachenko3, G. Soares3, I. Marques1,2, A. M. Fortuna3,2, R. sequencing techniques allows to identify novel potentially pathogenic vari- Santos1,2,4, A. P. M. de Brouwer5, P. Jorge1,2; 1Unidade de Genética Molecular, Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto de Magalhães ants that should be tested with functional (including in silico) studies and/ (CGMJM), Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidade Multidisciplinar de or co-segregation analysis. Investigação Biomédica (UMIB), Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Supported from NCN research projects no. 2011/01/D/NZ5/01347 and Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Unidade de Genética Médica, Centro de Genética 2013/09/B/NZ2/03164. Médica Jacinto de Magalhães (CGMJM), Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4UCIBIO/REQUIMTE, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Faculdade de Farmácia,  P11
.115 Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 5Department of Human Genetics, Donders Resolving molecular basis of novel phenotype: recessive, dominant Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, and de novo disorders segregating in a consanguineous family Netherlands. P. Le Quesne Stabej1, H. Williams1, C. James1, L. Ocaka1, M. Tekman2, H. C. Stanescu2, R. Kleta2, Division of Medicine, UCL, D. Morrogh3, A. Calder4, M. Bitner-Glindzicz1; 1Genetics and Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Division of Medicine, UCL, London, United Kingdom, 3NE Thames Regional Genetics X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome (XLOS) is a midline multiple congenital Laboratory Service, London, United Kingdom, 4Radiology Department, Great Ormond condition characterized by facial dysmorphisms such as telecanthus/hyper- Street Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. telorism, broad nasal bridge and cleft lip/palate. Other features are variably present, including heart and anal defects, hypospadias, brain malformations and intellectual disability and/or developmental delay (ID/DD). Extensive We report a consanguineous family wstith four offspring. The mother has inter and intra-familMiaIlD p1 henotypic variability was previously described non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL), 1 child has NndSHL and craniometadiar-d particularly regarding the presence of ID/DD in XLOS patients, even when physeal dysplasia (CMDD) - wormian bone type, 2 child has NSHL only, 3 caused by the same mutation. MID1 has  E3
 ubiquitin ligase activity child suffers from sigtnhificant developmental delay with microcephaly in ad- that specifically targets proMteIiDn1 phosphatase 2A for degradation. Controlling dition to NSHL and 4 child has CMDD - wormian bone type only. We perfor- protein phosphatase 2A is essential for proper hippocampus development. med whole exome sequencing (WES), linkage analysis and array Compara- To date over 90 different mutationMs IhDa1v e been described and asso- tive Genomic Hybridisation (CGH) on all family members. There is a strong ciated with the presence of ID/DD in XLOS patients. histstory of hearing loss on the mother’s side of family. She is married to her We analyzed the coding sequendcee noof vtohe gene in eight male patients, 1PD ZcDou7sin with normal hearing. Whole exome sequencing (WES) identified pertaining to six unrelated families, with a clinical suspicion of XLOdSe. nTowvoo a deafness-causing splice variant in an autosomal recessive deafness gene novel variants, c.1656del and a c.1215_1228dup, were identified in which resides in a linkage region (LOD scoreC O3. L61
)A. I1n the two child- four patients from two families. Interestingly, the patient with the ren diagnosed with a very rare skeletal phenotype (CMDD - wormian bone mutation did not present ID/DD, showing a global developmental quotient type), WES unexpectedly disclosed a heterozygous variant shared of 110. between the two affected sibs as the cause of skeletal phenotype. The vari- A descriptive statistical analysis of the specific clinical features of our two ant has been previously described to cause two skeletal phenotypes diffe- index patients and of those described in the literature with genotypic data r2e4nt8 to the phenotype in this family and was inEhSeHritGed 2fr0om16 th |e B aAppRarCeEntLlyO N(An,= 1 S0
P3 A), IrNev |e aWleWd nWo .cEoSrrHelaGti.oOn RbGetween ID/DD penetrance and type ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .120 Analysis of overgrowth disorders through custom NGS panel of 183 mutation or affected MID1 protein domain (missense mutations, in the lat- genes (OGLYVAS) ter). This could indicate absence of an effective phenotype-genotype cor- J. Tenorio, G. Gordo, I. Dapía, P. Arias, E. Vallespín, K. Ibañez, J. Silla, Á. Del Pozo, T. relation concerning ID/DD or alternatively insufficient data due to poorly Consortium, P. Lapunzina; described cognitive deficits in these patients (i.e. full IQ assessment is often INGEMM, Madrid, Spain. missing). 
P11 .118 Introduction: Overgrowth syndromes (OGS) comprise a group of conditions OFD1 in males: Congenital heart defects are included its phenotypic in which growth parameters are above of the mean and are usually accom- spectrum panied by other clinical manifestations. In some cases, there is high over- A. Bouman1, M. Alders1, L. van Leeuwen2, N. Thuijs3, M. van Maarle1; lapping between different OGS, making essential the molecular diagnosis. 1AMC, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2AMC, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3AMC, Department of Pathology, Material and Methods: We have designed a custom panel of NGS in which Amsterdam, Netherlands. we included: i) genes responsible for any OGS, ii) genes related to the pa- thways that leads to any disorder that resemble an OGS and iii) genes within a loci implicated in any overgrowth disorders described in the literature. OFD1 Oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1 (OFD1) is an X-linked dominant disorder Thus, 183 genes have been included. Eighteen patients, divided into tho- caused by mutations in the gene. This condition is characterized by se with clear phenotype but unconfirmed diagnosis (n=3) and those with facial anomalies and abnormalities of oral tissues, digits, brain and kidneys. non-syndromic overgrowth and intellectual disability (n=14) were tested. Almost all affected patients are female, as OFD1 is lethal in males mostly in One sample with known mutation and phenotype has been included as an the first or second trimester of pregnancy. internal control. Although OFD1 is a disorder of the primary cilia, congenital heart defects Results: After variants filtering, fourteen mutations have been found in ele- are not frequently reported in both males and females with OFD1. Only a ven unrelated patients, five of which are causative genes for well-known few cases were published this far, describing male OFD1 patients with a con- overgrowth syndromes. Otherwise, nine variants have been found in seven genital hdeea rnto dveofect. genes which are within a deletion or duplication syndrome with overgrowth Here, we present a case of an affected male fetus with a pathogenic hemi- and/or genes that act in several growth pathways but without a clear relati- zygous mutation in OFD1 (c.2101C>T; p.(Gln701*)). Ultrasound on between their mutations and phenotype abnormalities. examination demonstrated severe hydrocephalus, hypoplastic cerebellum Conclusions: Custom NGS panel of genes of overgrowth disorders is an ex- and hypoplastic left ventricle of the heart. The pregnancy was terminated tremely cost-effective tool to diagnose those cases in which there is high at 16 weeks of gestation. Post-mortem examination of the fetus confirmed clinical overlapping between different syndromes and also gives the possi- previous findings and also demonstrated polydactyly of both hands and one bility to find mutation in genes from growth pathways that could explain the foot. phenotype in undiagnosed cases of non-syndromic overgrowth. By presenting this case of a male fetus with confirmed OFD1 and a conge- Grants: FI
S15 /1481 
P11 .121 nital heart defect, we would like to create awareness that congenital heart OVO
L2  variants in a syndrome with cleft lip, colonic atresia and other defects are included in the phenotypic spectrum of OFD1. This is especial- congenital abnormalities ly of importance when prenatally multiple malformations are seen and the P. J. G. Zwijnenburg, J. M. Weiss, H. J. Meijers-Heijboer, Q. Waisfisz; suspicion of OFD1 is raised, also when the family is unsuspected for OFD1. A VU university medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. clinical summary of this case and previous male OFD1 cases with a congeni- tal heart defect will be demonstrated. 
P11 .119 Ultrasound screening at 20+2 weeks showed a bilateral cleft lip in the fe- LR
P5 -linked Osteoporosis-Pseudoglioma syndrome mimicking tus of a non-consanguineous couple. At 30+5 weeks, a boy was born with isolated microphthalmia normal weight, height and OFC. He suffered from respiratory insufficiency, S. Guntekin Ergun1, M. A. Ergun1, G. Gumus Akay2, N. A. Akarsu3, F. E. Percin4; bilateral cleft lip-palate, a Peters anomaly, right sided aortic arch, severe tra- 1Gazi University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, cheomalacia and atresia of the transverse colon. Karyotyping, SNP array and 2Ankara University, Brain Research Centre, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University analysis of B3GALTL, CHD7 and ASX
L1  was normal. He remained respirato- Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Gene Mapping Laboratory, ry insufficient and died after 6 weeks. Ankara, Turkey, 4Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Shortly after whole exome sequencing (WES) was initiated, mother was Ankara, Turkey. pregnant. At 17+1 weeks an ultrasound showed a bilateral cleft lip without other abnormalities and the pregnancy was terminated. A female fetus was born with a bilateral cleft lip-palate. Autopsy showed malrotation and a Introduction: Osteoporosis-Pseudoglioma syndrome (OPGG; MIM 259770) short ascending colon, cysts in the intestinal wall, uterus bicornis and he- is a rare autosomal recessive disorder manifesting juvenile-onset osteopo- mivertebra. rosis and blindness. Affected individuals often have multiple bone fractures, WES analysis revealed compound heterozygous variants in OVO
L2 , c.447C>A particularly in spinal bones. Vision problems affect the retina and named as p.(Cys149*) and c.538del p.(Cys180Alafs*15) in both sibs. p.(Cys149*) is a pseudoglioma since the conditions resemble an eye tumor known as retinal nonsense variant in the second last exon, most likely resulting in nonsense glioma. Mild intellectual disability, hypotonia, abnormal flexible joints or mediated mRNA decay. p.(Cys180Alafs*15) causes a premature stopcodon seizures are frequently associated with the disorder. It is caused by biallelic in the last exon and therefore predicted not to result in nonsense mediated mutations in the LR
P5 . Here we reported a four generation consanguineous decay. To our knowledge, this is the first report on nonsense variants in family in which three members, ranging between 19 and 28 years, were af- OVO
L2  in humans. OVO
L2  is considered to play an important role in early fected by bilateral isolated microphthalmia. embryonic development; Ovol2-deficient mice display severe defects inclu- Materials and Methods: Homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing ding underdeveloped branchial arches, abnormal gut morphology and aber- have been performed to clarify the genetic etiology of the bilateral isolated rant vascularization. microphthalmia in this family. Therefore, we consider the nonsense variants in OVO
L2  likely to be causa- Results: The exome sequencing revealed a homozygous splice-site mutation tive for this syndrome of bilateral cleft lip-palate, colonic atresia and other in LR
P5  (c.2827+1G>A) in the index patient. congenital malformations. Conclusions: Although no osteoporosis or bone fracture history in any of the 
P11 .122 affected members, dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry revealed osteoporosis Diagnosis of Pallister Killian syndrome by aCGH analysis in the spine in two examined affected members. Two sisters with compound Z. Yilmaz Celik1, Y. K. Terzi1, I. Erol2, F. I. Sahin1; 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, heterozygous mutations in LR
P5 : c.889dupA and c.2827+1G>A associated Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatric Neurology, with bilateral retinal detachment, microphthalmic eye, retro-lental masses Ankara, Turkey. and reduced bone density have recently been reported. Thus, microphthal- mia and reduced bone density observed in our family considered to be a component of OPPG syndrome. Taken together our study showed that iso- Introduction: Array comperative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a high re- lated microphthalmia can be the prominent symptom in a subset of OPPG solution cytogenetic tool for detection of segmental genomic copy number families and, even no associated findings observed, bone mineral density variations (CNVs). Large numbers of genetic syndromes associated with loss measurement is essential for appropriate genetic counselling in such cases. or gain of human genome have been diagnosed by this method. Here we report a one year old girl consulted due to dysmorphic face and hypotonia. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAAINlth |o WughW, cWon.vEeSntHioGna.lO cyRtoGgenetics revealed a normal karyotype, we 2id4en9-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .126 Hallmark features of CLAPO syndrome in two patients with PROS tified a 12p11.1p13.33 copy number gain by aCGH. phenotype and confirmed PIK3CA somatic mosaic mutations Materials and methods: Peripheral blood lymphocytes were used for DNA V. Martinez-Glez1, G. Gordo1, L. Rodriguez-Laguna1, G. Herranz1, S. Garcia-Minaur1, F. isolation. aCGH analysis was carried on by Roche NimbleGen 630K array Santos-Simarro1, J. Lopez-Gutierrez2, P. Lapunzina1; ISCA Plus Cytogenetics array and was analyzed by Nexus 7.5 software. The 1INGEMM-CIBERER-IdiPaz-Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Vascular LSI TEL/AM
L1  ES Dual Color translocation probe was used for detection of Anomalies Center, Plastic Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. tetrasomy 12p mosaicism. PIK3CA Results: The girl was the second child of nonconsanguineous parents. She PIK3CA had dysmorphic features including frontal bossing, round face , sparse scalp PROS ( -Related Overgrowth Spectrum) comprises a group of seg- hair, low-set abnormal ears, wide nasal bridge, short nose, long filtrum, thin mental overgrowth syndromes caused by somatic mutations in the upper lip, everted/thick lower lip, short neck. We detected copy number gene, including previously considered separate syndromes such as Mega- gain on short arm of the chromosome 12 encompassing about 34.5 Mb by lencephaly-Capillary malformation (MCAP) and CLOVES (Congenital Lipo- aCGH. This data was also approved by FISH. However, FISH analysis revealed matous Overgrowth, Vascular malformations, Epidermal nevi, And Skeletal/ that the patient carried 10% mosaic i(12p) in lymphocyte cultures. Spinal abnormalities). However, as somatic mosaicism makes clinical ex- Conclusions: As a result the patient was diagnosed as Pallister-Killian syn- pression variable in severity and location, the complete phenotypic spec- drome. Peripheral blood lymphocytes were utilized for FISH to confirm dia- trum in PROS is still to be elucidated. On the other hand, CLAPO syndrome gnosis, so we did not perform invasive skin biopsy. This finding approved (Capillary malformation of the lower lip, Lymphatic malformation of the the previous reports suggesting that aCGH analysis may be enough to make face and neck, Asymmetry and Partial/generalized Overgrowth), is another diagnosis Pallister-Killian syndrome without any invasive applications. rare disease in this group of the overgrowth syndromes, with a highly simi- 
P11 .123 lar phenotype to PROS, but of unknown cause, although PsIoKm3aCtAic mosaicism Postnatal diagnosis of Pallister-Killian Syndrome after non-invasive is also suspected. Here we describe two patients with multiple clinical and prenatal testing radiological features associated to PROS and confirmed mosaic mu- D. Wahl1, W. Schenk2, U. Heinrich3, I. Rost3; tations. These patients also show two manifestations not described as part 1Practise, 86150 Augsburg, Germany, 2Childrens‘ Hospital, 86152 Augsburg, Germany, of the PROS spectrum and considered to be the hallmarks of CLAPO syndro- 3MVZ, 82152 Martinsried, Germany. me —Capillary malformation of the lower lip and Lymphatic malformation of the face and neck—. Therefore, we report a phenotypic overlap between these two entities and suggest a possible pathogenic association, which We report on a newborn girl, the second child of healthy parents, born after should be further explored in patients with CLAPO. an uneventful pregnancy. In order to avoid the risk of invasive prenatal dia- gnostics, a non-invasive prenatal test was performed, excluding trisomies 
P11 .127 13, 18 and 21. Furthermore, high-resolution ultrasound at 20-22. week’s In vitro studies with an AKT inhibitor, ARQ092, provide evidence gestation showed normal results. The parents felt save and were looking for a new and more effective therapeutic option in PIK3CA Related forward to give birth to a healthy child. Immediately after birth an increased Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS) patients muscle tone, as well as an anteriorly positioned anus, a duplication of the D. Loconte1, V. Grossi1, S. Di Tommaso1, C. Ranieri1, R. Bagnulo1, A. Peserico1, G. Forte2, P. right great toe and dysmorphic facial features were evident. Audiometry Sanese1, A. Giglio3, Y. Yu4, G. Abbadessa5, C. Simone1,2, N. Resta1; showed moderate hearing disturbance, ultrasound of the heart revealed an 1Division of Medical Genetics; Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology; University, Bari, Italy, 2Cancer Genetics Laboratory, IRCCS “S. de Bellis”, atrial septal defect. The sorrowful parents were convinced by the genetic Castellana Grotte (BA), Italy, 3Departiment of Emergency and Organ Transplantation- councilor, that further genetic investigations were indicated and agreed to Urology, Andrology and Kidney Transplantation Unit, Bari, Italy, 4Biology, ArQule, Inc., Array-CGH analysis. A mosaic tetrasomia 12p - causative for Pallister-Killian Burlington, MA, United States, 5Clinical Development, ArQule, Inc, Burlington, MA, United Syndrome - was detected. All symptoms of the child could be assigned to this States. diagnosis. Further involvement of eyes, skin and lungs could be excluded. The diagnosis of this severe and rare chromosomal disorder was explained to the parents, and their question, whether there had been a diagnostic fai- Introduction: In PROS, PIK3CA germline and postzygotic mutations consti- lure during pregnancy was appeased. Meanwhile the parents feel content tutively activate the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway causing congenital segmen- with their 6 months old girl and accept her slow but continuous develop- tal overgrowth, while are absent in surrounding healthy tissues. MTOR inhi- ment as well as the decisions they had taken during pregnancy, having und- bitors are empirically tested in these patients. We aim to assess the effects e Pr 1g 1o .n 1e 2 v 4arious steps of trauma processing and supervision. on PROS patient-derived cells of pathway blockage upstream of mTOR by Deletion of PDKCC gene in a patient with mexoaxial and preaxial the potent and selective alloste.ric AKT inhibitor ARQ 092, an experimental polydactyly, complex cardiac defect and facial features of Pallister drug with activity and long-term tolerability in many cancer patients, being Hall syndrome also tested in Proteus patients R. D. Clark; Materials and methods: We performed targeted deep sequencing of pa- Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA, United States. thway genes in six PROS patient-derived cells to identify causative muta- tions and immunoblots to assess the phosphorylation status of AKT and its PDKCC downstream targets (p
S6 , pPRA
S40 , pFOXO3a, pBAD, pGSK3α-β). Anti-pro- DePleDtKioCnC of the gene (MIM 614150) at 2p21 has no liferative effect of ARQ 092 and PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors (wortmannin, known phenotypic consequence in humans. However, the mouse homolog LY294002, syrolimus) was evaluated, with or without serum, in PROS cells of , Vlk, is a hedgehog target that interactPs DwKiCthC Gli3 to regulate chon- from six patients. drocyte differentiation. A patient with suspected PallisteGrL-HI3all syndrome Results: ARQ 092 potently inhibited Akt signaling and exerted a strong anti- had a deletion at 2p21 that included only the gene suggesting that proliferative effect by inducing cell death more efficiently than comparators, haploinsufficiency for this gene may mimic a mutation in . The mother with 50% of surviving cells after 60 hours of treatment with 5 uM dose. was a 33 year old obese G8
P4034  with bicornuate uterus and diet controlled Conclusions: Our data show that PROS cells are ‘addicted’ to AKT and PROS gestation diabetes mellitus A1 (HgA1c 5.5) from 30 weeks gestation. The treatment benefits more of AKT than mTOR inhibition. Clinical development patient was prenatally diagnosed with transitional AV canal, right ventri- of ARQ 092 in PROS patients is warranted. cular hypoplasia, cleft mitral valve with regurgitation and pulmonary valve 
P11 .128 hypoplasia. Amniocentesis revealed a normal karyotype and micrtoharray. PROS spectrum: Two different germline and somatic mutations in Birth weight was 3476 grams, head circumference was 36.5 cm (98 %ile). PIK3CA in a patient with segmental overgrowth, hemimegalencephaly After delivery other anomalies were: macrocephaly, central polydactyly of and vascular malformations the left hand, preaxial polydactyly of the hallices, hypopGlLaIs3tic nails, facial F. López Grondona1, P. Abenia Auson2, P. Fernández Álvarez1, I. Valenzuela Palafoll1, dysmorphism, absent gag reflex, increased tone of the upper extremities. M. del Campo Casanelles1, V. García Patos1, A. Cueto González1, T. Vendrell Bayona1, M. Pallister Hall syndrome was suspected clinically but the gene analysis Borregan Prats1, L. Martínez Ribot1, E. Tizzano Ferrari1; was normal. MRI of the brain showed mildly enlaPrKgDedC Cventricles and sulci 1Vall d‘Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, with irregular gyri. The prenatal microarray report was amended after de- Zaragoza, Spain. livery, identifying a 94 kb deletion at 2PpK2D1 CoCf the gene. Parental mi- croarrays are pending. This is theG fiLrIs3t report of an abnormal phenotype in a human associated with a deletion of and it suggests that this gene In 2015 the acronym PROS (PIK3CA - Related Overgrowth Spectrum) was functions in the same pathway as . defined to encompass syndromes characterized by overgrowth, megalence- phaly, vascular and skin malformations related with somatic mutations in 250 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG the gene phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PIK3CA). We present a patient withABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index a germinal mutation present in blood, skin, and buccal mucosa and a second or PH
P1 A depending on the parental allelic origin of the mutation (paternal somatic mutation present only in overgrowth affected tissues. or maternal, respectively). POH is characterized by progressive ossifications A 4-year-old boy with congenital asymmetric macrocephaly, segmental of dermal, skeletal muscle and deep connective tissues during childhood, overgrowth and vascular malformations of skin was initially diagnosed as whilst PH
P1 A is characterized by resistance to PTH in association with fea- Proteus syndrome (PS). Studies in PTEN and AKT1 were negative and was tures of Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy (AHO). referred to our Center. Patients and Methods: First family, 28 years old woman presented with He showed right hemimegalencephaly, polymicrogyria and schizencephaly, cutaneous calcifications from early childhood followed by deep tissue tu- right hemifacial overgrowth, vascular malformations, segmental overgrow- mors. Her daughter was neonatally diagnosed with congenital hypothyroi- th in lower extremities and upper limb hypotrophy. Suspicion of related dism, but as she grew features of AHO and PTH resistance were noted. In the PROS was made and PIK3CA mutations were investigated in blood samples, second family, a 30 years old female presented with cutaneous calcification skin biopsy from two areas of hypertrophy and buccal mucosa. from infancy which than progressed into deep tissues. Her 3.5 years old Results: We amplified exons 8-10 and 21 of PIK3CA (NG_012113.2, son was diagnosed with congenital hypothyroidism, PTH resistance, AHO NM_006218.2) as hot spot of mutations. phenotype and he presented epilepsy with calcification of the basal ganglia. The patient was heterozygous for the germline mutation c.1634A>C, GNAS gene was sequenced in both families. (p.Glu545Ala) + c.1658_1659 delGTinsC (p. Ser553Thrfs*7) in all the ana- Results: Molecular analysis of GNAS gene revealed a novel missense muta- lized tissues. This complex allele was previously describes as pathological tion (p.Gln19*) in exon 1, in the girl and mother of the first family. In the and associated with Cowden and Cowden-like Syndromes. DNA obtained second family, a novel heterozygous missense mutation was identified in from the hypertrophic areas revealed a somatic mutation c.3139C>T (p.His exon 6 of GNAS gene, p.Arg160Pro n the boy and her mother, confirming 1047Tyr) previously described in Megalencephaly-capillary malformation correlation with the disease. (MCAP) patients. Conclusions: These results further expand the spectrum of GNAS mutations PIK3CA mutations have been described as somatic in mostly PROS cases, associated with POH/PH
P1 A and underline the importance of identifying except for a few patients with megalencephaly-capillary malformation and such genetic alterations to supplement clinical evaluation and genetic coun- germinal mutations. This is the first report of two PIK3CA mutations sup- seling. porting the double hit hypothesis on the genesis of these phenotypes. This work was supported by Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI13/00467) and the Basque Department of Health (GV2014111017). 
P11 .129 Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy-8 and cerebellar hypoplasia with 
P11 .131 endosteal sclerosis are allelic disorders caused by mutations in Cerebral Neoplasmes in Proteus syndrome: case report POLR3B M. R. Pizzino1, I. Loddo2, M. Crapanzano1, C. Pidone1, M. C. Cutrupi1, S. Briuglia1; M. García-Murias1,2, M. Sobrido1,2,3, A. Schlüter2,4, A. Pujol2,4, C. Castro-Fernández1,5, 1Dipartiment of Paediatric Science Messina, Messina, Italy, 2University of Messina, F. Barros1,2,3, P. Blanco-Arias1,2,3, P. Cacheiro1,5, S. Beltrán6,7, M. Gut6,7, S. Laurie6,7, A. Messina, Italy. Carracedo2,3,5, J. Eirís-Puñal8, B. Quintáns1,2; 1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Introduction: Proteus syndrome (PS) is extremely rare disease with mal- Spain, 4Laboratory of Neurometabolic Diseases, ICREA, IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 5USC, formations and overgrowth of different tissues. Prognosis is severe with Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 6CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute for Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, 7Universita Pompeo Fabra, premature death. It is caused by mosaic mutation of (PI3K)-AKT signaling Barcelona, Spain, 8Complexo Hospitalario Universitario, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. pathway. Features are asymmetrical overgrowth of limbs, hyperostosis, ce- rebriforme connective nevi, skeletal deformities, benign and malignant tu- mors, capillary vascular malformations and deep venous thrombosis. BACKGROUND: cerebellar hypoplasia with endosteal sclerosis (OMIM Case report: We report a 15 years girl with a severe expression of PS. She 213002) is a disease of unknown cause with a few cases published in the had serious deformities of skull, thorax, arms, hands, feet, macrodactyly, scientific literature. Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy-8 (HLD8) with hypo- scoliosis, various deep vein thrombosis, ovaries cystadenoma and bullous dontia and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (also known as 4H syndrome) pulmonary disease. Then she showed progressive respiratory failure, be- is caused by mutations in POLR3B. AIM: To describe two patients from the havior changes, depression, headaches, fatigues. Brain MNR showed severe same family with cerebellar hypoplasia and mutations in POLR3B. CASE hyperostosis and two lesions like meningioma, with significant compressi- REPORT: A 22 years-old male was diagnosed at the age of 5 with cerebel- on on the midbrain, brain parenchyma and cerebral edema, hydrocephalus. lar hypoplasia and endosteal sclerosis. He had microcephaly, short stature, The severe progression of lesions determined respiratory failure and pati- myopia, dental dysplasia, hypogonadism, scoliosis, ataxia, intention tremor ent death. and psychomotor retardation. His 5-years old cousin had myopia, astigma- Conclusion: CNS malformations and meningioma have been previously re- tism, psychomotor retardation, microcephaly, hypodontia, and ataxia. Her ported in patients with PS. Because of brain tumor late diagnosis and severe brain MRI showed cerebellar hypoplasia and hypomyelination. Endosteal complications, therapy has been extremely difficult and patient died. The sclerosis was not present in the girl. Whole exome sequencing was carried PS prognosis varies depending on the severity of complications. Patients out in both patients and the unaffected parents of one of them. The patients should be examined regularly and annual physical examination and radio- were compound heterozygous for two likely pathogenic variants in POLR3B: graphy is also recommended. An appropriate follow up are most important, NM_018082.5:c.[1568T>A]+[2974G>A]; NP_060552.4:p.[V523E]+[G992S]. but extreme rarity of PS makes very difficult the multidisciplinary approach. The p.V523E variant has been described in several patients, while the References: p.G992S variant was not reported previously. All the heterozygous carriers Gilbert-Barness E, Cohen MM Jr and Opitz JM. Multiple Meningiomas, Cra- in the family were asymptomatic. CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in POLR3B cau- niofacial Hyperostosis and Retinal Abnormalities in Proteus Syndrome. Am. se cerebellar hypoplasia with endosteal sclerosis. We show that this disea- J. Med. Genet. 93:234-240, 2000. se is part of the phenotypic spectrum of the 4H syndrome. This study adds Cohen MM Jr. Proteus syndrome review: molecular, clinical, and pathologic another example to consolidate the cost-effectiveness of whole exome se- features. Clin Genet 2014: 85: 111-119, 2013. quencing for the diagnosis of rare diseases, especially when several affected 
P11 .132 individuals can be analyzed. Funding: 300 exomes to elucidate rare disease- Exome sequencing uncovers homozygous mutation in PCDHB10 in CNAG; FIS PI12/00742. two brothers with syndromic intellectual disability and palmoplantar lipomatosis 
P11 .130 V. López-González1,2, M. J. Ballesta-Martínez1,2, M. J. Sánchez-Soler1,2, L. Rodríguez- Progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH) and Peña1,2, B. Rodríguez-Santiago3, L. Armengol-Dulcet3, E. Guillén-Navarro4; pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (PH
P1 A) in two unrelated families 1Sección de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen with two novel mutations in GNAS gene de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2Grupo Clínico Vinculado al Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER). Instituto de Salud Carlos III A. Skórka1,2, D. Gieruszczak-Białek1,2, E. Ciara2, K. Chrzanowska2, I. Garin3, G. Perez de (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, 3qGenomics Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain, 4Consejería de Nanclares3; Sanidad, Murcia, Spain. 1Department of Pediatrics Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Molecular (Epi) Genetics Lab, Research Unit, Hospital de Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Introduction: Autosomal recessive inheritance accounts for 25% of intellec- tual disability (ID). Diagnosis can be challenging as clinical presentation is ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAfIrNeq |u WentWly Wun.dEifSfeHreGnt.iOateRdG. Whole exome sequencing (WES) is a pow 2e 5rf 1ul Introduction: GNAS heterozygous inactivating mutations cause PPHP/POH tool for gene discovery.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Clinical report: We report on two male siblings affected by syndromic ID, notype in one case); 9 patients showed SO
S1  mutations (2 familial); 3 had born to consanguineous parents of Roma origin, with a previous healthy mutations in BRAF (all sporadic cases with phenotype cardio-facio-cuta- daughter. neous); 1 in the NRAS; 2 in RAF1 (both sporadic); 1 in RIT1 (sporadic) and The patients are 15 and 5 years old. The eldest displays moderate ID, no 1 in SHO
C2  (sporadic). CGH array revealed one partial duplication in RAF1 expressive language, hand flapping, hearing loss, ventricular septal de- (0,07Mb). A comprehensive phenotype-genotype correlation was perfor- fect, vesicoureteral reflux, and a limp due to Perthes disease. The youngest med. Noonan Syndrome is the most frequent diagnosed syndrome with presents with psychomotor delay, epilepsy and growth retardation. Their characteristic features that make clinical diagnosis very accurate. However, dysmorphic features include broad nasal bridge, wide mouth with a bow- many of that features overlap with clinical findings described in the other shaped upper lip, large ears, sacral dimples and deep creases on palms and genes in the RAS/MAPK pathway making specific diagnosis more difficult. 
P11 .135 soles. Spectrum of pathogenic variants and clinical characterisation of a Results: WES revealed a homozygous stop variant c.T741A;p.Y247X in the representative cohort of Czech patients with RASopathies PCDHB10 gene, validated by Sanger. This novel variant was not observed in M. Nemcikova1, A. Baxova2, R. Beharka3, N. Dvorackova4, P. Fridrichova5, R. Gaillyova3, the variant databases and segregated as expected within the family. A. Gregorova4, M. Havlovicova1, T. Honzik2, V. Hurkova6, Z. Kalina3, J. Lastuvkova7, Discussion: We have identified a possible new syndrome characterized by M. Malikova1, J. Nemeckova3, S. Prasilova3, A. Puchmajerova1, E. Seemanova1, M. ID, dysmorphic features and palmoplantar lipomatosis, caused by a novel Simandlova8, P. Solarova5, E. Silhanova4, J. Soukalova3, S. Vejvalkova9, M. Vlckova1, J. stop homozygous mutation in a gene not previously reported as causal. Alt- Vseticka10, A. Krepelova1; hough further analysis is necessary, almost all protocadherin family genes 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology are widely expressed in the brain and play important roles in its develop- and Medical Genetics, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University ment and function, what could support its pathogenicity. Due to the associa- Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech tion of ID and deep creases, Pierpont, Coffin-Siris and Wiedemann-Steiner Republic, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 5Department syndromes should be regarded as differential diagnoses. Our report empha- of Medical Genetics, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic, 6Prediko, Zlin, Czech Republic, sizes the clinical utility of WES in patients with undiagnosed ID. 7Department of Medical Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic, 8Department of 
P11 .133 Paediatric Care, Prague, Czech Republic, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Olomouc, Mutation analysis in the ABC
C6  gene and genotype-phenotype Czech Republic, 10Medical Genetics, Ostrava, Czech Republic. correlations in the french cohort affected by pseudoxanthoma elasticum A. Legrand1,2, L. Cornez3, W. Samkari1, A. Venisse1, D. Germain4, J. Albuisson1,2,5, X. Introduction: RASopathies represent a group of clinically and molecularly Jeunemaitre1,2,5; 1Département de génétique, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, APHP, Paris, France, intersecting disorders comprising the Noonan syndrome (NS), NS with mul- 2Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France, tiple lentigines (NSML), Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair (NS/ 3Commissariat à l‘énergie atomique et aux énergies alternatives, CEA Saclay, Gif- LAH), CBL-mutation associated syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndro- sur-Yvette, France, 4University of Versailles - St Quentin en Yvelines (UVSQ), Division me (CFCS), Costello syndrome (CS), neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and Le- of Medical Genetics, Montigny, France, 5INSERM, U970, Paris centre de Recherche gius syndrome (LS). These clinical entities are due to pathogenic variants in Cardiovasculaire-PARCC, Paris, France. RAS/MAPK signalling pathway genes. Overlap of phenotypic features makes clinical diagnosis challenging, while molecular gPeTnPeNti1c 1a,n SaOlySs1is, fRoAsFte1r, sR eItTio1-, lBoRgAicFa, lK dRiAagSn, MosAiPs.2K1, MA
P2 K2, HRAS, SHO
C2 , CBL, RRAS, SPRED1 NF1 Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare, autosomal reces- Materials and Methods: Targeted analysis of sive disorder, characterized by ectopic mineralization and fragmentation of and by elastic fibers of connective tissues, leading to skin, eye and cardiovascular Sanger -and/or HaloPlex enrichment assay (Agilent Technologies, USA) fol- system symptoms. PXE is caused by loss of function mutations in ABC
C6 , lowed by next generation sequencing (MiSeq platform; Illumina, USA) in a coding a membrane transporter of unknown function. representative group of 162 unrelated Czech cases with clinically diagnosed Methods: A comprehensive molecular analysis of 306 French PXE probands NS or related disorders, excluding NF1 and LS, was performed. diagnosed using the Phenodex score, was performed (including Sanger Results: Altogether, pathogenic variants were found in 69 (42.6%) of all sequencing of all exons, Long-range PCR focusing the recurrent multiexo- cHaRsAeSs and NS confirmed in 59 patients. Four patients were diagnosed with nic deletion, and MLPA). Topography of the mutations was analysed, and NSML, in 3 cases pathogenic variants indicating CFCS were detected and genotype-phenotype correlation analysis was performed in patients with variants associated with CS were revealed in 2 instances. One patient 2 mutations: group H (haploinsufficient, 2 predicted loss-of-function vari- was diagnosed with NS/LAH. All detected substitutions were missense, one ants), group M (predicted residual conservation of the transporter function, variant in RIT1 is novel. 2 missense mutations) and group HM (one of each type of variants). Conclusion: Molecular, as well as clinical findings, generally correspond to Results: Molecular analysis led to the identification of 142 distinct mutati- previous studies. Our data facilitate genotype-phenotype correlations and ons with 66 novel mutations and a detection rate of 88%. Significant results aid clinical diagnosis in this heterogeneous group of disorders. were found: (1) Mutations distribution was specific to some regions and re- Supported by: FNM 00064203, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022, LD14073, NF-CZ11- sidues of the transporter (p=0,005), (2) a more severe ocular and vascular PDP-3-003-2014, and GAUK 165815. phenotype exists in patients in groups H and HM than in group M (p=0,05), APu1t1h.1or3 6Disclosure Information: None for all authors. (3) renal lithiasis and strokes, which are not included in the Phenodex score, A family case of Mitchell-Riley syndrome/Martinez-Frias syndrome were found respectively in 11 and 10% of cases. M. Sanchez-Gutierrez1, J. M. Carbonell-Perez1, J. Saenz-Hurtado1, E. Galan-Gomez2, R. Conclusion: This is the largest cohort ever published and characterized, and Hernandez-Rastrollo2; we propose a revised Phenodex classification, as well as personalized care 1Hospital Infanta Cristina, Badajoz, Spain, 2Hospital Materno Infantil, Badajoz, Spain. and prevention based on the patients‘ molecular status, enhancing vascular follow-up in patients with complete haplo-insufficiency of the gene. 
P11 .134 Noonan Syndrome and RAS-MAPK pathway: a road map over the last Introduction: Mitchell-Riley syndrome/Martinez-Frias syndrome (mrs/ 45 years in a tertiary hospital mfs) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder with multisystem involvement A. M. Cueto-González, T. Vendrell-Bayona, S. Boronat, M. Clemente, F. López-Grondona, and poor prognosis. The Martinez-Frias syndrome is characterized by pan- M. Borregan-Prats, L. Martínez-Ribot, E. Tizzano-Ferrari; creatic hypoplasia, intestinal atresia, and gallbladder aplasia or hypopla- Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. sia, with or without tracheoesophageal fistula. When the patient also pre- sents neonatal diabetes, it is called Mitchell/Riley syndrome. Materials and methods: We report a family case of Mitchell-Riley syndrome/ Germline mutations in genes of the RAS/MAPK pathway induced the activa- Martinez-Frias syndrome with a genetic mutation in RFX6. The patient is a tion of a cascade of events causing proliferation, differentiation, survival and healthy pregnant woman in her 26 weeks gestation (G3
P2 ). Her first daugh- cell death. Clinical consequences in patients including: short stature, conge- ter, born of non-consanguineous gipsy parents, had a pancreatic hypoplasia, nital heart defects, facial dysmorphism, developmental delay and ectoder- intestinal atresia and neonatal diabetes. She died at 17 months. This child mal anomalies among the most significant that are known as RASopathies. was diagnosed of mrs/mfs and showed a homozygous missense mutation We compiled all patients diagnosed with RASopathies during the last 45 on exon 4, c.541C>T, p.R181W. The patient and her couple are heterozygous. years in our Clinical Genetics Department to characterize their phenotype- Second daughter is heterozygous and showed at birth intestinal atresia that genotype correlation. was surgically corrected. In last pregnancy, the fetus showed polihydram- In total we have diagnosed 144 patients with clinical features compatible nios and “double bubble” suggestive of duodenal atresia. The fetus showed with RASopathies. In 55 of them we found the causative molecular defect. In the homozygous missense mutation, c.541C>T, and the pregnancy was ter- 252 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 37 patients mutations in PTPN11 were found (4 familial, and a Leopard phe- minated. The sister of the patient died at 15 month age, with neonatal dia-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .139 A satellited 15q chromosome: clinical, cytogenetic and molecular betes and intestinal atresia. Her couple suffers diabetes type I and intestinal characterization atresia. He has some relatives with intestinal atresia. S. Massara1, C. Ruggiero1, L. Espeche1, V. Cazayous2, V. Qualina2, L. Furfuro1, S. Rozental1, Conclusions: Further study of patients with RFX6 mutations should clarify C. Sargiotto1; its role in pancreatic, intestinal and enteroendocrine cellular development. 1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Hospital El Cruce, Furthermore, it should be investigated on the role of heterozygous mutation Florencio Varela, Argentina. in the development of intestinal atresia and DM type I. 
P11 .137 Nucleolar organizer regions and satellites are located on the short arms De novo heterozygous mutation in ADGR
L2  is associated with of acrocentric chromosomes. There are several reports of satellited non- microlissencephaly and rhombencephalosynapsis acrocentric chromosomes. Sometimes, the ectopic NORs are attached to a M. Vezain1,2, M. Lecuyer3, A. Laquerrière3,4, V. Dupé5, L. Pasquier6, L. Ratié5, V. David5, S. terminal chromosome band as a result of balanced or unbalanced rearran- Odent5,6, L. Trestard7, T. Frébourg1,2,8, B. Gonzalez3, P. Saugier-Veber1,8,2; gements that, depending on the particular type of rearrangement and the 1INSERM U1079, IRIB, Normandy University, Rouen, France, 2Normandy Centre for Genomic Medicine and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, 3ERI28, IRIB, Normandy chromosomes involved, will be associated with phenotypic abnormalities or University, Rouen, France, 4Pathology Laboratory, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, constitute rare familial polymorphisms. France, 5UMR6290 CNRS IGDR, University of Rennes1, Faculty of Medicine, Rennes, Up to our knowledge, the present report describes the most distal 15q ter- France, 6Department of Genetics, Rennes University Hospital, Rennes, France, minal deletion informed to date and the second associated with NOR tras- 7Department of Genetics, Belvédère Hospital, Mont-Saint-Aignan, France, 8Department of location. Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. We report on a 21 years old patient with short stature and mild intellectu- al disability. The patient presented IUGR, hip dysplasia, feeding difficulties. Clinical assessment showed nail hypoplasia, widening halux, cubitus valgus Rhombencephalosynapsis (RS) is a rare cerebellar mdea lnfoorvmoation defined by and venous sinus corona radiata. She failed to complete first school. vermian agenesis with fusion of the cerebellar hemispheres. In most cases, The GTW (550 bands) banding technique showed a terminal deletion at RS presents as a sporadic condition consistent with dominant muta- 15q26.3 and NOR staining confirmed the presence of ectopic stalks. MLPA tions. In sporadic forms, RS occurs in isolation or in combination with other technique confirmed the subtelomeric deletion and arrayCGH analysis re- cerebral and extra-cerebral malformations. The association of microlissen- vealed that the anomaly involved a 4.6 Mb deletion. Parental karyotypes cephaly with RS has never been reported so far. Moreover, the molecular were normal. bases of non-syndromdice fnoorvmos of RS remain unknown.ADGR
L2  It is difficult to establish a phenotype / genotype correlation due to the few Using comparative index case-parents exome sequencing strategy, wAeD GidReLn2- reported cases of 15q terminal deletion. Pre and postnatal growth retarda- tified a heterozygous missense variant in the gene in a fe- tion seem to be a regular clinical feature and could be related to haploinsuf- tus affected with RS, microlissenceInp hsiatluy and growth retardation. Adgrl2 ficiency of the IGF1R gene. We emphasize the value of the right combination encodes latrophiline 2, an adhesion G-Protein-Coupled Receptor whose of cytogenetic and molecular techniques for the characterization of NORs exogenous ligand is α-latrotoxine. hybridization showed that ectopic regions. was strongly expressed in the telencephalon, mesencephalon and rhomben- cephalon at HH12 for chicken embryo and 
E9 .5 for mouse embryo. By usi2n+g 
P11 .140 microfluorimetry experiments to evaluate the intracellular calciu2+m (Ca i) Somatic mosaic mutation in SETB
P1  identified in the mother of a girl release in response to α-latrotoxine binding, we showed that Ca i release with Schinzel-Giedion syndrome was significantly reduced in thAeD fGeRtuLs2 amniocytes versus wild-type amnio- T. Vendrell Bayona1, P. Fernandez Alvarez2, A. Cueto1, F. Lopez1, M. Borregan1, L. Martinez1, M. Lines3, L. Carrasquilal4, E. Tizzano1; cytes from control fetuses at the same developing stage, as well as in HeLa 1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Diseases Unit, Hospital Vall cells transfected with mutant cDNA versus wild-type construct. A d’Hebron , Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Clinical and Molecular cell adhesion assay and aA wDGoRun
L2 d healing assay demonstrated that the muta- Genetics and Rare Diseases Unit, Hospital Vall d’Hebron , Barcelona, Spain., Barcelona, tion increased cell adhesion properties and reduced cell motility. HeLa cells Spain, 32- Department of Pediatrics, Neonatology Section, Hospital Vall d’Hebron , overexpressing mutant C. eleg dainssplayed a highly developed cytoplasmic Barcelona, Spain., Barcelona, Spain, 4Endocrinology and Nutrition Departmen Arnau de F-actin network. Vilanova University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. Given the role of LAT-1, the latrophilin orthologue, in the anterior- posterior tissue polarity pathway, we hypothesize that RS results from ab- normal tissue polarity signaling. Introduction: Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS) is a severe congenital condi- tion affecting many body systems. Manifestations include distinctive facial 
P11 .138 features, neurological problems, hydronephrosis, typical skeletal malfor- Analysis of mutations within the intron20 splice donor site of CREBBP, mations, genital and cardiac anomalies. It is very rare, although the exact in patients with and without classical RSTS prevalence is unknown. H. G. Dauwerse1, M. J. van Belzen1, A. van Haeringen1, G. W. E. van Santen1, C. A. C. van de SGS is usually caused by de novo mutations in the SETB
P1  (18q21.1), prob- Lans1, E. Rahikkala2, L. Garavelli3, M. H. Breuning1, R. C. M. Hennekam4, D. J. M. Peters1; 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 3Maria Nuova Hospital, ably resulting in a gain-of-function or dominant-negative effect. Children Reggio Emilia, Italy, 4University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. with this condition have a higher risk of developing certain types of tumours including sacrococcygeal germ cell tumours. We report on a girl with SGS caused by germinal mutations in the SETB
P1  Whole exome sequencing of a patient with intellectual disability and wit- gene inherited from his mother who showed a somatic mosaicism. hout recognizable phenotype yielded a mutation, c.3779+1G>A, in the in- Material and methods: The girl was diagnosed neonatally by her manifes- tron20 splice donor site of CREBBP. Mutations at different positions within tations: coarse face with midface retraction, bilateral hydronephrosis, and the same intron20 splice donor site, were observed in 3 patients clinically skeletal anomalies. The mother was 34 year old with diabetes and a history suspected as having Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS). All mutations were of neonatal malignant sacrococcygeal teratoma. SETB
P1  was analyzed by de novo and likely disease causing. To investigate a putative difference in Sanger sequencing. splicing between the patient without RSTS phenotype and the three pati- Results: The study revealed a heterozygous transition in SETB
P1  resulting ents with RSTS phenotype, we analysed the effects of these mutations on in a substitution at a highly conserved residue: c.2605A>C (p. Ser869Arg). splicing of the pre-mRNA of CREBBP. As no RNA of patients was available, The mutation was not found in other patients or in databases variants in the we generated a new and improved exon-trap vector, pCDNAGHE, and tested general population. the effect of the various mutations on splicing in vitro. All mutations lead to The mutation study in the mother showed different levels of somatic mo- skipping of exon20. In one of the patients with an RSTS phenotype there was saicism ranging from 37% in blood and buccal cell samples to 6% in urine. also some normal splicing detectable. Conclusions: SETB
P1  is constitutionally mutated in developmental disor- In conclusion, we describe a patient with a CREBBP mutation with intellec- ders and somatically mutated in cancer. We present the first molecularly tual disability and a phenotype not resembling RSTS. Three other patients documented evidence of germline and somatic mosaicism for a STB
P1  mu- in whom the diagnosis RSTS was clinically suspected, also carry a mutati- tation, identified in the mother of a child with Schinzel-Giedion syndrome. on in the same splice donor site. However, the splicing pattern obtained by exon trapping cannot explain the phenotypic differences and suggests the involvement of modifying genes, altering the expressivity of the disease phe- notypes. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 253ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .141 A novel splicing site mutation of PLK4 that is required for centriole biogenesis and genomic stability causes Seckel Syndrome. The deletion was originally located on the father’s Y chromosome but trans- T. Dinçer1, G. Budak2, C. Semerci3, A. Ölmez4, Y. Dodurga5, M. Özmert6, B. Toraman1, A. mitted to daughter’s X chromosome by crossover during meiosis. The index Yıldırım2, H. Ergin6, A. Alver7, N. Akarsu8, E. Kalay1; patient’s sister and paternal aunt have SHOX deletion on X chromosome. 1Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical University, Interestingly, the index patient’s brother FISH analysis was normal. This Trabzon, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Biology, Institute of Health Science, Karadeniz means that a crossover has occured between the X and Y chromosomes in Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Pamukkale the father’s spermatogenesis. After crossover, the father transmitted X chro- University Medical Faculty, Denizli, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatric Neurology, Denizli mosome with SHOX deletion to both daughters but transferred normal Y State Hospital, Denizli, Turkey, 5Department of Medical Biology, Pamukkale University Medical Faculty, Denizli, Turkey, 6Department of Neonatology, Pamukkale University chromosome to son. Medical Faculty, Denizli, Turkey, 7Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of This family is presented as clinical evidence of crossover in the SHOX gene. Medicine, Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, 8Gene Mapping Laboratory, 
P11 .144 Department of Medical Genetics, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty,, Ankara, Turkey. Hepatoblastoma in a female with Simpson Golabi Behmel Syndrome: should we monitor females with SGBS as we do for males? D. Haye1, E. Amouyal1, Y. Capri1, S. Rossignol2, C. Baumann1, A. Verloes1, L. Perrin1; Seckel syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous rare autosomal recessive 1Robert Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 2Trousseau Hospital, APHP, Paris, France. disorder characterized by severe prenatal and postnatal growth retardati- on, severe microcephaly with mental retardation and a characteristic ‚bird- headed‘ facial appearance. Up to date, eight genes have been associated with Simpson Golabi Behmel Syndrome (SGBS) (OMIM 312870) is a X-linked syn- Seckel syndrome of which their encoding protein participates in DNA dama- drome characterized by pre-and post-natal overgrowth, macrocephaly, cha- ge response, genomic stability, centriole biogenesis and centrosome func- racteristic facies, organomegaly, variable congenital malformations, mild/ tion such as mitotic spindle organization and mitotic progression. Using ge- moderate intellectual deficiency and increased tumoral risk. It is caused by nome-wide SNP array genotyping and homozygosity mapping we mapped point mutations or genomic rearrangements in the glypican 3-gene (GP
C3 ). Seckel syndrome to chromosomal region 4q26.1-q26.3 in a Turkish family. We report on two girl sibs and their mother with SGBS. The first girl was Direct sequencing of PLK4 (Polo-Like Kinase 4) gene, which encodes a ma- born without macrosomia. She had a macroglossia that spontaneously re- ster regulator of the centriole biogenesis, revealed a homozygous splicing gressed. She died from post-surgical complications of a hepatoblastoma at acceptor site transition resulting in hypomorphic premature translation ter- age three. Her sister was born after a pregnancy marked by polyhydramnios. mination mutation (p.Asp11Profs14Stop). PLK4-Seckel fibroblasts obtained She had macrosomia, macroglossia, nephromegaly and diffuse hepatome- from patient showed impaired centriole biogenesis and disrupted mitotic galy. Wiedemann Beckwith syndrome was excluded. A novel c.213_214insC morphology. Moreover, G2/M delay and extended cell doubling time were heterozygous missense insertion (p.Q23TfsX46) was identified in exon 1 of observed. Further evaluation of the PLK4-Seckel cells showed that PLK4 is GP
C3  by Sanger sequencing in the family. X inactivation was not biased. The also essential for genomic stability and DNA damage response that are re- patient is currently followed on a yearly basis with abdominal ultrasound quired for proper development of organism. scan, and screened for tumoral markers and urinary catecholamins. The mo- ther is asymptomatic. 
P11 .142 Females with mutation in GP
C3  can express SGBS. Dysmorphic features, ma- Detection of low level somatic mosaic mutations in a gene panel for crosomia, diaphragmatic hernia, and developmental delay have been repor- segmental overgrowth. M. Alders, M. A. Haagmans, O. R. Mook, M. M. A. M. Mannens, H. J. Bliek; ted. Lyonisation has been proposed as the underlying mechanism for variab- Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, le expression of SGBS in female patients (Yano 2011). SGBS predisposes to Netherlands. embryonal tumors. In males, the risk has been estimated at 8% (Cottereau 2013). Cancers were only reported in two affected females: one low-grade ovarian carcinoma, and one breast cancer. Guidelines for neoplasia scree- Somatic mutations in genes of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway causing seg- ning have been proposed for males. Observation of hepatoblastoma in fema- mental overgrowth may be present in very low percentages. This can hinder les with SGBS raises the question of applying the same policies in both sexes. the identification of causal mutations. Sanger sequencing, but also standard 
P11 .145 NGS diagnostic pipelines, are able to identify mosaic mutations with a detec- A de novo mutation in the SNA
P25  gene in a patient with epileptic tion limit of approximately 10%. Targeted analysis of specific sites is most encephalopathy, hypotonia and contractures identified by trio-based commonly used for a more sensitive detection of mutations. With the gro- exome sequencing wing number of known causal mutations there is a need for a high sensitive H. Gabriel1, S. Fehr1, P. Stoebe1, K. Hoertnagel1, S. Biskup1, C. Schell-Apacik2; mutation scanning method to analyze the complete coding sequences of the 1CeGaT, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Praxis f. Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany. genes involved rather than analysis of hotspots. We have developed a NGS based gene panel test for segmental overgrowth (AKT1, AKT3, MTOR, PIK- 3CA, PIK3R2, PTEN, TS
C1  and TS
C2 ), especially for the detection of low level The Synaptosomal-associated protein-25 (SNA
P25 ) is part of the SNARE mosaicism. Samples are sequenced with high coverage (average 1500-2000 protein complex which is involved in the release of neurotransmitters. So reads, minimum 500 reads) and an analysis pipeline was developed that is far, only two patients with mutations in SNA
P25  have been described in the able to detect mosaic mutations as low as 1%. literature by whole exome sequencing; Rohena et al. (2013) identified a de novo SNA
P25  mutation in an 15y old patient suffering from hypotonia, MR 
P11 .143 and epilepsy, and more recently, Shen et al. (2015) describe an 11y old pa- Clinical Evidence of Crossover in the SHOX Gene tient who was suffering from MR, joint contractures, weakness and ataxic E. Göktaş, A. G. Zamani, M. S. Yildirim; dysarthria. Exome sequencing revealed a de novo SNA
P25  missense muta- Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Necmettin Erbakan University, tion. Here we describe a third patient with a de novo SNA
P25  mutation. The KONYA, Turkey. patient was stiff at birth and had multiple joint contractures. First seizures were observed at the age of 2m. Epileptic encephalopathy was suggested after MRI imaging. He died at the age of 1y. As the result of the complex Mutations of the SHOX gene are common cause of various genetic growth syndromal phenotype of the patient, trisomy 18 was suggested, however disorders, including isolated short stature, L´eri-Weill syndrome and Langer karyotyping and array-CGH testing showed a normal karyotype. Multiple ge- syndrome. L´eri-Weill syndrome characterized by short stature, mesomelia netic disorders were then suspected. Sequencing of a set of genes involved and Madelung deformity. in theses syndromes revealed no causative mutation. Finally, trio-exome se- We describe 10y old girl with disproportionate short stature and mesomelic quencing was performed in an attempt to identify a genetic cause. We were shortenings of the limbs. On X-ray examination shortening of the distal por- able to identify a de novo SNA
P25  mutation, p.Ile192Asn, which was predic- tion of the extremities and deformity in distal epiphysis of radius was seen. ted “pathogenic” by prediction tools. With this report we support the patho- The patient was diagnosed L´eri-Weill syndrome together with the clinical genicity and demonstrate the clinical variability of SNA
P25  gene mutations. findings and SHOX FISH analysis planned. The index patient’s father, sister Further, to our knowledge, this is the first patient combining the two major and paternal aunt showed disproportionate short statSuHrOe Xand mesomelic symptoms; contractures and epilepsy. shortenings of the limbs bSuHtO hXe r brother was normal stature. Their chromo- some analyses were normal but metaphase FISH with a -specific probe showed a deletiSoHnO oXf the gene on the X chromosome in the female in- dex patient, her sister and her paternal aunt but in the index patient’s father F2I
S5 H4 showed a deletion on the Y chromoEsoSmHeG. 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .146 
P11 .148 Subnuclear re-localization of SOX10 and p54NRB correlates with A Further Family Of Stromme Syndrome Carrying CENPF Gene a unique neurological phenotype associated with SOX10 missense Mutation: Confirming The First Stromme Gene Description Study mutations: genotype/phenotype correlations? F. Ozkinay1, T. Atik1, E. Isik1, Z. Gormez2, M. Sagiroglu2, O. Atana Sahin3, N. Corduk4, H. S. Marlin1, A. Kavo2, S. Gherbi1, A. Chaoui2, A. Jacquette3, V. Baral2, R. Touraine4, Y. Onay5; Watanabe2, L. Lecerf2, M. Holder5, R. Mendoza-Londono6, V. Pingault2, N. Bondurand2; 1Ege University, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Pediatric 1Centre de Référence des Surdités Génétiques, Département de Génétique, Paris, France, Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Informatics and Information Security Research Center, 2INSERM, Creteil, France, 3Service de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, TUBITAK-BILGEM, Kocaeli, Turkey, 3Acıbadem University, Institute of Health Sciences, 4Service de Génétique, CHU Saint Etienne, Saint Etienne, France, 5Guy‘s et St Thomas‘s Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Pamukkale University, Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Department of Pediatric Surgery, Denizli, Turkey, 5Ege University, School of Medicine, Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. SOX10 is a transcription factor with well-known functions in neural crest Background and Aims: Stromme syndrome is an extremely rare genetic dis- and oligodendrocyte development. Mutations in SOX10 were first asso- order characterized by microcephaly, anterior ocular chamber anomalies ciated with Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease (W
S4 ; deafness, pigmen- and “apple peel” type jejunal atresia. Here we report a Stromme Syndro- tation defects and intestinal aganglionosis). However, variable phenotypes me familywith two affected siblings whose whole exome sequencing (WES) that extend beyond the W
S4  definition are now reported. The neurological results revealed a homozygous truncating frameshifts mutation in CENPF phenotypes associated with some truncating mutations are suggested to be gene. This family confirms very recent gene identification study reported the result of escape from the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway; but by Filges et al. no mechanism was suggested for missense mutations, of which approxi- Case: A 3-month-old girl was hospitalized due to prenatally diagnosed mi- mately 20 have now been reported. Here, we present two sporadic and one crocephaly, microphthalmia and dysmorphological features. Parents had a familial cases with mutations affecting the proline 175 of SOX10, presenting history of previous child with the same findings and `apple peel` intestinal with W
S2  (WS without HSCR) and an unusual peripheral and central pro- atresia as an additional finding. gressive neurologic phenotype, including psychiatric diseases. Interestingly, Regarding the clinicial features of both affected siblings, the diagnosis of these mutations, as well as one affecting the adjacent amino acid, all lead Stromme syndrome was established. WES of these two cases showed the to specific subnuclear relocalization of the resulting proteins in vitro. In- homozygous mutation (c.5912_5913insA)/( p.T1974Nfs*9) in CENPF deed, mentioned mutants co-localize in foci with the Drosophila behavior gene(RefSeq NM_016343.3; MIM#600235) as the most probable defect un- human splicing (DBHS) protein family members, including p54NRB, known derlying the syndrome. Both parents were heterozygous fort he mutation. as a paraspeckle marker and new SOX10 partner. Of note, the co-transfec- Conclusions: During our confirmation studies with another Stromme case, tion of wild-type and mutant SOX10 constructs led to the sequestration of Filges et al. reported that CENPF gene is responsible for Stromme syndrome. wild-type protein in observed foci and altered synergistic activity between This is the second report that the CENPF mutations cause Stromme syndro- SOX10 and p54NRB. We propose that such dominant negative effect may me. contribute to or be at the origin of the unique progressive and severe neuro- 
P11 .149 logical phenotype observed in affected patients. This new molecular/cellu- Unusual phenotypic features in the presentation of rare chromosome lar mechanism could underlie the unique phenotype associated with some 6q subtelomeric microdeletion SOX10 missense mutations, and possibly other genes involved in related or H. M. Kathom1, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, S. Bichev2, B. Karashova1, R. Tincheva1, A. Savov2; unrelated pathologies. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National genetics laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria. 
P11 .147 A Multigenerational Family with STAR Syndrome: A Novel FAM58A Variant and an Expansion of the Phenotypic Spectrum Introduction: Subtelomeric microdeletions are found to be major reason for N. J. Boczek, T. Kruisselbrink, M. A. Cousin, P. R. Blackburn, E. W. Klee, R. H. Gavrilova, B. C. Lanpher; psychomor retardation and dysmorphism. Some such as 6q terminal micro- Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. deletion are very rare. Patients with this microdeletion present mainly with microcephaly, short neck, broad nose, psychomotor retardation, hypotonia and seizures, and retinal anomalies. Introduction: STAR syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder characterized by Materials and Methods: We report on a 9 years old girl, with unilateral toe Syndactyly, Telecanthus, Anogenital malformatFioAnMs,5 a8nAd Renal malfor- choanal atresia, eye leucoma, facial dysmorphism, and muscular hyperto- mations (OMIM: 300707). TherFeA aMre5 8oAnly ten cases described in the litera- nia at birth. Since 3 months of age she developed an epilepsy. At 9 years ture, all of which have loss-of-function variants in . Seven of these of age she presented with: severe mental retardation, short stature, micro- cases have a de novo variant in , while there are only two inherited cephaly, low weight, low frontal and occipital hair lines, narrow forehead, mother-daughter pairs described. downslanting palpebral fissures, “beak-like” nose, short, broad and slightly Materials and Methods: The patient was delivered at term and was noted flattened philtrum, maxillary prognathism, high arched palate, low set ears, to have ductus arteriosus, bicuspid aortic valve, and bilateral 3-5 toe syn- long neck with retroflexion, deformed chest, thoracolumbar scoliosis, long dactyly at birth. She is currently 8 years of age and has a history of tethered fingers and toes (arachnodactyly), and increased muscle tone. A screening cord, neurogenic bladder, learning differences, esotropia, and unilateral sen- for most common microdeletions, subtelomeric deletions and duplications, sorineural hearing loss. The patient’s mother and maternal half-sister have was performed using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. similar clinical histories with congenital heart defects, syndactyly, and ano- Commercial MLPA kits (MRC-Holland) were used for detecting imbalance genital malformations; however there are differences in phenotypic severi- at the subtelomere regions of chromosomes; each kit consists of one probe ty. Clinical whole exome sequencing (WES) was completed at BayloFrA MMi5ra8cAa fPoSrM eBa1ch subtelomere. Genetics to identify the genetic syndrome in this family. Results: A 6q terminal subtelomeric microdeletion was found, involving the Results: WES revealed a novel variant, c.651G>A (p.W217X), in , gene. identified in both the patient’s mother and half-sister as well. This family re- Conclusions: In rare subtelomeric deletions is quite hard to establish clear presents the 11-13th cases described with STAR syndrome, and represents phenotype-genotype correlation, as very small differences in the length of the thirFdA Min5s8taAnce of familial inheritance. the affected region could change the spectrum of presented features. Our Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first instance of a nonsense vari- case is specific because of the lack of hypotonia, short neck, broad nose, reti- ant in described in patients with STAR syndrome, and represents nal abnormalities, which are considered so far as major presentations of 6q the third family with inherited disease. This family highlights that tethered subtelomeric deletion syndrome. cord and hearing loss should potentially be added to the phenotypic spec- trum of STAR syndrome and shows the phenotypic variability of this syndro- me amongst family members. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 255ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .150 Genetic and neurodevelopmental spectrum of SYNGA
P1 -associated intellectual disability and epilepsy death. The aim of this study was to identify and characterize the genetic C. Mignot1,2,3, C. von Stülpnagel4,5, C. Nava1,6, D. Ville7, D. Sanlaville8,9,10, G. Lesca8,9,10, A. basis of congenital HH and ARVD/C in a consanguineous Bedouin family of Rastetter6, B. Gachet6, Y. Marie6, C. Korenke11, I. Borggraefe12, D. Hoffmann-Zacharska13, nine members with two affected brothers. E. Szczepanik14, M. Rudzka-Dybała14, U. Yiş15, H. Çağlayan16, A. Isapof17, I. Marey1, E. Materials and Methods: Genotyping was done on the parents and two affec- Panagiotakaki18, C. Korff19, E. Rossier20, A. Riess21, S. Beck-Woedl21, A. Rauch22, C. Zweier23, ted children. Exome sequencing was performed on the DNA of one brother. J. Hoyer23, A. Reis23, M. Mironov24, M. Bobylova24, k. Mukhin24, L. Hernandez-Hernandez25, Results: The homozygous chromosomal regions contained 39 variations, B. Maher25, S. Sisodiya25, S. Wechuysen6,26, C. Myers27, H. Mefford27, K. Hörtnagel28, S. reported in less than 10% of population variation databases. Following bio- Biskup28, EuroEPINOMICS-RES MAE working group, J. Lemke29, D. Heron1,2,3, G. Kluger4,5, C. Depienne1,6; informatics predictions for damaging effect, segregation in the family and 1APHP, Groupe hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière Paris, Paris, France, 2Centre de Référence analysis of prevalence in the Bedouin population, one candidate remained in „Déficiences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares“, Paris, France, 3Groupe de Recherche the Tax1 (human T-cell leukemia virus type-I) binding protein-3 (TAX1B
P3 ) Clinique (GRC) „Déficience Intellectuelle et Autisme“ UPMC, Paris, France, 4Hospital gene. The variation- Ile33Thr substitutions is predicted to change the struc- for Neuropediatrics and Neurological Rehabilitation, Epilepsy Center for Children and ture of PDZ domain that mediates protein-protein interactions and affected Adolescents, Vogtareuth, Germany, 5Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, the stability. Austria, 6Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, INSERM UMR S 1127, CNRS UMR Conclusions : The new clinical syndrome could be mediated by damaging 7225, ICM, Paris, France, 7Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, CHU de Lyon, Bron, France, 8Service de Génétique, Groupement Hospitalier Est, the interaction of TAX1B
P3  with the Potassium Channel KCNJ4 and impro- Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 9Université Claude-Bernard Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, per function of the Wnt signaling pathway in which TAX1B
P3  was suggested France, 10CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, Villeurbanne, France, 11Klinikum to participate. Oldenburg, Zentrum für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin (Elisabeth Kinderkrankenhaus), Klinik für Neuropädiatrie u. angeborene Stoffwechselerkrankungen, Oldenburg, 
P11 .152 Germany, 12Department of Pediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine and Temple syndrome with atypical features: a case report Epilepsy Center, University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 13Department of Medical M. Yakoreva1,2, T. Kahre1,2, S. Pajusalu1,3, T. Reimand1,2,3, K. Õunap1,2; Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 14Clinic of Neurology of Child 1Tartu University Hospital, United Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Tartu, Estonia, and Adolescents; Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 15Department of 2Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Pediatrics, Division of Child Neurology, School of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül University, Izmir, Estonia, 3Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Turkey, 16Boğaziçi University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Turkey, 17AP-H Temple syndrome (TS) is a rare imprinting disorder characterized by pre- Objective: We aimed to delineate the neurodevelopmental spectrum asso- and postnatal growth retardation, hypotonia, poor feeding, motor and deve- ciated with SYNGA
P1  mutations and to investigate genotype-phenotype lopmental delay, scoliosis, premature puberty and a variety of dysmorphic correlations. features. Maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 14 is the underlying Methods: We sequenced the exome or screened the exons of SYNGA
P1  in cause of TS. Isolated methylation defects and paternal deletions of imprin- a total of 251 patients with neurodevelopmental disorders. Molecular and ted locus 14q32 could be found in other TS cases. clinical data from patients with SYNGA
P1  mutations from other centers We present a case of TS in a 4-years-old girl with some atypical features. The were also collected, focusing on developmental aspects and the associated patient was born at the 35th weeks of gestation with weight 1832g (-1.5SD) epilepsy phenotype. A review of SYNGA
P1  mutations published in the lite- and length 42cm (-2SD). Pregnancy was complicated by IUGR and oligohy- rature was also performed. dramnios. Shortly after the birth AVSD, congestive heart insufficiency and Results: We describe 17 unrelated affected individuals carrying 13 diffe- kyphoscoliosis were diagnosed. During the first years of life, the child had rent novel loss-of-function SYNGA
P1  mutations. Developmental delay was feeding difficulties, poor weight gain, hypotonia and severe psychomotor the first manifestation of SYNGA
P1 -related encephalopathy; intellectual developmental delay. Later, dysmorphic features, body asymmetry, increa- disability became progressively obvious and was associated with autistic sing linear pigmentation on the arms and legs, hyperopia, strabismus and behaviors in eight patients. Hypotonia and unstable gait were frequent as- cognitive delay were noted. She started to walk independently at 2.5 years sociated neurological features. With the exception of one patient who ex- oMfE aGg3e. Her height now is -5SD, weight and OFC -2.5SD. perienced a single seizure, all patients had epilepsy, characterized by falls UPD7-UPD14 MS-MLPA analysis revealed a complete hypomethylation of or head drops due to atonic or myoclonic seizures, (myoclonic) absences, gene (14q32.2). The same result was obtained using DNA from fibro- and/or eyelid myoclonia. Triggers of seizures were frequent (n=7). Seizures blasts, urine and buccal swab. Comparative analysis of the SNPs using her were pharmacoresistant in half of the patients. The severity of the epilepsy mother’s CMA results showed maternal heterodisomy of the whole chromo- did not correlate with the presence of autistic features or with the severity some 14. No mosaicism was detected. of cognitive impairment. Mutations were distributed throughout the gene, Unlike previously described cases, our patient has more severe clinical but spared spliced 3’ and 5’ exons. Seizures in patients with mutations in presentation of TS with congenital heart defect, vision problems and skin exons 4-5 were more pharmacoresponsive than in patients with mutations pigmentation changes. This work was supported by the Estonian Research in exons 8-15. Council grant PUT355. Conclusion: SYNGA
P1  encephalopathy is characterized by early neurodeve- 
P11 .153 lopmental delay typically preceding the onset of a relatively recognizable Temple syndrome among patients with Prader Willi syndrome-like epilepsy comprising generalized seizures (absences, myoclonic jerks) and phenotype frequent triggers. A. Lande1, M. Kroken1, K. Rabben2, L. Retterstøl1; 
P11 .151 1Dep of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Frambu Center for The new syndrome of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, Rare Disease, Oslo, Norway. arrythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, facial dysmorphism and absence of corpus callosum is associated with TAX1 binding protein 3 gene variation Introduction: Temple syndrome (TS) and Prader Willi syndrome (PWS) M. Arafat1, E. Hershkovitz2, Z. Afawi3, N. Loewenthal2, A. Haim2, A. Levitas4, R. Parvari1,5; share many features in infancy and childhood. TS is an important, but often 1The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology,Immunology & Genetics, Faculty of neglected, differential diagnosis to PWS. We wanted to estimate the propor- Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Pediatric tion of TS in patients with PWS-like phenotype. Endocrinology & Metabolism Unit, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel, Materials and methods: In all samples submitted for PWS testing during 3Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 2014 and 2015, we consecutively conducted analysis also for TS. A total of Israel, 4Director of Pediatric Cardiac Imaging, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, 150 samples were included. The main indications for testing were hypoto- Soroka University Medical Center and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 5National Institute of Biotechnology Negev, Beer Sheva, nia in infancy or childhood, developmental delays and/or overweight. For Israel. TS-testing, we employed a methylation-sensitive MLPA-kit for detection of metylation aberrations in chromosomal region 14q32. Results: 3 out of 150 patients (2%) with PWS-like phenotype proved to Introduction: Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) is a genetically hete- have TS. In comparison, 6 out of 150 patients (4%) got the diagnosis of PWS rogeneous syndrome characterized by decreased secretion or action of go- molecularly confirmed. All three TS patients fit the phenotype previously nadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH), resulting in reduced sex hormone reported with the following shared features: low birth weight, neonatal hy- production and various clinical signs of hypogonadism. Arrhythmogenic potonia, feeding difficulties and slight developmental delay. The two oldest right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVD/C) is a cardiomyopa- patients were overweight, and the oldest patient (9 years old) had learning t2h5y 6disease that may result in arrhythmia, hearEt SfaHiluGre 2, a0n1d 6su |d BdeAn RcaCrdEiLacO NdAis, aSbPiliAtieINs. I|n W onWe oWf t.hEeS pHatGie.nOtsR, wGe confirmed maternal uniparental di-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .157 Enhancing the genetic understanding of Waardenburg Syndrome type somy 14 by satellite testing. We will pursue such analysis in the other two II patients. S. Issa1,2,3, Y. Watanabe1, E. Faubert4, L. Lecerf1, N. Bondurand1, S. Marlin5, V. Pingault2; Conclusions: TS is believed to be underdiagnosed, and our results support 1INSERM, U955, IMRB Team 6, Creteil, France, 2INSERM, U1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, this view. In concordance with recent papers, we conclude that analysis for France, 3Université Paris Est Creteil, Faculté de Médecine, Creteil, France, 4AP-HP, Hôpital TS should be performed whenever genetic testing for PWS is indicated in H.Mondor - Département de Génétique, Creteil, France, 5Centre de Référence des Surdités Génétiques, Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France. children. 
P11 .154 Analysis of Polymorphisms and Haplotypes of NO
S2 , PTG
S2  and VEGFA Genes in Individuals with Thalidomide Embryopathy Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is one of the most common types of autoso- T. W. Kowalski1,2, L. Tovo-Rodrigues3,1, L. R. Fraga1, M. T. V. Sanseverino4,1,2, M. H. Hutz1, L. mal dominant syndromic hearing loss and is characterized by association Schuler-Faccini1,2,4, F. S. L. Vianna1,2,4; with pigment disturbances of hair, skin and iris. WS is clinically classified 1Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2Instituto Nacional de into four subtypes (W
S1 -4) depending on the presence of additional fea- Genética Médica Populacional, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Universidade Federal de Pelotas, tures. Mutations in 5 major genes of the neural crest pathway are found in Pelotas, Brazil, 4Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil. this syndrome: MITF, PAX3, SOX10, EDNRB and its ligand EDN3. Neverthe- less, a large number of cases still remain unexplained at the molecular level, notably in W
S2  (70%). Whole Exome sequencing was performed in order to Introduction: Thalidomide embryopathy (TE) affected more than 10,000 enhance the understanding of the molecular basis of W
S2 . babies around the world in the 1960s. Thalidomide was a drug marketed as In a sporadic case (sequenced in trio), we were able to identify a missense safe, once its teratogenic properties were unknown at the time. The molec- variation in EDNRB, a gene previously involved in W
S4 , but with a different ular mechanisms underlying thalidomide’s teratogenesis remain not fully mode of transmission. Screening of our W
S2  cohort led to the identification comprehended. The hypothesis that teratogenesis occurs due to thalido- of 6 additional cases with mutations in this gene: 4 missense changes, one mide’s antiangiogenic properties has been largely investigated in experi- frameshift and one splice site mutation. Immunofluorescence experiments mental models. However, polymorphisms in genes affected by thalidomide performed on the mutants and wildtype proteins (as well as previously de- were not evaluated in humans. scribed mutants and polymorphic missense changes as controls) revealed Methods: In the present study, ten functional polymorphisms in genes of three mutants localizing in the cytoplasm instead of the membrane in diffe- angiogenesis pathway were accessed in 38 individuals with TE and 136 rent cell lines. A minigene was constructed for the splice site mutant and the subjects without congenital anomalies of the Brazilian population. The resulting cDNA conserved 4 intronic base pairs, predicting a frameshift with Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) rs2779249 and rs2297518 of early stop codon. In vitro functional tests are being conducted to analyze NO
S2 ; rs689465, rs689466 and rs20417 of PTG
S2 ; rs699947, rs1570360, the transcriptional and post-translational regulation of key players in the rs2010963 and rs3025039 of VEGFA were genotyped by real-time PCR or melanocytic pathway upon over expression of each mutant. Sanger sequencing. Microsatellite (CCTTT)n of NO
S2  was accessed through 
P11 .158 fragment analysis. Haplotypes were inferred through Phase Bayesian algo- A clinical description of a rare familial case of Weaver syndrome rithm. Statistical analysis was performed in SPSS v.18. caused by novel heterozygous EZH2 variant c.2050C>A (p.Arg684Ser) Results: All polymorphisms were in Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium. It was not A. Poluha1,2, K. Wojciechowska2, A. Bury3, A. Sobczynska-Tomaszewska4, K. Czerska4, I. identified a significant difference of allelic, genotypic or haplotypic frequen- Jaszczuk2, M. Holweg5, M. Lejman5, D. Winnicka5, M. Babicz5, B. Styka5, J. R. Kowalczyk2; 1Department of Pediatrics, Skaraborg Hospital, Skovde, Sweden, 2Department of cies when comparing both groups evaluated. Risk haplotypes were com- Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantology, Children‘s University Hospital, pared with pattern of congenital anomalies in TE individuals, and also no Lublin, Poland, 3Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology with significant association was observed. Endocrine-Metabolic Laboratory, Children’s University Hospital, Lublin, Poland, Conclusion: In this investigation we could not suggest a risk or protective 4MedGen Medical Center, Warsaw, Poland, 5Genetic Laboratory, Department of Pediatric allele for TE in genes NO
S2 , PTG
S2  and VEGFA, although other studies con- Hematology, Oncology and Transplantology, Children’s University Hospital, Lublin, cerning endophenotypes and other candidate genes should also be per- Poland. formed in a larger sample of thalidomide’s victims. Grant References: INAGEMP/CNPq 573993/2008-4; FIPE/HCPA 
P11 .155 Weaver syndrome is a rare congenital disorder characterized by pre- and Spectrum of TS
C1  and TS
C2  alterations in Russian patients with postnatal overgrowth, spectrum of developmental delay, advanced bone age tuberous sclerosis and characteristic craniofacial morphology. It is caused by constitutional he- E. N. Suspitsin1,2, G. A. Yanus1,2, M. Y. Dorofeyeva3, T. A. Ledashcheva4, E. N. Imyanitov1,2,5; terozygous EZH2 pathogenic variants. 1St.-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Research The majority of cases thus far reported appear to have been sporadic and Institute of Pediatrics and Pediatric Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4City Center there is not much data available regarding long-term follow up of adults for Medical Genetics, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5I.I. Mechnikov North-Western with EZH2-related Weaver syndrome or clinical variability in rare familial Medical University, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation. cases. Here we present three individuals from a previously unreported family identified to have a novel EZH2 variant. Proband is a 7 years-old boy with Background: Tuberous sclerosis (TS) is a genetic disease characterized by developmental delay, moderate intellectual disability, behavioral problems, development of hamartomas of multiple organs (brain, kidneys, retina, skin, increased pre- and postnatal length, soft and doughy skin, broad thumbs, etc.). TS prevalence in Russia approaches to 1:30000, however TS
C1 /2 mu- hipertrichosis and distinctive craniofacial dysmorphic features: macroce- tation distribution has not been subjected yet to systematic studies. phaly, broad forehead, flat occiput, long philtrum, large ears, widely spaced Material and methods: DNA samples of 53 patients with clinical signs of tu- eyes and horizontal chin crease. His 29 years-old mother and 55 years-old berous sclerosis were tested for mutations in TS
C1  and TS
C2  genes using maternal grandmother are both of a tall stature and have similar craniofa- Sanger sequencing and MLPA. The vast majority of cases (50 of 53) were cial morphology although no evidence of intellectual disability. sporadic, i.e., no clinical signs of TS were detected in the parents. Sequence analysis of EZH2 detected in a proband and then confirmed Results: TS
C1 /2 mutations were detected in 46/53 patients (87%): 34 in mother and grandmother a novel, heterozygous variant c.2050C>A (74%) carried mutations in the TS
C2  and 12 (26%) in the TS
C1 ; this ratio (p.Arg684Ser) in the highly conserved SET domain. It is likely to be patho- is in agreement with data obtained in European countries and the USA. It is genic based on the fact that it segregates with the overgrowth phenotype of note that mutations were detected in 5 of 7 patients with one major and in reported family and that recurrent substitution of the same amino acid 0-1 additional minor features. All but one alteration were unique; splice-site residue Arg684 in EZH2 by a different amino acid is well known to be pa- mutation TS
C2  c.138+1G>A was found in 2 unrelated patients. Large rear- thogenic. rangements (exon deletions/duplications) were found in 5/46 (11%) and In summary, we expand the mutational spectrum of EZH2-related over- affected exclusively TS
C2 ; this is substantially higher compared to estimates growth and point out to clinical variability in rare familial case. done in other studies (0.2-6%). Conclusions: Tuberous sclerosis in Russian patients appears to have some peculiarities: 1) domination of sporadic form of the disease; 2) absence of recurrent mutations; 3) high frequency of large rearrangements. Some patients with mutations had only one major diagnostic feature; thus, relaxed clinical criteria should be applied for justification of TS
C1 /2 muta- tion testing. This work is supported by RFBR grantE №SH15G-0 42-0061761 4| BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 257ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .159 
P11 .161 Molecular screening of EZH2: analysis of 23 patients with clinical Next generation sequencing: the prenatal diagnostic test for foetuses features of Weaver Syndrome with severe ultrasound abnormalities? G. Gordo1, I. Dapía1, J. Tenorio1, P. Arias1, M. del Campo2, M. P. Tirado3, M. A. Ramos- M. J. V. Hoffer1, A. C. J. Gijsbers1, S. Bollen1, M. E. Y. Laurense-Bik1, I. J. H. M. van Arroyo4, F. Santos-Simarro1, P. Lapunzina1; Minderhout1, S. Smit1, I. F. A. C. Fokkema2, A. Haeringen1, M. Koopmans1, T. P. Potjer1, K. 1Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics-INGEMM. Hospital Universitario La Paz, van der Tuin1, G. W. E. Santen1, N. S. den Hollander1, C. A. Ruivenkamp1; Madrid, Spain, 2Servicio de Genética. Hospital Vall D‘hebron., Barcelona, Spain, 3Servicio 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Dept. de Neurología pediátrico. Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4Servicio de genética. Hospital of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Virgen del camino, Pamplona, Spain. At present, the standard prenatal genetic diagnostic screening tool for foetu- Introduction: Weaver syndrome (WS) (MIM #277590) is an overgrowth ses with ultrasound abnormalities is microarray analysis. However, recently, disorder characterized by pre- and postnatal overgrowth, variable learning in patients with intellectual disability and/or developmental delay (ID/DD), disability and distinctive craniofacial features. It is also characterized by ad- next generation sequencing, proved to be a much better tool, it demonstra- vanced bone age (usually carpal osseous maturation), camptodactyly and an ted in about 20% of the cases the disease-causing aberration. In our study increased frequency of tumours. The prevalence of WS is still unknown due we investigated whether whole exome sequencing (WES) could also be a to the scant number of cases reported up to date. In 2011, mutations in the promising tool to unravel the underlying defect for foetuses with ultrasound Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) were associated with the development abnormalities. of WS. EZH2 is a histone-methyltransferase that acts as the catalytic agent Nine foetuses with a severe, unexplained ultrasound abnormality and their of the polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PR
C2 ) and it is also involved in the unaffected parents (trios) were postpartum included in our series of pati- PI3K/mTOR pathway which includes other genes implicated in different ents for WES. The exome sequences were analysed with a stringent post-se- overgrowth disorders. quencing annotation pipeline including an ID/DD gene panel of ~700 genes Material and methods: We performed molecular analysis of EZH2 in 23 pati- for filtering of the data. Analysis of the whole exome was only performed ents with a clinical diagnosis of WS. Genomic DNA was extracted from peri- when informed consent was available and the gene panel did not reveal a pheral blood, and mutational analysis by conventional sequencing was per- candidate mutation. All remaining variants with a potential clinical conse- formed. Variants pathogenicity was evaluated through bioinformatics tools. quence were validated by Sanger sequencing. In 33% of the cases we were Results: We found three different missense mutations affecting conserved able to identify the causal genetic variant. domains of the protein. Two of them were not previously reported and are In conclusion, WES demonstrates to be the a good diagnostic tool to unravel located in the SANT domain which is involved in DNA-binding. All three pati- the underlying genetic cause in a substantial portion of the foetuses with ents showed clinical features compatible with WS. To date, only one of them severe ultrasound abnormalities. developed a tumour. 
P11 .162 Conclusions: WS is a rare disease with few cases reported in the literature. The process of genetic counselling and the genotype-phenotype In this study we described two new variants probably associated to the de- correlation in a popliteal pterygium syndrome: a case report velopment of this disease. Additionally, one of the mutations appeared in a N. Capdevila, E. Gabau, R. Ballester, M. Guitart, N. Baena, S. Pina; patient who developed a neuroblastoma early in the infancy. Parc Taulí Sabadell, University Hospital, Sabadell, Spain. Grants: FI
S15 /1481 
P11 .160 Search of the genes responsible for Opitz C and Bohring-Opitz Introduction: Popliteal pterygium syndrome is a congenital malformation Syndromes that includes orofacial, musculoskeletal and genitourinary anomalies. It is R. Urreizti1, S. Mort-Farre1, N. Roca-Ayats1, H. Franco-Valls1, C. Esteve-Castañer1, caused by mutations in the IRF6 gene and characterized by an autosomal J. Ponomarenko2, L. Cozzuto2, F. Munell3, A. M. Cueto3, E. F. Tizzano3, J. Dopazo4, B. dominant inheritance, incomplete penetrance and variable expression. Clin- Cormand1, L. Vilageliu1, J. M. Opitz5, G. Neri6, D. R. Grinberg1, S. Balcells1; ical manifestations may include from lower lip pits or mounds to cleft com- 1Universitat de Barcelona, IBUB, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre for Genomic plete palate with the presence of cutaneous webbing across one or more Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4Centro Investigación Príncipe Felipe, BIER, CIBERER, Valencia, Spain, 5University of Utah School major joints in the lower extremities. of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 6Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Rome, Presentation case: Pregnant woman in the first trimester of pregnancy Italy. comes to genetic counselling consultation, because six months ago she had an abortion after detecting the presence of bilateral cleft lip with cleft pal- ate and low mobility of the lower limbs in the foetus. After fetal autopsy, the Opitz C Syndrome (OTCS, MIM #211750) is a rare and severe pathology of diagnostic suspicion is a popliteal pterygium syndrome by the characteristic unknown genetic cause and unclear pattern of inheritance. It presents with nail dysplasia. The IRF6 gene sequencing is performed, and Cys84Arg muta- malformations andde ndoevvoelopmental delay and clinicaAllSyX oLv1erlaps with the tion is detected allowing the study of the carrier parents. more severe Bohring-Opitz Syndrome (BOS, MIM #605039). In BOS, half of Conclusion: The joint assessment of the multidisciplinary team and the cor- the patients beaArS X
L1  truncating mutations in the gene. rect diagnostic orientation determined by the fetal autopsy has provided We studied 14 families with patients diagnosed as OTCS or BOS, from diffe- an accurate genetic diagnosis. Although the spectrum of mutations of IRF6 rent countrieAs.S X
L1  was sequenced in all of them and 6 patients (and their gene has an incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity, it has been parents) were analyzed by whole exomed see nqouveoncing (WES). possible to offer a correct and detailed genetic counselling to the progeni- We found an mutation in on eM SAcGoEttLis2h BOS patient. tors on the current pregnancy. In a Spanish OTCS patient we found a truncating mutation at the imprinted and maternally silenced gene. The mutation was present 
P12  Cancer genetics on the paternal chromosome. Other truncating muMtaAtiGoEnLs2 in this gene have been found associated with the Shaadfe-Y naonvgo syndrome andF OwXiPth1 severe ar- 
P12 .001 throgryposis, suggesting clinical heterogeneity for . Detection of a homozygous 11kb inversion by whole exome In an Italian OTCS patient we found a mutation at a splice site, sequencing in a patient with Xeroderma pigmentosum associated with developmental delay, speech impairment and contractures, P. Joset, S. Azzarello-Burri, T. Herget, M. Papic, M. Zweier, D. Niedrist, A. Baumer, A. Rauch; all traits present in the patient. RYR1 Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland. Finally, two Russian OTCS sibs were reevaluated and re-diagnosed as af- fected with congenital myopathy and two recessive mutations were identified by WES. Whole exome sequencing (WES) is a powerful tool in detecting point-mu- Selected variants in the exomes of the other three patients are currently tations and small indels but is not commonly used to discover bigger struc- being validated. tural rearrangements. With an overall diagnostic yield of about 50% in 262 Our results suggest that OTCS is a highly genetically heterogeneous patho- single/trio cases, we found in approx. 70-80% of our cases a pathologic logy. point substitution. Moreover, in about 11-16% we were detecting small de- Fundings: 2014SGR-932 (Catalan Government), SAF2014-56562-R (Spa- letions and in 9-14% small insertions. While the biggest pathologic deletion nish Government), crowdfunding PRECIPITA (FECYT, Spanish Government), was 28 bps and the biggest pathologic insertion 13bps, structural rearran- and Associació Síndrome Opitz C. gements much bigger than those are difficult to detect, but might explain a certain percentage of our unsolved cases. Here we report a 20 year old male with spinocellular carcinoma of the face, lymphnode metastasis and already 258 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG multiple facial tumorexcisions. The initial Next Generation Sequencing ap-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .006 Adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction by NF1: risk by proach with the Illumina cancer panel was negative for the suspicious genes offspring? DDB2, ERC
C2 , ERC
C3 , ERC
C4 , ERC
C5 , XPA und XPC. The subsequent targe- N. Dragicevic1, A. Gehrig1, A. Rosenwald2, E. Kunstmann1; ted WES approach on additional genes associated with Xeroderma pigmen- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 2Institute of tosum revealed an 11kb homozygous inversion with 1 breakpoint located Pathology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. within the coding exon 4 of the POLH gene. Mapping of the unmatched nu- cleotides form the reads resulted in a second intronic breakpoint 11189 bp downstream, between exon 8 and 9 of the POLH gene, predicted to disrupt We report the occurrence and investigation of a adenocarcinoma of the ga- the whole gene. stroesophageal junction in a 41-year-old woman with previously clinical To our knowledge we report here for the first time a homozygous inversion diagnosed neurofibromatosis type 1 in age of 20 year. A family history was detected by whole exome sequencing. positive, her father and uncle had café-au-lait spots. In the maternal family 
P12 .002 an aunt and cousin suffering from stomach and breast tumor. The importance of Chromosome Microarray Analysis (CMA) in The patient with multiple café-au-lait patches, axillary freckling and dermal karyotypically normal children with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia neurofibroma, had also a benign tumor of the breast. She presented with (ALL) loss of appetite, nausea, loss of weight, vomit, iron deficiency and respectly A. Mitrakos, A. Kattamis, M. Tzetis, K. Katsibardi, E. Kanavakis, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli; abdominal pain. University of Athens, Athens, Greece. A gastroscopy with biopsy leading to the identification of a invasive mode- rately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction Type of ,,Barrett- Carcinoma”. The significance of genetic profiling in patients with ALL has been under- By DNA sequencing in exon 26 of NF1 gene was detected germline deletion lined by recent discoveries which have led to novel risk stratification sub- c.3457_3460delCTCA. Genetic investigation of CDH1-gene was negative. To groups and new treatment approaches, overall increasing Event Free Sur- assess the relationship of the tumor to the NF1 mutation, DNA was extracted vival rates. Here we evaluate the efficiency of high resolution aCGH+SNP from paraffin-block and not revealed loss of heterozygosity at the NF1 gene. analysis when compared to conventional karyotype. Son of the patient, 6 years old is the holder of the famous mutation in the We studied bone marrow samples obtained after diagnosis from 8 children NF1 gene. At was discussed about risks of morbidity and prevention of ade- (median age 7 years old) with B-cell and B-cell precursor ALL (n=3 and n=5 nocarcinoma, as well as other possible mechanisms of tumorigenesis, exclu- respectively), that presented with normal or non diagnostic conventional ding LOH (1, 2). karyotype and are part of a larger cohort. Following DNA isolation we uti- References: lized the high-resolution aCGH+SNP 2X400K platform (Agilent Technolo- 1. Seminog O and Goldacre M, Risk of benign tumours of nervous system, gies), that covers the entire genome with an average resolution of 7kb for and of malignant neoplasms, in people with neurofibromatosis: population- CNVs, and can also identify regions of LOH. The results were compared to based record-linkage study. BJC 2013;108:193-198 conventional cytogenetic techniques and assessed in the light of the clinical 2. Brems H, Beert E et al. Mechanisms in the pathogenesis of malignant tu- outcome for each patient. mors in neurofibromatosis type 1. Lancet Oncol 2009;10:508-15 Clinically relevant CNVs were detected in 7/8 cases (87.5%). The most com- 
P12 .007 mon aberrations involved the ETV6 gene (n=5). One case with hyperdiplo- BRAF and KRAS mutations in colonic polyps as molecular marker of idy (54 chromosomes) and one case with hypodiploidy (37 chromosomes) risk of metachronous advanced neoplasia. were also detected, with the smallest CNV detected being a 28kb deletion M. Juarez1, C. Egoavil1, E. Hernandez-Illan1, M. Rodriguez-Soler2, A. Garcia-Martinez1, P. involving PAX5 gene. Aberrant genomic regions harbored hematopoiesis Zapater3, C. Guarinos1, C. Alenda4, L. Castaño-Soler5, J. Martinez6, F. Ruiz6, L. Compañy7, J. (RUNX1), cell-cycle regulation (CDKN2A/2B), as well as oncogenes and tu- Aparicio6, J. Casellas6, O. Murcia6, M. Giner-Calabuig1, A. Castillejo8, V. Barberá8, J. Soto9, R. Jover6; mor suppressor genes. Additionally, regions with LOH were identified, en- 1Unidad de investigacion- Hospital General de Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 2Unidad de compassing important genes (IKZF1, RARA). Hepatologia-Hospital General de Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 3Servicio de Farmacologia- We conclude that in a plethora of cases conventional cytogenetic techniques Hospital General de Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 4Servicio de Patologia- Hospital General may not accurately depict the genetic profile of ALL patients in the clinical de Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 5Hospital General de Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 6Unidad setting, increasing the necessity for additional approaches like CMA. de Gastroenterologia- Hospital General de Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 7Unidad de 
P12 .005 gastroenterologia- Hospital General de Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 8Unidad de Genetica Isochromosome der(17)(q10)t(15;17) in acute promyelocitic Molecular- Hospital General de Elche, Elche, Spain, 9Unidad de gastroenterologia- leukemia resulting in an additional copy of the RARA-PML and loss of Hospital General de Alicante, Elche, Spain. the p53: report of two cases V. Djordjevic, M. Dencic-Fekete, J. Jovanovic; Clinical center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. BACKGROUND AND AIM: Our aim is to study if molecular characteristics of polyps can add information about risk of metachronous advanced neoplasia. METHODS: We retrospectively included 308 patients diagnosed with co- Introduction: Isochromosome of the long arm of the derivative chromosome lonic polyps (2007-2009) who have at least one surveillance colonoscopy 17, originating from the translocation t(15;17) [ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) or made more than 6 months after the baseline, until 2014. 995 polyps were ider(17q)] in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), is a very rare chromoso- collected and tested for somatic BRAF(V600E) and KRAS(codons 12, 13) me aberration which has been associated with a poor prognosis. mutations. Patients were classified into 3 subgroups based on mutational Materials and Methods: We report two APL patients, their clinical and labo- profile of their polyps at baseline: 1) non-mutated polyps, 2) at least one ratory data associated with ider(17q). Cytogenetic analysis was performed BRAF-mutated polyp or 3) at least one KRAS-mutated polyp. on unstimulated bone marrow cells. Chromosomes were examined with RESULTS: 661 polyps were classified as adenomas (66.4%), being 0.8% modified Giemsa stain HG-banding technique. Interphase and metaphase BRAF mutation and 11.6% KRAS mutation. 334 (33.6%) polyps were clas- fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies were performed on bone sified as serrated lesions: 281 (84.1%) HPs, 38 (11.4%) SSP, 8 (2.4%) TSA marrow cytogenetic specimens which were previously used for karyotype and 7 (2.1%) MP. A 39.4% of serrated polyps showed BRAF mutation, and analysis. Detection of PML-RARA and RARA-PML fusion genes were perfor- 20.9% KRAS mutation. 289 patients could be classified in three mutatio- med using the DF SureFISH 15q24.1 together with the DF SureFISH 17q21.2 nal profiling groups: 14.9% were considered as BRAF mutated, 22.8% as probes. Detection of p53 gene was performed using LSI T
P53  (17p13.1) KRAS mutated and 62.3% did not present any mutation in these markers. probe. DNA probes were applied following standard procedures outlined by In univariate analysis, KRAS mutation was associated with development of the manufacturer. An RT-PCR assay was performed to detect the PML-RARA metachronous advanced polyps(KRAS: 30.3%; BRAF: 16.3%; non-mutated: fusion gene. 15.6%; p = 0.029), more specifically advanced adenomas(KRAS 21.2%; Results: Cytogenetic analysis of bone marrow cells of both patients showed BRAF 9.3%; non-mutated 10.0%; p=0.049). This association is also obser- mosaic karyotype with the ider(17q) and reverse transcription polymerase ved in the multivariate analysis, adjusted by age and sex(OR: 2.267, 95% CI: chain reaction (RT-PCR) was positive for long (L) isoform of PML-RARA fusi- 1.152-4.461). on transcript. FISH analysis confirmed extra copy of RARA-PML fusion gene CONCLUSION: Our results suggest the presence of KRAS mutation in polyps or ider(17q) and loss of the normal tumor suppressor p53 gene in both of at baseline is an independent risk factor for the development of metachro- the patients. nous advanced lesions. Conclusions: Results both of the reported APL cases with ider(17q) indica- ted that the duplication of der(17) gives a growth advantage to the relevant clone which becomes dominant. Moreover, loss of the normal tumor sup- pressor gene p53 may also contribute to this growth advantage. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 259ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .008 Risk factors for the presence of pathogenic APC and biallelic MUTYH mutations in patients with multiple adenomas protein expression levels decreased when located in the nucleus in higher S. W. ten Broeke1, S. S. Badhal1, T. van Wezel2, H. Morreau2, F. J. Hes1, H. F. Vasen3, C. M. astrocytoma grades, indicating expected behavior as an antagonist of Wnt Tops1, M. Nielsen1; signaling, whereas when located in the cytoplasm an increase in SFR
P3  ex- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, Leiden, pression was noted in high grade as compared to low grade astrocytomas. Netherlands, 3Department of Gastroenterology and Netherlands Foundation for the This may suggest that SFR
P3  can also act as an agonist of Wnt signaling pro- Detection of Hereditary Tumours, Leiden, Netherlands. moting invasive behavior. Background. 
P12 .010 APC MUTYH Patients with multiple colorectal adenomas may carry germ- Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analyses may help line mutations in or , but mutation detection rate seems to be to development of personalized medicine in pediatric B-cell acute declining. The aims of this study were (1) to assess the proportion of these lymphoblastic leukemia mMuettahtoiodnss. in patients with multiple adenomaAsP aCnd (2) toM iUdeTnYtHify risk fac- P. Carrasco Salas1, J. Nevado1, I. Vallcorba1, B. González2, D. Bueno2, L. Fernández3, M. Vela3, J. Valentín4, P. Lapunzina1, A. Pérez-Martínez2; tors that predict mutation detection. 1INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Unidad de Hemato-Oncología We performed mutation analysis of and/or in a Dutch Pediátrica. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3Centro Nacional de cohort of 1933 patients ascertained from family cancer clinics between Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO). Grupo de Investigación clínica., Madrid, Spain, 1R9e9su2 ltasn.d 2015. Risk factors were examined using (multinomial) logistic 4Instituto de Investigación Hospital Universitario La Paz (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain. regression analyses. APC MUTYH The overall detection rate declined from 54% before to 14% after 2004. The proportion of / carriers in patients with <20 polyps Introduction: B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL), the most pre- was low (3.5%;25/722). Only one mutation was identified in the patient valent cancer in the pediatric population, is a malignant disease resulting group (n=198) of 10-19 adenomas diaAgPnCo sed at age 60<. A younger age at from accumulation of genetic aberrations. Knowledge of these aberrations adenoma diagnosis and a first degree relative (FDR) wMithU TpYoHlyps was asso- is useful for disease classification, prognosis, therapeutic purposes, and to ciated with higher odds of finding an mutation, but CRC in a FDR was provide an overall understanding of the pathogenesis of the B-ALL. not. Having CRC was onlyA pPCr/eMdUicTtYivHe of finAdPiCn g(n b=2ia3l4l)e*lic Biallelic m MuUtTaYtHio ns. Methods: We retrospectively examined bone marrow samples from 32 ped- O(n R= (3 93 52 %)$ CI) OR (95%CI) (n= O9 R5) (* 95%CI) iatric B-cell ALL using the Illumina CytoSNP-850K BeadChip in the Illumina Adenoma count <10 HiScan platform. 10-19 20-49 Results: Except for one, all patients showed copy number alterations (CNAs). 50-99 61 .. 58 (( 30 .. 67 -9 1- 24 .. 02 )) 12 1.2 .4 ( 0 (3.5 .9-9 -3.3 2) .8) 52 .. 41 (( 20 .. 58- -16 1.1 .) 6) Losses were more common than gains. Whole and partial copy neutral loss >100 14.7 (7.3- 19.9 (6.2-63.4) 14.9 (6.2-34.6) of heterozygosity (CN-LOH) were observed in 12 cases. Only four recurrent 29.5) Age at adenoma 77.6 (40.5- 202.79 (70.32- 20.3 (8.5-48.7) genetic alterations were found: hyperdiploidy (44% of the cases), deletion diagnosis >50 148.7) 584.8) 40-49 of CDKN2A/B genes (22%), deletion of PAX5 gene (16%) and deletion of 30-39 CN C< RR3 o0 CC C <>R 55C 00 756 ... 772 ((( 433 ... 637 --- 191 3.0 7 .. 0)0 )) 187 5.. 80 .0 (( 43 (8.. 78 .0-- 11 -262 8.. 50 .0)) ) 124 ... 366 ((( 012 ... 413 -- -6 39 . .. 92 1 )) ) E SET SV N6 1 ( , 9 N% M) E g 1e n ane. d S Bev Me Pra Rl 1 p Bo , s bs uib t l ae d t da ir tg ioe nt ag le sn te us d iw ese r ae r eid ne en et dif eie dd , t oin cc olu nd fii rn mg their implication in the disease. In a deceased high-risk patient, a partial 0.74 (0.4-1.4) 0.54 (0.3-1.2) 3.8 (2.0-7.2) FDR polyps, no 0.55 (0.44- 0.67 (0.39-1.17) 4.3 (2.7-8.0) heterozygous deletion of JAK2 gene were observed, which must be studied FYe Ds R CRC, no 0.90) to confirm if it provides a gene expression signature similar to BCR-AB
L1  Yes 1.7 (1.2-2.4) 2.1 (1.3-3.2) 1.2 (0.8-2.0) pediatric ALL. These JAK-mutated cases have been proposed as logical tar- 0.79 (0.55- 0.77 (0.5-1.2) 0.9 (0.5-1.4) gets for therapeutic intervention with JAK2 inhibitors. 1.1) Conclusions: SNP arrays are a powerful cytogenetic tool to define genetic Discussion. abnormalities in B-ALL, including CN-LOH, a hidden chromosomal defect by Adenoma count and younger age at adenoma detection are the standard methods. In addition, the use of this technology in clinical practice main predictive factors of finding a mutation, but a FDR with CRC is not. For may help to develop individualized treatment plans for affected children. patients over age 60 with less than 20 adenomas testing does not seem justi- 
P12 .011 fiable. Our findings have an important impact on referral policy. Genomic analysis identifies novel drivers and progression pathways Supported by the Dutch Cancer Society in skin basal cell carcinoma X. Bonilla1, L. Parmentier2, B. King3, F. Bezrukov4, G. Kaya5, V. Zoete6, V. B. Seplyarskiy7,8,9, 
P12 .009 H. J. Sharpe10, T. A. McKee5, A. Letourneau1, P. G. Ribaux1, K. Popadin1, N. Basset-Seguin11, A dual role of sFR
P3  modulating molecule in astrocytic brain tumors R. Ben Chaabene1, F. A. Santoni1, M. A. Andrianova7,8,9, M. Guipponi1, M. Garieri1, C. A. Kafka1,2, D. Tomas3,4, L. Marković1, A. Varošanec1, N. Njirić1, Ž. Krsnik5, G. Mrak6, N. Verdan5, K. Grosdemange5, O. Sumara12, M. Eilers12, I. Aifantis3, O. Michielin6,13, F. J. de Pećina-Šlaus1,2; Sauvage10, S. Antonarakis1,14,5, S. I. Nikolaev1,5; 1Laboratory of Neurooncology, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, School of Medicine 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Hospital of Valais, Sierre, Switzerland, 3NYU University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Biology, School of Medicine, School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 4University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, United States, 5University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 6Swiss Institute of University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 4University Hospital „Sisters of Charity“, Zagreb, Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Institute of Information Transmission Problems, Croatia, 5Department of Neuroscience, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, University Moscow, Russian Federation, 8Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 6Department of Neurosurgery University Moscow, Russian Federation, 9Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Clinical Hospital Zagreb, School of medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. Federation, 10Genentech Inc., San Francisco, CA, United States, 11University of Geneva, Paris, France, 12University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 13University of Lausanne and Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 14Institute of On a sample of 55 astrocytic brain tumors we determined the expression Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. and localization of sFR
P3  modulating molecule throughout different mali- gnancy grades. Immunohistochemistry followed by digital scanning (Nano- Zoomer 2.0RS, Hammamatsu), and ImageJ (NIH, SAD) program were me- Basal cell carcinoma of the skin (BCC) is the most common malignant neo- thods of choice for determining the levels of sFR
P3  expression. Our results plasm in humans. BCC is primarily driven by aberrant activation of the So- demonstrated that the differences between expression levels and malig- nic Hedgehog (Hh) pathway. However, its extensive phenotypical variation nancy grades were statistically significant. Moderate (P=0,014) and strong remains to be explained. The genetic profiling of 293 BCCs revealed the (P=0,028) nuclear expression levels were significantly different with pilocy- highest mutation rate observed in cancer (65P TMCuHt1ations/Mb), wSMitOh strong tic and diffuse astrocytomas showing higher expression values. When we di- pPr=evalence of SUUVF-Uli ght signature mTPu5ta3tions. 85% of BCCs harbored mutati- vided our sample into two groups, both moderate and high cytoplasmic ex- ons in Hh p-8athway genes: mutually exclusive (73%) and (20%) pression levels were significantly higher in glioblastomas than in the group ( 6.6x10 ), (8%), and in (61%). M85Y%CN of BCCs aPlPsPo6 hCarbored comprising astrocytomas II and III. We also showed that high grade tumors aSTdKdi1t9ional drivLeArT m
S1 utationsE iRnB oBth2er genePsI iKm3pClAicated inR ABC
C1 C tumorigenNe/sKis/. had lower values of moderate (P=0,002) and strong nuclear (P=0,018) ex- HRe-RcuArSrent driver mutations were observed in (30%), (15%), pression comparing to low grade tumors. Analysis of cytoplasmic staining (10%), PT P(8N%14), (R4B%1), (2F%BX)W, 7 (1%) and showed that strong cytoplasmic expression was significantly higher in the (2%). Loss of function (LoF) and deleterious missense mutations astrocytomas III and glioblastoma group than in astrocytomas I and II group were observed in (23%), (8%) and (5%). In line with (P=0,048). Moreover, we found that lower grade astrocytomas had fewer the mutational profiles detectedM bYyC NDNA sequencing, we observed activati- membranous SFR
P3  stain than higher grade astrocytomas and that this on of the Hh pathway as well as upregulation of target genes of the Hippo- d2if6fe0rence was significant (P=0.036). Our resuE ltsS dH eG mo 2 n0 st1 ra6 te | d B thA atR SC FRE PL 3O N YA A, P S pP aA thI wN a y| aW ndW acW tiv. aE tS ioH n G of .ORG target genes in RNAseq experiments.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index MYCN 
P12 .015 PTPN14 LAT
S1  The expression of PIEZO1 and PIEZO2 ion channels in human and The functional analysis of the novel tumorigenic driver mutations in , mouse bladder carcinoma and suggests their potential relevance in BCC tumorigenesis E. O. Etem1, G. G. Ceylan2, S. Ozaydin1, C. Ceylan3, T. Kuloglu4, I. Ozercan5; and provides an expanded molecular understanding of BCC. 1Firat University Medical School Department of Medical Biology, Elazığ, Turkey, 
P12 .013 2Yildirim Beyazit University Medical School Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Clinical and genetic features of Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome in Spanish Turkey, 3Turkey yuksek ihtisas education and research hospital department of urology, families Ankara, Turkey, 4Firat University Medical School Department of Histology, Elazığ, A. Lopez1, E. Llistosella2, E. Darder1, A. Velasco1, D. Sitjà2, A. Izquierdo1, E. Grau3, A. Turkey, 5Firat University Medical School Department of Pathology, Elazığ, Turkey. Solanes3, M. Navarro3, M. Salinas4, S. Iglesias4, À. Teulé4, G. Capellà4, C. Lázaro4, M. Pineda4, L. Feliubadaló4, J. Brunet1,4,3; 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Girona, Spain, 2Dermatology Introduction: Action and pressure-sensitive PIEZO ion channels, express in Deparment, Josep Trueta Universitary Hospital, Girona, Spain, 3Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Badalona, Spain, 4Hereditary Cancer Program, bladder, are cation-selective mechanosensitive channels. PIEZO1 is a MSC Catalan Institute of Oncology, L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. protein and it is encoded by PIEZO1 gene in humans. PIEZO2 is a close ho- molog of PIEZO1. We aim to evaluate PIEZO1/PIEZO2 expression in post- natal period (
P0 -1) in mice bladder tissue as developmental and bladder Introduction: Pathogenic mutations in FLCN gene cause Birt-Hogg-Dubé cancer (BCa) tissue of mouse and human. syndrome (SBHD, OMIM #135150). It is inherited in a dominant manner Material/Methods: The detection of developmental expression was perfor- and characterized by the presence of benign hamartomas of hair follicles med in 
P0 ,
P7 ,
P14 ,
P21 ,
P28 ,
P36  and 
P90  in bladder tissue of BalbC strain (fibrofolliculomas and trichodiscomas), lung cysts, spontaneous pneumo- mice. Mice were divided into BCa group(n=40) and control group(n=10). thorax and increased risk for renal neoplasm. BCa in mice was created by using N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)nitrosamine Materials and Methods: 17 families from our Hereditary Cancer Program (BBN). A total of 50 subjects were included in the study (40=BCa patients, were analyzed. Genetic testing identified FLCN deleterious mutation in 10 10=controls). After histopathological evaluation for BCa, expression of PIE- families. To date 30 patients were detected as carriers, all of them are under ZO1/2 genes were examined by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry in tu- follow-up. Pathology reports were reviewed in order to classify skin lesions mor and normal tissues. and renal neoplasms. Base line Thoracic CT scan to detect pulmonary bullae Results:PIEZO1 expression increased 21th and 90th days whereas PIEZO2 was indicated, and renal MRI was performed in all patients to screen for expression increased 7th day and decreased 90th day as developmentally. renal tumors. It was found in situ carcinoma in 14 samples, adenocarcinoma in 6 samp- Results: Focusing on carriers: 21 (70%) have coetaneous affectation (15 les and benign proliferative changes in 10 samples in mice. Comparing with have biopsied fibrofolliculomas/trichodiscomas); 8 (26%) developed pneu- control group, it was detected significantly increase in expression of PIE- mothorax and 7 were diagnosed of renal cancer (2 cromophob, 3 clear cell ZO1/2 in cancer groups in human and mice. Immunoreactivity had been and 2 pending pathology results) and kidney sparing surgery could be per- observed against PIEZO1/2 both human and mouse bladder tissue with formed for >3cm lesions. Only one patient shows the triad symptoms (skin, normal or cancer. pulmonary and renal manifestations). Three carriers did not manifest any Conclusions: The developmental changes in spesific days of PIEZO expressi- lesion, all of them were under 38 year old. on is demonstrated to play role in BCa development. Although roles of PIE- No previously reported mutations were identified in two families: ZO1/2 ion channels in BCa isn’t known exactly, the dysfunction of PIEZO1/2 c.573_574delGAinsT and deletion of 1 and 2 exons. The other mutations ion channels expression may contribute the carcinogenesis of BCa by cau- were: c.1429C>T (nonsense), c.323G>T (missense), c.1733delC, c.3delG sing proliferative changes. (frameshift) and c.1301-1G>A (splicesite) 
P12 .016 Conclusions: This data indicate that all carriers over 40 years old have cli- Genetic and epigenetic profile of tumor cells of 126 patients with nical manifestation. Skin lesions appear as the first and more common ma- diffuse brain gliomas n Pi 1fe 2s .0ta 1ti 4on. Screening for renal tumors allowed to avoid total nephrectomy. Z. Zemanova1, H. Lhotska1, K. Svobodova1, H. Cechova2, S. Ransdorfova2, L. Lizcova1, F. Kramar3, Z. Krejcik2, L. Pavlistova1, S. Izakova1, A. Berkova1, K. Skipalova1, K. Michalova1; Differentially expressed long noncoding RNAs in bladder cancer 1Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory E. M. Borkowska1, S. Peter2, R. Dryton2, C. P. Rakhit2, A. P. Noon2, W. Chan3, J. W. F. Catto2; Diagnostics, General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University 1Medical University of Lódź Department of Clinical Genetics, Łódź, Poland, 2University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, of Sheffield Academic Urology Unit and Unit of Molecular Oncology, Sheffield, United Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Neurosurgery, Central Military Hospital and 1st Kingdom, 3Max Delbruck Center of Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany. Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. Introduction: Bladder cancer (BC) is the fourth commonest male malignan- Diffuse gliomas are the most common brain tumors and comprise astrocy- cy and one of the most expensive human cancers to manage. The majority of tomas, oligodendrogliomas, and oligoastrocytomas (WHO grades II-III), and tumors are urothelial carcinoma in histologic type. Although many reports glioblastomas (grade IV). Lower-grade gliomas (LGG, grade II-III) have high- detail genetic events in urothelial cancer, alterations of epigenetic gene re- ly variable clinical behavior that is not adequately predicted on the basis of gulation are also important in this disease. Epigenetic gene regulation may histological classification. Assessment of the genome aberrations will pro- occur directly or indirectly through noncoding RNA (ncRNA) species. To bably allow more robust and prognostically relevant classification of these date, few data have reported the role of long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) in tumors. urothelial cancer and little is known of their function. We performed genome-wide analyses of 126 samples of gliomas (100x LGG, Material and methods: The expression of 17112 lncRNAs and 22074 mRNA 26x glioblastoma) with the aim to investigate the genetic and epigenetic was determind using microarrays in 83 normal and malignant urothelial background of different tumor subtypes. The tissues taken from primary samples (discovery step) and selected RNAs with qPCR in 138 samples (va- tumors were analyzed using I-FISH with VYSIS probes (Abbott), SNP array lidation step). Significantlly differentially expressed RNAs were identified (Illumina), and MLPA (MRC-Holland) to detect recurrent chromosomal ab- and stratified according to tumour phenotype. siRNA knockdown, functio- errations, copy number variations, IDH mutations and hypermethylation of nal assays, and whole genome transcriptomic profiling were used to identify MGMT and MMR genes promoters. potential roles of selected RNAs. Mutation of IDH genes was detected in 75.0% LGG. A total of 41.3% LGG Results: We observed upregulation of many lncRNAs in urothelial cancer patients with mutated IDH had simultaneous co-deletion 1p/19q, which that was distinct to corresponding, more balanced changes for mRNAs. In is considered the indicator of better response to radio-chemotherapy. Ac- general, lncRNA expression reflected disease phenotype. We identified 32 quired UPD17p was proven in 65.0% of astrocytomas and 23.1% of gliobla- lncRNA with potential roles in disease progression. Focusing upon a promi- stomas. In 46.2% glioblastomas, shattering of different chromosomes (chro- sing candidate , we implicate upregulation of AB074278 in apoptosis avoi- mothripsis) always in combination with complex changes was observed. In dance and maitenance of a proliferative state in cancer through a potential 39.0% LGG, new recurrent finding - hypermethylation of MLH3 gene pro- interaction with EM
P1 , a tumour supressor and a negative regulator of cell moter was detected. In our study, patients with LGG and hypermethylated proliferattion. MLH3 had significantly longer OS (p=0.001). Conclusion:We have identified many lncRNAs significantly altered in uro- In conclusion, molecular-cytogenetic diagnostics is a powerful tool to obtain thelial cancer and associated with disease progression and tumor subtypes. prognostically relevant information in glioma patients and therefore should be an integral part of examination in patients with brain tumors. Supported by IGA MZCR NT/13212-4, RVO-VFN64165, GACR 
P302 /12/ G157. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 261ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .017 Hereditary breast/ovarian cancer: a systematic screening of 94 cancer associated genes in 500 consecutive index cases Materials and Methods: Genetic results of all Lebanese patients, who un- A. Gehrig, I. Schmitt, C. R. Müller; derwent full sequencing of BRCA1/2 at AUBMC between 2011 and 2015, Department of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany. were reviewed. Demographic and personal/family cancer history data were collected. Results: Deleterious mutations were identified in 10.6% of the families Introduction: In about 25% of cases, hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (20/188) (16BRCA1, 4BRCA2). In total, twelve deleterious mutations were (HBOC) is caused by mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. Additional DNA repair recognized, four of them were novel. In 30% (6/20) of the carrier fami- genes such as CHEK2, ATM, PALB2, RAD51C and others have been implica- lies, the BRCA1 
C44 F mutation was identified; this is reportedly the most ted in HBOC. common mutation in our population, suggesting a possible founder effect. Methods: All 500 patients fulfilled the inclusion criteria defined by the Ger- Two other mutations BRCA2 IV
S24 -1G>A and BRCA1 
E720 X accounted for man HTMB OC Conso r- tium. After target enrichment with the TruSight cancer respectively 15% and 10% of the familial mutations. Twenty five variants panel (Illumina) designed to simultaneously analyse 94 cancer associated were considered of unknown clinical significance (10 BRCA1, 15 BRCA2). genes - sequencing was performed on a MiSeq (Illumina). Variant analysis Conclusions: Prevalence of BRCA mutations was found to be high among was done by GensearchNGS software (PhenoSystems) and the NextGENe tested women. Three mutations accounted for more than 55% of the total CNV detection tool (Softgenetics). detected mutations. This study stresses on the importance of BRCA testing Results: Coverage was at least 50-fold across 93% of all investigated coding in Lebanese women at high risk for breast/ovarian cancer. It also highlights regions. We focused on protein truncating mutations since functional data interesting data in terms of prevalence and spectrum of BRCA mutations in on other variants in these genes are scarce. In addition to BRCA1 and BRCA2, our population. we detected pathogenic mutations (class 4 and 5) in the genes: ATM, CHEK2, Funding source: MPP/AUB NBN, PALB2, RAD51D, BRI
P1 , T
P53 , PTEN, CDH1, MSH6, FANCA, FANCC, 
P12 .020 FANCI, FANCM, XPC, ERC
C2 , RECQ
L4 , SLX4, WRN, BLM, BUB1B, PM
S1  and Prevalence and reclassification of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants of SBDS. CNVs were found in BRCA1, BRCA2, NBN and WRN. uncertain significance in Spanish breast cancer families. Conclusions: We identified monoallelic, likely pathogenic mutations in DNA A. Gisbert1, M. Cornet1, D. Fisas2, C. López2, E. Martinez1, M. Pintor2, N. Calvo2, T. Ramón y repair genes other than BRCA1/2 in about 10% of HBOC cases. However, the Cajal2, A. Lasa1,3; causative association to HBOC and the prospective tumor risks for many of 1Genetics Department. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Oncology these mutations and genes have yet to be determined. Of note, extending the Department. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3U-705, CIBERER, analysis to a larger number of genes proportionally increases the number of Barcelona, Spain. variants of uncertain significance and the workload to survey and classify 
P12 .018 them. TruSight Enrichment Workflow vs PCR Amplicon Workflow (MASTR) INTRODUCTION: In the last two decades, the molecular diagnosis of here- for targeting cancer genes ditary breast and/or ovarian cancer has been based on the identification of M. Chatzidaki1, Y. L. Loukas1, G. Thodi2, E. Molou2, Y. Dotsikas1, K. Schoulpi3, O. germline inactivating mutations within the BRCA genes. Unfortunately, va- Triantafylli2; 1Department of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, riants of uncertain significance (VUS) still occur in 5-10 % of tests. The aim Greece, 2Neoscreen LTD, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Mental Health and Social of this study was to reassess the pathogenicity of VUS identified in families Welfare, Hospital Paidon “Agia Sofia”, Athens, Greece. counseled at our hospital. MATERIAL AND METHODS: VUS were reclassified into class I, II, III, IV and V following the International Agency for Cancer Research (IARC) recommen- Introduction: Breast cancer has been associated with mutations in other dations. This was done by means of a thorough review of online database low and high penetrant genes except of BRCA. This knowledge allow us to resources such as BIC (http://research.nhgri.nih.gov/bic/), LOVD (http:// identify more women at risk for breast cancer. The purpose of this study was www.lovd.nl/3.0/home) and KConFab (http://www.kconfab.org/Progress/ to compare PCR Amplicon Workflow (BRCA HC MASTR Plus) which detects Mutations.aspx) together with a systematic literature review. The final clas- mutations and CNVs in 26 “breast cancer” genes and TruSight Enrichment sification was based on the use of integrated analyses, in vitro transcript Workflow (TruSight cancer) which targets 94 “cancer” genes. assays and in silico tools. Materials/Methods: 30 patients with mild to severe family history were RESULTS: From 1995 to 2015, 1200 families were tested for BRCA1/2 germ- subjected to BRCA HC Plus panel and 12 to the TruSight cancer panel (TC). line mutations. A total of 307 variants were identified in 253 families and Three runs were conducted using MiSeq 600V3 reagent kit in the former 182 were unique. case, i.e.10 samples per run, while 4 samples each time were loaded on a Our integrative approach allowed us to reclassify 96/182 variants originally MiSeq 300V2 kit, regarding the latter panel. categorized as VUS (class III). Eighty of them (83%) were predicted to be Results: Both panels require a low input of DNA and have an efficient work- non-pathogenic or class I, 7 (7%) were reclassified as class II, 5 (5%) as class flow. Regarding hands- on time, it seems that BRCA HC MASTR Plus work- IV and 4 (4%) as class V. The other 86 remained as class III. flow is shorter and it may be easier for a less experienced user. Considering CONCLUSIONS: The continuous reassessment of VUS remains a challenge the quality of the final results, a high Q-score was achieved with both panels. for clinicians and geneticists. The wealth of information provided by NGS However, the average coverage (read-depth) reached with the former panel studies, facilitated the reclassification of more than half of our original VUS, was higher i.e. about 500x for most of the targeted genes compared to the thus allowing us to improve our preventive strategy. one reached with the TC, regarding the common cancer genes. 
P12 .021 Conclusion: TC panel could be a solution for cases with a rather inconclusive Reliable detection of BRCA-mutations in formalin-fixed, paraffin- family history, but for patients with a distinct phenotype BRCA HC MASTR embedded ovarian carcinomas using smMIP-based next generation plus panel offers a rather more robust and efficient method for confirming sequencing diagnosis. R. Weren1, A. Mensenkamp1, M. Simons1, A. Sie1, M. Nelen1, H. Ouchene1, M. van 
P12 .019 Asseldonk1, A. Eijkelenboom1, J. Shendure2, A. Hoischen1, B. Tops1, N. Hoogerbrugge1, M. Ligtenberg1; BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation spectrum in Lebanese women 1Radboudumc Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, undergoing testing for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer United States. R. Badra1, J. Abbas2, M. Assaad1, F. Boulos1, N. El Saghir2, C. Mounsef1, D. Mukherji2, Z. Salem2, M. Seoud3, C. Farra1; 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon, 2Department of Internal Medicine, American University Introduction. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors are promis- of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, ing novel therapies for ovarian cancer patients who have developed BRCA1 American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon. or BRCA2 mutation-positive tumors. Approximately 15% and 8% of these patients have an inactivating germline or somatic BRCA-mutation, respec- tively. Therefore, assessing the BRCA-mutation status in DNA derived from Introduction: In Lebanon, breast cancer is considered the most common ovarian carcinomas is crucial to select patients who may benefit from these malignancy among women. Up to 10% of breast cancers are directly related treatments. However, the detection of germline and somatic mutations in to germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. In this retrospective study, BRCA1 and BCRA2 is hampered by the poor quality of DNA derived from we aimed at reporting the prevalence of BRCA mutations in a Lebanese co- formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) ovarian carcinomas and the com- hort of individuals with personal or strong family history of breast/ovarian plexity of both genes. c 2a 6nc 2er, in order to determine the role of BRCAE tSesHtinGg 2in0 b1re6a s|t BcaAnRceCr EriLskO NMAa, tSerPiaAlsI Nan d| WMeWthWod.sE. WSHe pGre.OseRntG a single molecule molecular inversion assessment. probe-based targeted sequencing approach to detect germline and somaticABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in DNA derived from FFPE ovarian carci- sis allowed to identify three mutations out of 14 tested tumors (21%), all nomas. This method was applied to 107 ovarian carcinomas derived from showed LOH; moreover, one mutation was found in one out of 13 tumors patients with a BRCA1 (n=24) or BRCA2 (n=14) germline mutation and sequenced for BRCA2, which failed to show LOH. All BRCA1/2 sequence sporadic patients (n=50) before and after chemotherapy. Calculation of the mutations were subsequently found to be germline. BRCA1 MLPA analysis technical sensitivity and reduction of the levels of sequencing background was performed in 11 tumors and detected 8 acquired deletions of the whole noise was achieved using molecular barcoding to recognize unique template gene (three explaining LOH in mutation carriers). Out of eight tumors ana- molecules. lyzed with BRCA2 MLPA, two showed deletion of the whole gene (one in a Results. All germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 were successfully tumor also showing loss of BRCA1). Although preliminary, our results sup- detected. In addition, pathogenic somatic mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 port a relevant frequency of germline BRCA1/2 mutations in OC patients, were observed in five sporadic patients (10%). while somatic mutations appeared to be limited to monoallelic BRCA1 and/ Conclusions. Our approach enables the rapid and reliable detection of both or BRCA2 loss. germline and somatic mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in DNA derived from 
P12 .024 FFPE ovarian carcinomas. Consequently, this method can be applied to se- Prevalence of pathogenic gene variants associated with breast and lect ovarian cancer patients who may benefit from treatments with PARP ovarian cancer in Estonia inhibitors and genetic counseling. H. Roomere, Ü. Murumets, P. Laidre, T. Kahre; 
P12 .022 Tartu University Hospital, United Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Tartu, Estonia. Experience of BRCA clinical testing for 3,200 patients: An international perspective L. Wange1, S. Wehnelt1, D. Gebs2, J. House2, K. Copeland3, L. Esterling2, S. Manley2, H. C. Introduction: Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer among Esto- Cox2; nian women, 650 new cases are diagnosed annually. Ovarian cancer (OC) is 1Myriad GmbH, Munich, Germany, 2Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, less frequent, 150 new cases per year. ~10% of cancers are associated with United States, 3Myriad Genetics GmbH, Zurich, Switzerland. hereditary predisposition. BRCA1 BRCA2 Materials and Methods: Altogether 953 individuals (906 females, 47 ma- les) were sent for genetic testing by oncologist or medical geneticist during Introduction: Inherited mutations in the and genes are the 2008 - 2015. BC was diagnosed in 339 patients (36%) and OC in 122 (13%), most common cause of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) across 14 patients had both cancers. 478/953 were high risk family members. 182 human populations. Clinical screening of germline variants has been routine patients (19%) were 45y or younger. 654 (69%) had family history of BC/ for over 2 decades in countries such as the USA. However, testing is beco- OC. BRCA1/2 genes were analysed either by APEX, Sanger or next generati- ming increasingly accessible on the global scale. We report the outcomes on sequencing (NGS). 314 patients were analysed against BC/OC high and of clinical BRCA genetic testing in a cohort ascertained across 33 countries medium risk genes by NGS. Deletions/duplications in BRCA1/2 genes were rBeRpCrAe1sentingB 6R CcAon2tinents. excluded by MLPA analysis in 547 patients. Methods: This study assessed 3,229 consecutive individuals undergoing Results: 158 patients (17%) were mutation-positive. The prevalence of and full sequencing and large rearrangement analysis in a BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations in BC/OC group (447 patients) was 18%, BRCA1 DAkkS accredited laboratory in Munich, Germany from 2013 to 2015. Cli- main mutations ratio was 45%. Interestingly we did not find any deletions/ nical information was obtained from test requisition forms completed by duplications from BRCA1/2 MLPA. In 26 cases (BRCA1/2 negative) the pa- ordering healthcare practitioners, with the majority of patients ascertained thogenic variant was found either from PPMID, BRI
P1 , CHEK2, MSH2, MSH6, on suspicion of HBOC. PM
S1 , CDH1, ATM or NBN gene. Results: Over 98% of patients were female and 72% reported a personal Conclusions: Two main mutations in BRCA1 cover ~54% of all BRCA1/2 history of cancer. The most frequent female cancer was breast (63%), follo- pathogenic mutations in Estonia: c.4035delA (21%); c.5266dupC (33%). wed by ovarian (8%). Males comprised <2% of the patients and greater than Therefore we recommend start screening with detection of these two re- 50% of them reported a personal history of breast cancer. Overall, 12.7% of latively common BRCA1 mutations and in case of negative result continue patients tested positive for a laboratory classified pathogenic variant. Patho- with NGS. BRCA1/2 MLPA analysis is not informative in Estonia. genic variants were enriched in patients with a personal history of cancer (13.9%) versus no personal cancer history (9.5%); this is especially striking 
P12 .025 in cancers directly associated with HBOC. Pathogenic variants were detec- TruRisk® based next-generation sequencing and CNV detection ted in patients originating from Europe, Asia, Africa and North and South demonstrate the importance of implementing other breast and America. ovarian cancer-associated genes in routine diagnostics Conclusion: BRCA clinical testing is valuable at the global level for iden- L. Buelow, B. Bluemcke, E. Pohl, B. Versmold, A. Waha, J. Driesen, K. Keupp, A. Baasner, I. Praulich, J. Hauke, E. Hahnen, B. Wappenschmidt, R. Schmutzler; tifying high-risk patients who would benefit from increased surveillance Center for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Cologne, Germany. and medical intervention. 
P12 .023 Germline and somatic BRCA1/2 mutations in ovarian cancer patients Approximately 24% of familial breast cancer (BC) and/or ovarian cancer unselected for family history (BORCC)A c1as2es analyzed within the framework of the German ConsorBtRiuCmA 1f/o2r G. Rodella1, R. Zuntini1,2, G. Barbero1, M. G. Tedesco1, S. Miccoli1,2, L. Godino1,2, A. M. Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (GC-HBOC) are caused by pathogenic Perrone2,3, D. Santini2,4, B. Corti4, C. N. Salfi4, F. Buscherini1, S. Ferrari1,2, P. De Iaco2,3, C. / mutations. However, the mutation frequencies of non- Zamagni2,5, D. Turchetti1,2; genes associated with familial BC and/or BC/OC are largely unknown. 1Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Policlinico Therefore, panel next-generation sequencing represents a comprehensive Sant’Orsola-Malpi, Bologna, Italy, 2Centro di Ricerca sui Tumori Ereditari, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Bologna, Italy, 3SSD Oncologia Ginecologica, AOU di approach to simultaneously analyse numerous candidate genes regarding Bologna, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy, 4SSD UO Anatomia their involvement on BC/OC pathogenesis. Here, we present extended NGS Patologica, AOU di Bologna, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, Bologna, data generated by using the GC-HBOC-designBeRdC ATr1u/R2isk® gene panel. In Italy, 5Oncologia Medica, AOU di Bologna, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, this study, a cohort of 594 index cases from high-risk BC and BC/OC families, Bologna, Italy. negative regarding deleterious mutations in was analyzed. Data analysis was accompaAnTieMd, bCyD HCN1,V C HdeEtKe2ct, iFoAnN uCsMin gM tLhHe1 S, oMpShHia2D, MDMSH V6e, rNsBioNn, 3PA.5L.0B.21,2 P-pT5E.N0,. 0R aAnDa5ly1sCi,s R toAoDl5 (1SDop, ThPia5 G3enetics). By focusing on 13 BC and/or Ovarian Cancer (OC) is the seventh most common cause of cancer-related OC associated genes ( death in women. It is estimated that about 15% of OC arise in women car- ), we AidTeMn tified 2
C5 H dEiKffe2r ent pat,h FoAgNe-- rying germline BRCA1/2 mutations and that 3% of sporadic serous OCs har- nCMic varian, tPsA, LinBc2lu ding l arge R rAeDar5r1aCn gemen. ts, in 25 unrelated mutation car- bour somatic BRCA1/2 mutations; BRCA deficiency is predictive of response riers (4,2%). Mutations weAreT MideCnHtiEfiKed2 in FAN(nC=M3), (n=10) to PARP-inhibition. (n=4) (n=7)and (n=1) 24% of these mutations are large Since July 2015, we have included for BRCA1/2 testing also women with rearrangements, found in , and . Therefore, our study high grade OC with no suggestive family history. Among 21 patients with highlights the importance of comprehensive gene panel testing along with apparently sporadic OC who have undertaken testing to date, complete re- CNV detection to be included in BC and/or OC routine diagnostics. The re- sults are available for 12; four of those (33%) carry a deleterious mutation sults of the CNV detection together with further approximately 300 samples, (three in BRCA2, one in BRCA1). In addition, we undertook a research pro- which are already processed, will be evaluated. ject aimed at analysing BRCA1/2 in fresh-frozen tissue of newly diagnosed OC patients. So far, 15 patients have bEeeSnH eGnr o2ll0ed1;6 B R| CBAA1 RseCquEeLnOceN aAna,l yS-PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 263ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .027 Easy-to-use online self-test identifies women at high familial risk of breast cancer and decreases anxiety fered genetic counseling and testing.The analysis was performed on DNA A. van Erkelens, N. Hoogerbrugge; from the peripheral blood. The mutations in BRCA1,2 were detected using Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. DHPLC and sequencing of exons in which the Polish founder mutations are found most frequently. T
P53  gene was sequenced from exon 2 to 10. All the samples were screened for the Slavic c.657-661del5 mutation in NBN gene Introduction: Individuals at an increased familial BC risk should be identi- and for the most common mutations in CHEK2. fied, as they and their relatives can receive earlier and more intensive BC Results: In this group of 334 patients we identified 67(20%)BRCA1,2 muta- surveillance. An online self-test for familial BC can identify women at in- tion carriers and 3 T
P53 (0,9%), 3 NBN (0,9%),3 CHEK2(0,9%) carriers. Ma- creased familial risk and may decrease anxiety and distress even in patients jority of the BRCA1 mutations were founder Polish mutations. Most of the at low risk. BRCA1 carriers had 1st and/or 2nd degree relatives with breast and/or ova- Methods: Women invited for population-based screening mammography rian cancer. There was no such correlation in the group of BRCA2 and T
P53  were also invited for an online self-test and questionnaires. Psychological mutation carriers, however all T
P53  carriers had BC with high expression impact was assessed at baseline (T0), immediately post-test (T1), after two of estrogene and progesterone receptor and overexpression of Her2 („triple weeks (T2) using the State-trait inventory Dutch Version (STAI-DY) and positive BC“. Conclusion:In Polish women diagnosed with BC at very young Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS). age genetic testing for the BRCA1,2 mutations should be offered, even in the Results: In total, 304 completed T0 and T1, 195 completed T2. At T1, a mo- absence of relevant family history. Screening for the founder Polish BRCA1 derate or high familial BC risk was identified in four (1%) and 18 (6%) wo- mutations is not sufficient in this group. In the youngest women diagnosed men. There was a significant reduction in state anxiety at T1 and T2 (T1-T0: with „triple positive“ BC sequencing of T
P53  gene should be considered.Ge- mean change = -1.69 (95%CI:-2.21,-1.17), P<0.001; T2-T0: mean change = netic testing may guide important diagnostic and therapeutic decisions in -2.69 (95%CI:-3.93,-1.45), P<0.001). Similarly, trait anxiety but not distress this group of patients. were reduced at T2 (mean change = -1.31 (95%CI:-2.14,-0.48), P=0.002; 
P12 .030 mean change = -0.18 (95%CI:-0.78,0.43), P=0.57). Women at moderate or Identification of novel candidate genes for hereditary breast cancer high familial BC risk had slightly higher levels of anxiety and distress at T0, via whole exome sequencing D. Turchetti1,2, R. Zuntini1,2, F. Isidori1, C. Diquigiovanni3, F. Buscherini3, F. Palombo3, S. T1 and T2, and similar decreases in psychological outcomes between T1-T0 Miccoli1,2, E. Bonora1,2; and T2-T0. 1Centro di Ricerca sui Tumori Ereditari, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Conclusion: An online self-test for familial BC identified women at modera- Università di Bologna, BOLOGNA, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, te or high familial BC risk (prevalence 6%) and decreased anxiety. Adding Bologna, Italy, 3Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, BOLOGNA, Italy. familial risk assessment to population BC screening may prevent BC in re- latives. 
P12 .028 Founder BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in women with breast and/or Hereditary breast cancer (HBC) accounts for 5% of BC cases. Germline ovarian cancer from Eastern Europe (Ukraine): application of next BRCA1/2 mutations explain 60% of HBC, but no other major genes have generation sequencing been identified in the remaining 40%. A. Myszka1, H. Akopyan1,2, N. Kitsera2, F. Hammet3, H. Tsimiklis3, D. Park3, T. Nguyen- We decided to perform whole exome sequencing (WES) in affected I-degree Dumont3, M. Southey3; cousin-pairs displaying features suggestive of HBC, who tested negative for 1Institute of Obstetrics and Emergency Medicine, University of Rzeszow, Rzeszow, BRCA1/2. Based on their relationship, I-degree cousins share 1/8 of the Poland, 2Institute of Hereditary Pathology of National Academy of Medical Sciences, Lviv, entire genome, which helps filter and select candidate variants. To date, 4 Ukraine, 3The Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, University of cousin-pairs were analyzed through WES and candidate variants were iden- Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. tified in three different genes in 3 pairs, whereas the fourth one shared a BRCA2 deletion not previously identified by Sanger sequencing. The candidate variants, affecting RO
S1 , RASA
L1  and ICAM5 genes, were Mutations in a small number of genes have been associated with a high risk confirmed by direct sequencing. Further characterization of the variants is of breast and ovarian cancer. The frequency of founder mutations in BRCA1 ongoing. In particular, the RO
S1  variant affected a predicted canonic splice and BRCA2 genes can inform genetic testing strategies for some populati- site, suggesting an effect on the correct splicing of RO
S1 , a tyrosine kinase ons. The main purpose of the study was to search for new pathogenic muta- receptor that has been implicated in several cancer types. We inserted the tions that are associated with high risk of breast and/or ovarian cancers in wild-type or mutant genomic region into a minigene plasmid, transfected the Ukraine population. it into CO
S7  cells, and found that the mutant cells used a cryptic intronic The study group consisted of 132 women from West Ukraine diagnosed splice site 20 bp downstream, leading to the insertion of a premature stop- with breast cancer and/or ovarian cancer. All cases had a positive family codon in the protein. Future studies will explore the effect of the variant on history of breast and/or ovarian cancer. DNA samples were isolated from cell growth/proliferation and invasion in CRISP/Cre-modified MCF10A and blood. Studies were performed using Hi-Plex technology incorporating mas- MCF7 cells. sively parallel sequencing (next generation sequencing). Our findings support previous evidence that many different genes account In the group of patients we detected 25 (19%) pathogenic mutations in for the fraction of HBC not related to BRCA1/2 mutations and led us to iden- BRCA1 (5 recurrent and 3 singular mutations) and 9 (7%) pathogenic mu- tify promising novel variants for HBC. tations in BRCA2. The study identified a large number of variants in BRCA1 
P12 .031 and BRCA2 that have uncertain or conflicting significance to breast and ova- Cluster analysis of breast cancer expression profiles and the search rian cancer risk. for genes associated with metastatic tumors This was the first study of women at high risk of breast and/or ovarian can- K. Grishina1, T. Muzaffarova1, N. Pospekhova1, S. Poyarkov1, E. Glubokova1, V. Khaylenko2, A. Karpukhin1; cer from the West Ukraine population using next generation sequencing and 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Blokhin Russian established that there is a high frequency of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Cancer Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. in this population. The results will contribute to improved genetic testing in the Ukrainian population that currently relies on the testing of a limi- ted selection of specific mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in clinical genetics The investigation of 75 gene quantitative expression levels in a sample of practice. Improved genetic risk assessment could also lead to improved can- breast cancer tumors in relation to the normal breast tissue was performed. cer prevention in this population. All patients of the sample were not subject to radiation, neither to chemo- 
P12 .029 therapy. The set of 75 genes was formed on the basis of their participation Germline BRCA1, BRCA2, NBN, CHEK2 , T
P53  mutations in the group in the progression of breast cancer. By cluster analysis 3 clusters of gene co- of the young Polish patients diagnosed with breast cancer. expression were identified. Two of them were enriched by metastasis cases. D. Nowakowska1, D. Czapczak2, U. Piekarska1, A. Kluska1, A. Janiec-Jankowska1; The frequency of metastasis cases was not significantly different in these 1The Maria Sklodowska -Curie Cancer Center & Institute in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, clusters that allowed combining them (group 1). A statistically significant 2The Maria Sklodowska-Curie Cancer Center & Institute of Oncology in warsaw, Warsaw, difference in the frequency of cases with metastasis in group 1 in relation to Poland. the cluster poor in metastasis (group 2) was shown ( OR = 20, 95% CI = 1,9 to 218,4 p = 0,01). The 14 differentially expressed genes in group 1 relative to group 2 with significantly different expression level were identified. The Breast cancer (BC) at young age is associated with poor prognosis, therefore 11 of them were differentially expressed in both clusters with metastasis there is a great need to characterize better this group of patients. and 3 were specifically expressed only in one cluster. The most highest le- M 2a 6t 4erial/methods: 334 women with BC at/uEndSeHr Gth e2 a0g1e 6o f| 3B5A wReCreE oLfO- NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .036 Landscape of the mutation pattern in 4175 HBOC families using NGS vel of gene expression revealed in one cluster MM
P9  and FN1, and uPAR, panel PLAUR, ZEB2 in another cluster with metastasis. Excess of the expression L. Castéra1,2,3, S. Krieger1,2,3, N. Goardon1, A. Ricou1, A. Rousselin1, A. Legros1, O. Bruet1, C. level of these genes in cluster with metastasis relative to the group 2 is 10 Quesnelle1, F. Domin1, C. San1, B. Brault1, R. Fouillet1, C. Abadie4, O. Béra5, P. Berthet1, O. - 50 times. Letac1, T. Frebourg6,7,3, D. Vaur1,2,3; 1Comprehensive Cancer Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France, 2Normandy Centre for 
P12 .033 Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Caen, France, 3Inserm U1079, Rouen, France, Evaluation of circulating miRNAs expression as non-invasive 4Comprehensive Cancer Centre Eugène Marquis, Rennes, France, 5University Hospital, biomarker for Breast Cancer in Iranian women Fort de France, France, 6Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 7Normandy Centre for E. Soleimanpour1, M. Hosseinpour Feizi1, E. Babaei1, V. Montazeri2; Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France. 1Tabriz University, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Noor Nejat Hospital, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of. In 2012, to optimize the molecular diagnosis of hereditary breast and ovari- an cancer (HBOC), we validated a NGS-based routine screening based on the Introduction: Breast cancer is the most common cause of cancer mortality capture of 21 to 33 genes involved in HBOC and paired-end sequencing on among women. So, early detection and targeted therapies of cancer can sig- Illumina platforms. The bioinformatic pipeline includes CASAVA, NextGENe, nificantly reduce the mortality as well as increase the survival rate. MicroR- CNVseq and Alamut-HT and a custom interfaced database (CanDiD). Using NAs are a well-known candidate to develop predictive and prognostic bio this strategy, we have now analyzed 4175 patients and detected 722 (17 molecules that can be affordably used as early and non-invasive detection %) deleterious mutations. The majority of the mutations (83%) were found marker. The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression levels of miR- in BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, PALB2, ATM, T
P53 , RAD51C, BRI
P1 , RINT1 with 21 and miR-155 in Iranian Breast cancer patients and the potential use of respective incidences of 4,6%, 4%, 1.2%, 1.1%, 1%, 0.6%, 0.5%, 0.4%, 0.3%. circulating miRs as non-invasive biomarker. BRCA1 and BRCA2 exhibited 359 mutations including 26 large rearrange- Material and methods: Tumor specimens, paired non-tumoral adjacent tis- ments. The 46 mutations detected in PALB2 were mostly found in women sues and matching plasma samples from 30 Iranian women breast cancer with a cancer over 40 years and the 21 RAD51C mutations preferentially were collected. Plasma of normal women were also used as control.The rela- in women with ovarian cancer. T
P53  was mutated in 23/3865 index cases tive expression of miR-21 and miR-155 was measured by real-time quantita- including only 4 characteristic Li Fraumeni families and preferentially in tive reverse transcription PCR. women with breast cancer before 31 years. These results demonstrate the Results: The levels of miR-21 and miR-155 were significantly higher in plas- efficiency of this NGS procedure to perform molecular diagnosis of HBOC, ma (p= 0.02 and 0.01, respectively) and tissue sample (p= 0.00 and 0.00, confirms the genetic heterogeneity of HBOC and show that the fraction of respectively) of breast cancer patients in comparison with control groups. potentially deleterious mutations detected within the other genes than Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis revealed 0.81 and 0.83 in BRCA1 and BRCA2 justifies their analysis and additional studies to estimate miR-21 and miR-155 tissue, as well as 0.99 and 0.92 in miR-21 and miR-155 the associated cancer risks. plasma samples respectively. Moreover, there was no relation between the 
P12 .037 expression level of miRs and clinic-pathologic data. Parent of origin and prognosis in hereditary non-BRCA breast cancer Conclusion: These finding revealed that the expression patterns of these cir- in Sweden culating miRs in Iranian women are the same as their paired tissue groups C. Wendt1,2, A. Lindblom3,4, S. Margolin1,5; and also other population over the world. So, circulating miR-21 and miR- 1Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 155 can be used as non-invasive biomarker for breast cancer detection. 2Department of Oncology, Karolinska Hospital, Solna, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 
P12 .035 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Stockholm, Results of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation screening with next generation Sweden, 5Department of Oncology, Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Stockholm, sequencing in a cohort of breast and ovarian cancer patients in Sweden. Trakya region of Turkey H. Tozkır1, S. Demir Ulusal1, E. Atlı1, A. Sezer2, H. Gürkan1, N. Tunçbilek3; 1Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Edirne, Turkey, Introduction: Breast cancer prognosis is affected by tumour characteristics 2Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of General Surgery, Edirne, Turkey, 3Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of Radiology, Edirne, Turkey. and adjuvant treatment. It has been suggested that prognosis in familial breast cancer could be influenced by parent of origin with a worse progno- sis when breast cancer is inherited paternally. The aim of this study was to Introduction: The role of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations in breast and investigate parent of origin effects on prognosis in our cohort of non-BRCA ovarian cancer risk is supported by a great number of studies worldwide. hereditary breast cancer families in Stockholm, Sweden. Here we report a novel mutation in BRCA2 gene in a patient with breast Material and methods: Pedigrees from 1782 families were eligible. Index cancer and summarize the BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation screening results of 54 patients were divided into two study groups, paternal and maternal inheri- patients (2 males, 52 females) enrolled to our center between November tance. Tumour characteristics and survival data for the index patients were 2014- October 2015. collected and analysed. Methods: Automated DNA isolation was performed from peripheral blood Results: In total 319 families fulfilled inclusion criteria, 229 and 90 index samples of 54 patients using EZ1 DNA isolation kit. Coding regions of patients in maternal and paternal group respectively. Affected mothers were BRCA1(NM_007294.3) and BRCA2 (NM_000059.3) genes were captured by excluded to avoid bias. Median follow-up was 11 years. No significant differ- Ion Ampliseq Library Kit V2.0. Target enrichment was performed by Ion One ence in overall survival or recurrence-free survival between maternal and Touch OT2 200 kit followed by semiconductor sequencing on Ion Perseonal paternal inheritance of breast cancer was observed with hazard ratios 0.99 Genome Machine. Torrent Suite Software and Ion Reporter Software were (95% CI: 0.54 to 1.80) and 1.22 (95% CI: 0.78 to 1.92) respectively. used to analyze mutations. IGV was used to visualize the amplicons. At least Conclusion: We found no evidence for a worse prognosis with paternally 100X coverage of the bases in the targeted regions were accepted for preci- inherited breast cancer compared to maternal inheritance. However, with se analysis of the mutations. Sanger sequencing was performed to confirm this sample size only large differences in prognosis can be detected. In that the presence of the mutations and to screen the other family memberse if perspective the tendency towards worse recurrence-free survival (HR 1.22, needed. 95% CI: 0.78 to 1.92) in the group with paternal inheritance is interesting. Results: In total, pathogenic mutations were found in 6 patients. Also notable is the skew distribution with a predominance of maternally in- NM_007294.3(BRCA1):c.5266dupC(p.Gln1756Profs*74) (2/54 patients), herited cases indicating that accuracy of self-reported family history is low NM_000059.3(BRCA2):c.67+1G>A (2/54 patients) and NM_000059.3(BRCA for paternally inherited breast cancer. 2):c.1773_1776delTTAT(p.Ile591Metfs) (1/54 patients) mutations were de- 
P12 .038 termined. A novel mutation, NM_000059.3(BRCA2):c.721A>T(p.Lys241Ter A potential role for germline RECQL mutations in breast and ovarian ) was found in a patient with breast cancer diagnosed at age 22. cancer susceptibility Conclusion: Pathogenic mutation frequency was 11.11% in our cohort. We K. De Leeneer, G. Wieme, L. Vergote, I. Coene, F. Malfait, T. Van Maerken, B. Poppe, K. suggest that mutation screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes by next gene- Claes; ration sequencing is a practical method for genetic testing of high risk po- CMGG Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. pulations. Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women and the con- ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAtIrNib u| tWionW oWf h.eErSedHitGar.yO sRusGceptibility has been well recognized. How2e6ve5r,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index rs616488 since the known moderate-to-high risk genes explain only 5% of breast can- rs204247 Homozygous 0.62 0.45-0.87 cer incidence, the identification of new genetic factors is crucial. Recently, Heterozygous 0.86 0.68-1.09 0.367 Homozygous 0.84 0.57-1.25 RecQ helicase-like (RECQL) was identified twice as a breast cancer suscep- Heterozygous 0.88 0.68-1.14 0.423 tibility gene by whole exome sequencing (Cybulski et al., 2015; Sun et al., Homozygous 1.04 0.75-1.45 2015). No other data on the prevalence of RECQL mutations in breast cancer We observed notably protective effect in the case of rs1436904 positi- susceptibility are currently available. ve and rs9693444 wild type genotype compared to rs1436904 wild type We evaluated the complete coding and splice site regions of RECQL in 323 and rs9693444 positive allele combination (OR=0.54; 95% CI=0.39-0.73; unrelated (BRCA1/2 and PALB2 negative) breast and ovarian cancer fami- p<0.001). Disease specific survival rates did not show significant prognostic lies referred to our center for genetic testing. Mutation detection was per- impact for any of tested variants. Worse prognosis trend (p=0.0877) was formed with a targeted resequencing approach starting with singleplex PCR, observed for rs9693444 positive and rs1436904 wild type genotype com- Nextera XT library preparation and sequencing by synthesis on a Miseq in- pared to rs1436904 positive and rs9693444 wildtype genotype. strument. Reads were mapped with the use of CLCbio v7 and called variants Conclusion: Rs9693444 proved association with increased breast cancer annotated by an automated pipeline using VEP and Alamut. Detected vari- risk, rs9693444 has a protective effect, but rs616488 and rs204247 has no ants were confirmed with Sanger sequencing. impact on breast cancer risk in given population. In total 12 unique sequence variants were identified, of these, two splice 
P12 .041 Funded by National Research Program BIOMEDICINE for Public Health. site variants (c.867+3A>T and c.1798-2 A>G) and one missense substitu- Genomic analysis of dual breast cancer tumors for determination of tion predicted to be damaging (c.1114G>A; p.Val372Ile) in the helicase do- tumor progression and evolution main warrant further investigation. These 3 novel variants were detected in G. Repiska1, T. Sedlackova2, M. Mego3, J. Radvanszky2, Z. Cierna4, M. Chovanec3, F. Duris5, families with a strong predisposition for ovarian cancer, hinting towards a N. Muratiova2, G. Minarik2; 1Comenius University in Bratislava, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Physiology, possible role for RECQL in ovarian cancer predisposition in the Belgian po- Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Comenius University in Bratislava, Faculty of Natural Sciences, pulation. In a second stage of this study the prevalence of RECQL mutations Department of Molecular Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Comenius University in will be evaluated in ovarian cancer families. Bratislava, Faculty of Medicine and National Cancer Institute, 2nd Department of Oncology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Comenius University in Bratislava, Faculty of Medicine, 
P12 .039 Institute of Pathological Anatomy, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Comenius University in Variants in eight cancer genes (AIP, ATM, BLM, BRIP, CHEK2, EXT2, Bratislava, Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Department of Computer FANCM and RECQ
L4 ) and breast cancer risk Science, Bratislava, Slovakia. M. Jakimovska1, K. Kubelka2, L. Stojanovska3, A. Arsovski3, M. Karagjozov2, D. Plaseska- Karanfilska1; 1Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Acibadem Sistina Hospital, Skopje, Macedonia, The Introduction: Cancer as disease is characterized by extreme genetic hete- Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3Re-Medika Hospital, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former rogeneity. Also when it comes to specific cancer types the heterogeneity is Yugoslav Republic of. still present not only on interindividual basis but also on intratumoral level. The genomic analysis of dual tumors originated from the same patient could bring new information in the field of detection of disease progression and Recently, a number of moderate and low susceptibility genes have been de- tumor evolution. monstrated to account for a significant breast cancer (BC) risk. In this study Materials and Methods: Dual breast cancer tumors of 4 patients were ana- we have screened 12 variants in eight cancer genes (AIP, ATM, BLM, BRIP, lyzed with ultradeep genomic sequencing. For genomic sequencing TruSeq CHEK2, EXT2, FANCM and RECQ
L4 ) among 180 familial breast cancer pati- Amplicon Cancer Panel and Miseq system were used. Gained genomic data ents and 180 controls from the general population, using a multiplex single were analyzed using BaseSpace standard analysis tool for TruSeq applica- based extension method. We have previously detected these variants among tions. After variant calling variants with frequency between 10% and 90% BC patients during the panel-based NGS screening of 94 cancer genes. Based were compared between the two samples originated from single patient. on ClinVar and/or type of the mutation, five variants were pathogenic, while Tumor specific variants were subsequently characterized in details. seven were variants of unknown significance (VUS). All VUS were predic- Results: After variant calling from 147 to 172 variants were identified. From ted as deleterious with at least two in silico prediction tools. The variants these 13 to 22 variants were present in 10 to 90% variant frequency and were either present with very low frequency (<0,3%) or were not found in except by both tumor samples shared vEaRriBaBn2ts in all tumor pairs at leasTt Po5n3e ExAC database, with the exception of FANCM c.4799C>T (2.7% among Eu- single tumor specific variant assoPcIKia3tCeAd with oncogenic effect was recorded. ropeans). We have detected higher number of variants (n=27) among BC These were represented by variants in (p. V777L and p.
L869 R), patients in comparison to the controls (n=13, p=0.0188). The most frequent (p.
P152 fs*14 and p.Y205S) and (p.Q546E and p.H1047R) genes. variant was FANCM c.4799C>T (2.22% in BC and 1.11 in controls), followed Conclusions: Identified shared as well as single tumor specific variants with by AIP c.47G>A, ATM c.7475T>G and AIP c.911G>A. FANCM c.1972C>T was confirmed oncogenic effect could be used in personalized disease progressi- found in one BC patient and two controls, BLM c.11T>C in one BC patient on molecular testing. Moreover, with addition of future prospectively gained and one control, while BLM c.1642C>T, BRI
P1  c.751C>T, CHEK2 c.1550G>A, biological samples and clinical information important knowledge about tu- EXT2 c.2034+1G>T and RECQ
L4  c.1868G>A were detected each in only mor evolution could be added. one BC patient. Detection of higher number of variants in these eight genes Acknowledgements among BC patients leads to the conclusion that these variants can be consi- Study was supported by grant APVV-14-0327. dered as risk factor for breast cancer. 
P12 .042 
P12 .040 Rescuing low tumor-content formalin-fixed paraffin embedded Impact of low penetrance variants on breast cancer morbidity (FFPE) biopsies for whole exome sequencing by DEPArray™ digital M. Ustinova, Z. Daneberga, M. Nakazawa-Miklaševiča, L. Kalniņa, E. Miklaševičs, J. sorting technology Gardovskis; C. Forcato1, J. Laliberte2, C. Bolognesi1, C. Schumacher2, G. Buson1, C. Mangano1, P. Riga Stradiņš University, Institute of Oncology, Riga, Latvia. Tononi1, F. Fontana1, G. Medoro1, T. Harkins2, N. Manaresi1; 1Silicon Biosystems, Bologna, Italy, 2Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. Introduction: Four of low-penetrance variants were chosen to test their im- pact on breast cancer morbidity and prognosis in the given population. Introduction: According to recent data from ongoing basket trials, about 1 Materials and Methods: Tested population consisted of 2,530 European de- in 5 patients presents with poor biopsies with small sample size, and/or scent breast cancer patients and 731 healthy gender matched controls. SNP low-tumor content due to admixture of normal cells, preventing them ac- genotyping was carried out by restriction fragment length polymorphism cess to precision oncology. Here we describe a workflow for whole-exome and TaqMan SNP genotyping assays. Data analysis was performed using the sequencing (WES) of pure populations of tumor cells obtained from very program Rv3.1.0. low tumor-cellularity FFPE samples using DEPArray™ sorting technology. Results: The diverse effect of variants on breast cancer risk was observed Materials and Methods: A FFPE 50µm thick section from breast infiltra- (Table1.). ting ductal carcinoma, with 10% tumor cellularity, was dissociated into a cell suspension. Using DEPArray™ digital sorter, 419 cells from 100%-pure SNP Zygosity OR 95% CI P-value Tarbsl9e6 19. 3
C4 as4e4–control study results. tumor and 497 cells from normal stromal subpopulations were recovered based on Keratin/Vimentin immunofluorescence and DNA content. After rs1436904 Heterozygous 1.39 1.11-1.75 0.005 lysis, Illumina® compatible libraries were prepared from cell-sorted or Homozygous 1.51 1-2.34 266 Heterozygous 0.79 E
S0 .H63G-1 2016 | 0B.0A0R8CELONDAN, AS-PexAtrIaNct e|d W saWmpWle.sE uSsHinGg .AOccRelG-NGS® 2S DNA Library Kit from SwiftABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Biosciences, amplified, enriched using SeqCap EZ MedExome enrichment kit are carriers of pathological mutations in BRCA2: p.Thr3033AsnfsTer11 or (Roche) and sequenced on a HiSeq 2500. p.Lys1590SerfsTer27. Results: Matched stromal/tumor analysis of B-allele frequency of hetero- Conclusion: In cases with cancer family history, the possibility to detect the zygous SNPs precisely identified Loss-of-Heterozygosity (LOH) regions, pathological mutations running in the pedigree is very high among patients as well as Copy-gain regions, both undetectable on genomic DNA extrac- (5 out of 6) and healthy relatives (6 out of 11) and can be determined by ted without sorting. We readily detected a clinically relevant homozygous using the TruSight Cancer Panel. (23/23=100% reads) T
P53 :p.
L111 R somatic mutation in a LOH region of 
P12 .045 sorted-tumor fraction, missed in unsorted gDNA, where mutation was not A capillary eletrophoresis-sequencing based screening solution for called as present in only 1 read out of 20 (5%). identifying and quantifying hotspot mutations in solid tumors Conclusions: DEPArray™ sorting combined with Accel-NGS® 2S library kit S. Jackson, A. Gerstner, K. Varma; enables WES on pure tumor and stroma of FFPE samples, offering a clear Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States. picture of tumor-specific variants including LOH and copy-numbers re- gardless of tumor cellularity. 
P12 .043 Sanger sequencing by capillary electrophoresis (CE) offers many advantages Calreticulin gene mutation status in JAK2 and MPL mutation negative over NGS screening, including simplified workflow, faster time-to-answer, essential thrombocytosis and primary myelofibrosis patients less expense, and easier data analysis. Coupled with Applied Biosystems™ E. O. Ote1, Y. K. Terzi1, S. Karakus2, F. I. Sahin1; Minor Variant Finder (MVF) software to detect low abundance alleles, these 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, features make front-line screening of solid tumors for oncogenic mutations Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Hematology, Ankara, by CE an attractive possibility. We have designed a panel for CE sequencing Turkey. consisting of 26 amplicons covering 66 COSMIC somatic mutations that are most commonly found in tumor DNA samples. A total 1972 COSMIC sites are covered by the panel. We screened 44 solid tumor FFPE samples from Introduction: JAK2 and MPL mutations are being used for diagnosis of Es- various tissues for these alleles. We found 34 samples with known hot- sential Trombocythemia (ET) and Primary Myelofibrosis (PMF), but 30- spot mutations. Allele frequencies determined by CE sequencing and MVF 40% of the patients do not carry any mutations of these genes. Recently, at these sites were highly correlative with Ion Torrent™ NGS-determined another gene called Calreticulin (CALR) has been reported to be involved in frequencies. Pathogenic alleles were detected down to frequencies of 5%. development of ET and PMF. In this study, we investigated the CALR mutati- Furthermore, minor variants were detectable in as little as 100pg of input on frequency, mutation types and their relevance to clinical findings. DNA. We demonstrated the utility of this approach by screening tissues with Materials and methods: 16 ET and 4 PMF patients were enrolled in this stu- unknown mutation profiles with the panel and identified and quantified dy. All patients were negative for JAK2 V617F, MPL W515K/L and 
S505 N hotspot mutations in known tumorigenic genes. Therefore, CE sequencing mutations. We investigated CALR mutation status with Sanger sequencing followed by MVF analysis provides a fast and simple first-line screen for pa- method. thogenic alleles in FFPE tumor samples. Results: The mutation rate was 25% in general. However, we did not find any mutations in patients with PMF. We detected three different mutations 
P12 .046 (31.25%) in 5 patients with ET. Three of the mutations were 52 base pairs Whole genome approaches reveal complex genomic rearrangements (bp) deletion (Type I mutation, c.1092_1143del), one was 5 bp insertion on a Mesothelioma tumor genome: preliminary findings of a cohort (Type II mutation, c.1154_1155insTTGTC) and the last one was 46 bp dele- study tion (c.1094_1139del). All patients with Type I mutation were women and T. TUNCE
L1 , M. Metintaş2, G. Ak2, &. Değirmenci1, H. Güneş1; 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, the mean age (23.3y) was found to be significantly lower compared to all Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi University Medical Faculty, Department of Chest groups (p=0.003). Diseases, Eskisehir, Turkey. Conclusions: The results showed that the mutation rate and types were si- milar to the previous reports. New prospective studies with larger cohort will help us to understand the effect of CALR mutations in the development Malign Mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive malignancy originating from and prognosis of myeloproliferative neoplasms. pleura, pericardia, heart and abdomen layers. Asbestos exposure is the main This study has been approved by Baskent University Institutional Review risk factor for the MM. Individuals with asbestos exposure have the high- Board (Project No: KA14/318) and supported by Baskent University Re- er risk to get MM. Asbestos exposure has many known pathological effects search Fund. to the cell, but its effect mechanism and impact on the human genome still 
P12 .044 remains unclear. It is known that cancer genomes possess many complex Germline alterations in cancer patients and unaffected individuals genomic anomalies and heterogeneity with patient specific patterns. As with family history the genome-wide scanning technologies and their analyzing methods evol- S. K. Karachanak-Yankova1, Z. Hammoudeh1, G. Antov1,2, S. Ivanov3, L. Balabanski3, R. ve, our understanding and knowledge of cancer genome structure gain a Vazharova3, M. Malinov3, D. Toncheva1,3; high-resolution perspective. In this study, we combined Whole genome SNP 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Array and Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) methods to map a Mesothe- Bulgaria, 2Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Genetics ‘Academician Doncho lioma genomes’ complex genomic architecture. Pleural Tumor of a Malign Kostov’, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Genomic laboratory, SBALGAR “Malinov”, Sofia, Bulgaria. Mesothelioma patient with known asbestos exposure used for genomic DNA isolation who diagnosed in Eskisehir Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Chest Diseases Department. Tumor genome scanned with a combined ef- Introduction: Approximately 10% of all types of cancer are hereditary disor- fort both SNP array and WGS, as a result, we discovered both massive intra- ders due to germline mutations, which can be transmitted to the offspring. chromosomal structural anomalies affecting several chromosomes within The aim of the present study is to detect germline cancer-associated altera- Chromothripsis patterns on chromosomes 10, 12, 14 and inter-chromoso- tions, which increase the cancer risk among carriers, using next-generation mal rearrangements resulting formation of fusion genes including WDR70- sequencing. NXPH1, SKA3-DDX10, TSHZ2-SL
C35 A1. We also detected copy number los- Materials and methods: We have analyzed 17 blood DNA samples from indi- ses of some major cancer-related genes which are confirmed with both two viduals with family history: 6 patients (4 -with breast cancer, 1 -with ovarian methods. According to our results, we suggest that some genomic anomalies and 1 -with colorectal cancer) and 11 unaffected persons (10 with breast especially fusion genes can be implied as precision medicine targets for fu- cancer relatives and 1 with colorectal cancer relatives). The analysis was ture. performed using the TruSight Cancer Panel, which includes 94 genes and The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (No:115
S819 ) 284 SNPs associated with predisposition to cancer. and ESOGU BAP(No:2013-209) supported the study. Results: We have detected the following alterations: (i) the colorectal can- cer patient and the unaffected person with family history both carry pro- bably pathological mutations in the APC gene, namely p.Glu1573LysfsTer3 and p.Ala1283Pro; (ii) the ovarian cancer patient carries the pathological p.Val1663LeufsTer6 mutation in the BRCA2 gene; (iii) three out of four bre- ast cancer patients have pathological mutations in the following genes: T
P53  (193H>LH), BRCA2 (p.Ala938ProfsTer21) and BRCA1 (p.Gly1232Glyfs). Among the 10 unaffected persons wEitSh HbrGea 2st0 c1a6nc e| rB fAamRiClyE hLisOtoNryA f,iv Se PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 267ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .048 
P12 .050 Identification of microRNAs differentially expressed in Human Larynx Molecular basis of resistance of chondrosarcomas to conventional Cancer Stem-Like Cells. therapies M. Ozen1,2, O. Karatas3, I. Suer4, B. Yuceturk5, M. Yilmaz6, B. Oz7, G. Guven8, H. Cansiz6, C. J. J. Aury-Landas, N. Girard, M. Barreau, E. Lhuissier, K. Boumediene, C. Baugé; Creighton9, M. Ittmann10,11; EA4652 - BioConnecT team - Université de Caen Normandie, Caen, France. 1Biruni University Medical School Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical School, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, Erzurum Technical Chondrosarcomas are malignant tumors of bone. They are considered as University, Erzurum, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Advanced Genomics resistant to both chemotherapy and radiations. This emergent study aims and Bioinformatics Research Center, The Scientific and Technological Research Council to unravel the molecular mechanisms involved in the resistance of chon- of Turkey (TUBITAK), Kocaeli, Turkey, 6Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Cerrahpasa drosarcomas to cisplatin or to X-ray treatments by an innovative strategy of Medical School, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Department of Pathology, Istanbul comparative functional genomics. University, Cerrahpasa School of Medicine., Istanbul, Turkey, 8Department of Medical We observed, using five cell lines derived from human chondrosarcomas, Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul University., Istanbul, Turkey, 9Department that they had distinct responses to cisplatin or to X-ray treatments. To un- of Medicine and Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center Division of Biostatistics, Baylor College derstand the molecular basis of these different sensitivities, we performed of Medicine., Houston, TX, United States, 10Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine., Houston, TX, United States, 11Michael E. DeBakey VAMC, whole-exome sequencing on the cell lines. After strict filtration, 245 to 476 Houston, TX, United States. rare coding or splice variants per cell line were predicted to have a delete- rious functional impact on the protein. We applied targeted, then pangeno- mic approaches to select relevant variants. We identified 66 mutated genes Background: microRNAs are associated with regulation of distinct physio- potentially implicated in the response to therapy. Interestingly, recurrent pathological processes including development of normal stem cells and loss of function mutations of a tumor suppressor gene were identified in carcinogenesis. In this study we aimed to investigate microRNA profile of the three most resistant cell lines in which no apoptosis is induced by X-rays Cancer stem-like cells isolated form freshly resected larynx cancer (LCa) nor cisplatin. This gene is actionable by targeted chemotherapy. Functional tissue samples. analyses are in progress to validate the role of this very promising gene mu- Materials and Methods: CD133-high stem-like cells were isolated from tations and of the 65 other genes in resistance to treatments. freshly resected LCa tumor specimens. MicroRNA profile of 12 pair of In conclusion, chondrosarcoma cell lines respond differently to conventional CD133-high and CD133-low cells was determined using microRNA microar- therapies. In addition, our study is the first one which extensively characte- ray and differential expressions of selected microRNAs were validated by rized commonly used human chondrosarcoma cell lines by whole-exome quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR). sequencing. Our preliminary results provide essential genetic information Results: MicroRNA profiling of CD133-high and CD133-low LCa samples re- on resistance mechanisms through the identification of genes potentially vealed that miR-26b, miR-203, miR-200c, and miR-363-3p were significant- involved in the response to cisplatin and X-ray radiations. ly downregulated and miR-1825 was upregulated in CD133high larynx 
P12 .051 CSLCs. qRT-PCR analysis in a total of 25 CD133-high/ CD133-low paired TS
C2  mutations in a chromophobe renal cell carcinoma patient with samples were confirmed the altered expressions of these five microRNAs. extraordinary response to temsirolimus. Expressions of miR-26b, miR-200c, and miR-203 were significantly corre- J. Roldán-Romero1, J. Maroto2, G. Anguera2, M. Apellániz-Ruiz1, F. Algaba3, C. Montero- lated with miR-363-3p, miR-203, and miR-363-3p expressions, respectively. Conde1,3, A. Cascón1,3,4, M. Robledo1,3,4, C. Rodríguez-Antona1,3,4; Furthermore, in silico analysis revealed that these microRNAs target both 1Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Human Cancer Genetics Programme, Spanish cancer and stem-cell associated signaling pathways. National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Oncology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Pathology, Conclusions: Our results showed that certain microRNAs in CD133-high Fundacio Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de cells could be used as cancer stem cell markers. Based on these results, we Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain. propose that this panel of microRNAs might carry crucial roles in LCa patho- genesis through regulating stem cell properties of tumor cells. Grant support:The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey Background: Temsirolimus, an inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapa- (210T009) mycin (mTOR), is an effective anti-cancer drug. There are large variations in 
P12 .049 response among patients, in part explained by mutations activating mTOR A long-term multidisciplinary surveillance program for patients with pathway. Here, we present a metastatic chromophobe renal cell carcinoma the Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome. patient with complete response at metastatic sites and 80% size reduction P. R. Benusiglio, D. Lejri, M. Di Maria, P. Burtin, O. Caron, D. Malka; of the renal tumor after temsirolimus treatment. After nephrectomy and 5 Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France. years after temsirolimus the patient developed a retroperitoneal adenopa- thy that was resected. Currently, >7 years after temsirolimus, the patient is disease-free. Introduction. The Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer Syndrome (HDGC) is Patients and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was performed on the caused by germline mutations in the E-cadherin gene CDH1. Carriers have primary tumor, the retroperitoneal adenopathy and normal blood. Soma- a high risk of signet-ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) and lobular breast cancer tic single nucleotide variants and small insertions or deletions leading to (LBC, women only). They require long-term multidisciplinary management, non-synomymous coding or splice site variants were identified. Immunohi- as stated in the latest international guidelines, and ideally in centres of ex- stochemical detection of TS
C2  and phospho- ribosomal protein (p
S6 ) was cellence. We are about to set up a systematic surveillance program for car- performed. riers, and therefore needed a clear picture describing their management Results: Whole exome sequencing revealed two concurrent inactivating at our Institution. Methods. We collected data for patients who had tested mutations in tuberous sclerosis 2 (TS
C2 ), a critical negative regulator of positive for a CDH1 mutation at the Gustave-Roussy-Cancer-Campus-Grand- mTOR Complex 1. One was a splicing defect (c.5069-1G>C) in intron 39 of Paris and who were alive as of 11th-Feb-2016. Results. We identified twenty TS
C2 , and the other consisted on two nucleotide substitutions in exon 28 carriers from seven families. Five have a history of SRCC, one of LBC. Of the (c. 3200_3201delinsAA; p.V1067E). These mutations abolished TS
C2  acti- fifteen with no SRCC history, ten have already had risk-reducing gastrectomy vity and increased mTOR pathway activation, as demonstrated by increased (RRG), three are planning to do so, one is refusing the procedure and one has phosphorylation of 
S6 , suggesting they constituted the basis for the excep- not collected his test results. Carriers with a history of cancer benefit from tional temsirolimus response. regular surveillance. The picture is however more complex for unaffected Conclusions: Whole exome sequencing in patients with extraordinary drug carriers. For example, follow-up ceased about six months after RRG for all responses have the potential to uncover mechanisms that underlie drug but two. Regarding LBC, formal screening is rarely in place. Conclusion. The- sensitivity. Specifically, sequencing of mTOR pathway in chromophobe renal re is room for improvement in the management of HDGC patients. We are cell carcinoma may serve to prioritize mTOR inhibitor treatment and guide setting up a long-term multidisciplinary surveillance program, in which we therapy in these patients. aim to address the following issues in particular: 1-the physical, metabolic, and quality-of-life consequences of RRG, 2-SRRC screening and incidence in patients delaying RRG, 3-LBC screening and incidence, and requests for risk- reducing mastectomy. 268 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .052 Prognostic impact of chromosomal translocations in myelodysplastic syndromes and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia patients. A study merit further functional studies for confirmation. by the spanish group of myelodysplastic syndromes Funding: European Commission (F
P7 /2007-2013) under grant agreement D. Costa1, X. Calvo1, A. Pereira1, A. Carrió1, F. Solé2, E. Luño3, J. Cervera4, T. Vallespí5, C. number 625356. 
P12 .054 Muñoz1, C. Gómez1, A. Arias1, E. Such4, G. Sanz4, J. Grau6, A. Insunza7, M. Calasanz8, M. Detailed analysis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cases with single Ardañaz9, J. Hernández10, G. Azaceta11, S. Alvarez12, J. Sánchez13, M. Martín14, J. Bargay15, V. Gómez16, C. Cervero17, M. Allegue18, R. Collado19, E. Campo1, J. Esteve1, B. Nomdedeu1, M. T
P53  mutation Nomdedeu1; K. Plevova1,2, J. Malcikova1,2, J. Kotaskova1,2, M. Trbusek2, J. Smardova2, E. Diviskova2, A. 1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Josep Carreras Leukemia Research, Badalona, Spain, Oltova2, Y. Brychtova2, M. Doubek1,2, S. Pospisilova1,2; 3Hospital Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 4Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, 1Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, Spain, 55Hospital Vall d’Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, 6Hospital Germans Trias I Pujol, 2University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. Badalona, Spain, 7Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla, Santander, Spain, 8Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 99Hospital Txagorritxu, Vitoria, Spain, 10Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 11Hospital Clínico Universitario de Introduction: In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), somatic defects of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 1212Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, T
P53  gene represent an adverse prognostic marker. In the majority of af- Spain, 13Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía de Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain, 14Hospital fected cases, T
P53  is inactivated on both alleles due to the concurrent mu- Doce de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 15Hospital Son Llàtzer, Mallorca, Spain, 16Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain, 17Hospital Virgen de la Luz, Cuenca, Spain, tation and deletion. However, in ~30% of cases, only single T
P53  mutation 18Complexo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain, 19Hospital General de (T
P53 mut) without deletion is detected. We aimed to perform a detailed Valencia, Valencia, Spain. analysis of the second T
P53  allele in these cases and to assess their genomic makeup. Materials and methods: Separated CLL lymphocytes were investigated. Introduction: Chromosomal translocations are rare in the myelodysplastic T
P53  mutations were analyzed using FASAY assay and direct sequencing. syndromes (MDS) and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). With the 17p13 deletions were assessed by iFISH. Genome-wide analysis was perfor- exception of t(3q), translocations are not explicitly considered in the cyto- med on CytoScanHD arrays (Affymetrix). genetic classification of the IPSS-R and their impact on disease progression Results: We identified 179 CLL cases with T
P53  disruption; 56/179 patients and patient survival is unknown. The present study was aimed at determi- (31%) harbored single T
P53 mut with allelic frequency ranging 10-100%. ning the prognostic impact of translocations in the context of the cytogene- We selected 22 cases with single T
P53 mut for CytoScan analysis. Interestin- tic classification of the IPSS-R. gly, copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (cn-LOH) in a subclone of CLL lym- Material and Methods: We evaluated 1,653 patients from the Spanish Regi- phocytes was detected in 11/22 cases. In 9/22 cases no abnormality in 17p stry of MDS diagnosed with MDS or CMML and an abnormal karyotype by locus was observed. In the remaining 2/22 cases, heterozygous deletion was conventional cytogenetic analysis. newly detected. When we compared genomic complexity of leukemic clo- Results: Translocations were identified in 168 patients (T group). Compared nes with monoallelic vs biallelic (cn-LOH-only) T
P53 mut, the latter group with the 1,485 patients with abnormal karyotype without translocations exhibited significantly more genomic abnormalities (4 vs 6 chromosomal (non-T group), the T group had a larger proportion of patients with refrac- defects, p=0.0121). However, there was no difference in overall survival bet- tory anemia with excess of blasts and higher scores in both the cytogenetic ween the groups. and global IPSS-R. Translocations were associated with a significantly shor- Conclusion: cn-LOH in 17p locus is a frequent finding in cases with single ter survival and higher incidence of transformation into AML at univariate T
P53 mut leading to biallelic T
P53  inactivation and should be considered in analysis but both features disappeared after multivariate adjustment for the T
P53  testing in CLL. IPSS-R cytogenetic category. Patients with single or double translocations Acknowledgement: Supported by the project AZV-MZCR 15-31834A, and other than t(3q) had an outcome similar to those in the non-T group in the the EU Horizon2020 project No 692298. intermediate cytogenetic risk category of the IPSS-R. 
P12 .055 Conclusion: The presence of translocations identifies a subgroup of MDS/ A heritable form of SMARC
E1 -related meningiomas with important CMML patients with a more aggressive clinical presentation that can be ex- implications for follow-up and family screening plained by a higher incidence of complex karyotypes. Single or double trans- E. H. Gerkes1, J. Fock1, W. den Dunnen1, M. van Belzen2, C. van der Lans2, E. Hoving1, I. locations other than t(3q) should be explicitly considered into the interme- Fakkert1, M. Smith3, D. Evans3, M. Olderode-Berends1; diate risk category of cytogenetic IPSS-R classification. 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, 
P12 .053 Manchester, United Kingdom. Germline mutational landscape of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia A. Prasad1,2,3, G. Escaramis1,2,3, H. Susak1,2,3, M. Bossio1,2,3, L. Domenech1,2,3, O. Drechsel1,2,3, G. Castaño4, R. Rabionet1,2,3, I. Gut5, M. Kogevinas4, E. Campo6, C. Lopez-Otin7, S. Ossowski1,2,3, X. Estivill1,2,3; Introduction: Recently, a new hereditary tumor predisposition syndrome 1Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), has been discovered, resulting in an increased risk for spinal and intracra- Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP), Barcelona, nial clear cell meningiomas (CCMs) in young patients. Heterozygous loss-of- Spain, 4Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), Barcelona, function germline mutations in the SMARC
E1  gene are causative, giving rise Spain, 5National Centre of Genomic Analysis (CNAG), Barcelona, Spain, 6Clinic Hospital to an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain, 7University of Oviedo, Molecular Cancer Institute, Oviedo, Case report: We report on an extended family with a pediatric CCM pati- Spain. ent and an adult CCM patient and several asymptomatic relatives carrying a germline SMARC
E1  mutation. Discussion: We discuss difficulties in genetic counseling for this heritable Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a cancer of B-lymphocytes, which condition. Because of the few reported cases so far, the lifetime risk of de- expands in the bone marrow, lymph nodes, spleen and blood. Many genes veloping meningiomas for SMARC
E1  mutation carriers is unclear and the have been implicated in CLL development through sequencing the tumor complete tumor spectrum is unknown. There is no surveillance guideline genome. However, these studies do not completely explain the pathogene- for asymptomatic carriers nor a long-term follow-up recommendation for sis of the disease, nor do they define the early events that lead the B-cells SMARC
E1 -related CCM patients as yet. Until more information is available to accumulate the different types of somatic mutations leading to CLL. The about the penetrance and tumor spectrum of the condition, we propose the aim of this project is to identify the landscape of germline risk factors that following screening advice for asymptomatic SMARC
E1  mutation carriers: can predispose an individual to CLL. In particular, we have designed a rare neurological examination and MRI of the brain and spine, yearly from dia- variant association study based on the hypothesis that rare mutations are gnosis until the age of 18 and once every 3 years thereafter, or in between more likely to affect the function of the proteins and may modulate risk for if there are clinical symptoms. This advice can also be used for long-term complex diseases. We have analyzed exome-sequencing data on 450 CLL ca- patient follow-up. More data is needed to optimize this proposed screening ses (normal and tumor samples) respectively, from the Spanish CLL ICGC advice. consortium and performed rare variant association study with 950 controls from our in-house exomes. We identified genes that were enriched in our CLL cohort than in controls. We designed a targeted sequencing panel con- sisting of 358 genes, 945 cancer susceptible SNPs and 166 microRNAs. Se- quencing was performed in a cohort of 95 CLELR, 9
C5 C 4prMosEtTate canNcCeArP aGn2d 290 healthy control samples. The most relevant genes we have identified that are associated with susceptibility to CLL are , and . The results imply an important possible E coS mH pG on e2 n0 t 1 o6 f C | L B L A paR thC oE gL enO esN isA a, n S d PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 269ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .056 
P12 .059 Spectrum of BCR-ABL Kinase domain mutations: A cohort study from Aberrant DNA methylation in inherited and sporadic colorectal Saudi Arabia cancer H. Abalkhail, S. Khalil; N. Sahnane1, F. Magnoli1, B. Bernasconi1, M. Tibiletti1, M. Pedroni2, M. Ponz de Leon2, King Faisal Special hospital & RC, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. G. Magnani2, C. Romualdi3, L. Reggiani-Bonetti2, L. Bertario4, S. Signoroni4, F. Sessa1, D. Furlan1, Italian Association for the Study of Familial andHereditary Gastrointestinal Tumors (AIFEG); 1University of Insubria, Varese, Italy, 2University of Modena-Reggio Emilia, Modena, Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal myeloproliferative neoplasm Italy, 3CRIBI Biotechnology Center, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 4National Cancer (MPN) associated with a characteristic translocation between chromoso- Institute-Milano, Milan, Italy. me 9 and 22 to form Philadelphia chromosome (Ph). The introduction of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) imatinib for CML marked a new era for targeted therapy. In general CML patients in chronic phase (CP) have a very Introduction:Aberrant DNA methylation has been widely investigated in good response to TKIs. A significant proportion harbor molecular residual sporadic colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) but less information is available disease and develop acquired resistance, in which mutations in the Abl ki- about the role of epigenetics in hereditary CRC. nase domain are the best known cause of resistance.celerated phase and Patients and Material:LINE-1 hypomethylation and gene-specific hyperme- blast phase.In this retrospective study, we assessed the ABL kinase domain thylation of 38 promoters were analyzed in multicenter series of 220 CRCs mutation in 165 patients referred from our clinics between 2011-2015 with including 71 microsatellite unstable Lynch CRCs (LS-MSI), 23 CRCs of young Ph positive CML displaying either refractory to TKI or resistance displaying patients without inherited syndromes (EO-MSS), and 126 sporadic CRCs, increase BCR-AB
L1  levels monitored by Quantitative PCR. Mutation analysis comprising 28 MSI-unstable (S-MSI) and 98 microsatellite-stable cases (S- was performed on RNA extracted from either blood or Bone marrows after MSS). All tumor methylation patterns were integrated with clinico-patho- amplification of the BCR/AB
L1  transcript by nested PCR followed by Direct logical and genetic characteristics, namely chromosomal instability (CIN), sequencing of the BCR-AB
L1  Kinase domain including residues 243-487. T
P53  loss, BRAF, and KRAS mutations. In total, 165 patients (78 Females and 87 males), Age between 10-80 years Results:LS-MSI mainly displayed absence of extensive DNA hypo- and hy- (median age: 38 years) of which 160 were adults and 5 pediatrics were ana- permethylation. A subset of LINE-1 hypomethylated LS-MSI showed G>A lyzed. Among 1653 patients, 35 (21%) were positive for 14 different mu- transition in the KRAS gene, absence of CIN and T
P53  loss and an unfavo- tations across the AB
L1  Kinase domain mutations (12 patients had T315I, urable prognosis. S-MSI exhibited extensive gene hypermethylation, MLH1 4 patients had the following: 
E255 K and Y253H, 2 patients had each of methylation, BRAF mutation and absence of CIN and T
P53  loss. By contrast, the following mutation: H396R, F359 and F317L. Additionally, one patient S-MSS showed marked LINE-1 hypomethylation and CIN and they had a with each of the following mutations: 
E355 G, V299L, 
L248 V, 
L298 , Y326H, worse prognosis. EO-MSS were a genetically and epigenetically heteroge- M244V, G250E and 
E453 K). 
P12 .058 neous group. Like LS-MSI, some EO-MSS displayed low rates of DNA hypo- Exome sequencing data analysis to characterize rare germline copy or hypermethylation and frequent KRAS G>A transitions. By contrast, some number variants involved in colorectal cancer predisposition EO-MSS showed similar features to those observed in S-MSS, such as LINE-1 S. Franch-Expósito1, C. Esteban-Jurado1, P. Garre2, I. Quintanilla1, S. Durán1, M. hypomethylation, CIN and T
P53  deletion. In all four classes, hypermethyla- Cuatrecasas3, E. Samper1, J. Muñoz1, T. Ocaña1, S. Carballal1, M. López-Cerón1, A. Castells1, tion of ESR1, GATA5, and WT1 was very common. E. consortium1, M. Vila-Casadesús4, E. Serra5, S. Beltran5, J. Carvajal6, L. Bujanda7, C. Conclusion:Aberrant DNA methylation analysis allows the identification of Ruiz-Ponte8, J. Camps1, M. Gironella1, J. Lozano4, F. Balaguer1, J. Cubiella9, T. Caldés2, S. different subsets of CRCs. This study suggests that LINE-1 hypomethylation Castellvi-Bel1; may be a useful prognostic marker in both sporadic and inherited CRCs. 1IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic, CIBEREHD, Barcelona, Spain, 2IdISSC, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 3Pathology, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 4Bioinformatics, 
P12 .060 CIBEREHD, Barcelona, Spain, 5CNAG, Barcelona, Spain, 6Centro Andaluz de Biología del Prognostic assessment of colorectal cancer using clustering analysis Desarrollo, Sevilla, Spain, 7Gastroenterology, CIBEREHD, Hospital Donostia, Donosti, N. I. Pospekhova, Y. A. Shelygin, S. I. Achkasov, O. I. Sushkov, S. A. Frolov, O. A. Spain, 8FPGMX, CIBERER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 9Gastroenterology, CIBEREHD, Mainovskaya, A. A. Ponomarenko, A. S. Tsukanov, V. P. Shubin; Hospital de Ourense, Ourense, Spain. State Scientific Centre of Coloproctology, Moscow, Russian Federation. Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) represents the third most common Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a clinically and molecularly heterogeneous disea- cancer worldwide. On the other hand, copy number variants (CNV) are se. Different subtypes of tumors have different prognosis and sensitivity to structural variations larger than 1 kilobase (kb) displaying copy number target and chemotherapy. The aim of the work was to determing different differences either polymorphic or related with predisposition to disease. prognostic subgroups keeping in mind cancer with peritoneal carcinomato- Materials and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed in sis (PC) to be the worst prognosis group. germline DNA from 38 families with strong CRC aggregation without altera- Methods. We analyzed samples obtained from 41 patients with PC and 58 tions in known hereditary genes. To identify rare CNV that could correspond CRC stage I-III including 7 patients with Lynch syndrome (LS). 12-gene to the mutational event for CRC predisposition, WES data was analyzed with expression signature has been carried out for all tumors by RT-PCR. RAS/ ExomeDepth and CoNIFER tools. Variants shared by family members were BRAF mutations and MSI were analyzed by sequencing and fragment analy- prioritized and compared with the Database of Genomic Variants catalogue sis. Hierarchical clustering has been used for data analysis. and our Spanish database. Variants were selected and validation and as well Results. Cluster analysis identified 4 groups of samples. Genes SFR
P2 , TNC, as segregation analysis were performed by comparative genomic hybridiza- ZEB1, MU
C2 , VIM were the most significant for clustering. Seven cases have tion (CGH). Gene expression analysis (arrays and qRT-PCR) were conducted been included in Cluster 1 (MU
C2 /TFF3 presence, SFR
P2 /ZEB1 absence); in both germline and tumor cDNA and tumor immunohistochemistry (IHC) 36 cases - Cluster 2 (TNC presence, MU
C2 /TFF3 absence); 24 - Cluster 3 was also performed. (SFR
P2 /TNC/VIM presence, MU
C2 /TFF3 absence); 32 - Cluster 4 (SFR
P2 / Results: Sixteen candidate CNV were detected in 15 families. The most inte- MU
C2 /TFF3 absence). Distribution of CRC with PC among clusters was resting CNV corresponded to a duplication in chromosome 1 spanning 400 9.8%; 29.3%; 34.1%; 26.8% cases; CRC stage I-III - 5.1%; 41.4%; 17.1%; kb that was confirmed by CGH and family segregation was correct. TTF2, 36.2% cases, respectively. RAS mutations were more common in Cluster 1 TRIM45, VTCN1 and miR942 were affected by the duplication. Gene expres- and 3 whereas MSI-H in Cluster 2 and 4. Four from 5 BRAF-V600E were sion data indicated TTF2 and miR942 overexpression in duplication carri- found in Cluster 3. ers. Tumor IHC showed TTF2 protein overexpression and underexpression Conclusion. The prevalence CRC with PC in Cluster 3 and its association with of the TMEM158 protein, a predicted target of miR942. BRAF-mutation confirms aggressiveness, high metastatic potential and poor Conclusions: The duplication in chromosome 1 could correspond to the mu- prognosis of this tumor group. Molecular classification of CRC can serve for tational event involved in the predisposition to CRC in the carrier family by disease prognosis assessment suggesting specific treatment for each case. overexpressing TTF2 and miR942, which would lead to TMEM158 under- expression. 
P12 .061 The Fanconi anemia DNA damage repair pathway in the spotlight for germline predisposition to colorectal cancer C. Esteban-Jurado1, S. Franch-Expósito1, J. Muñoz1, T. Ocaña1, S. Carballal1, M. López-Cerón1, M. Cuatrecasas2, M. Vila-Casadesús3, J. Lozano3, E. Serra4, S. Beltran4, E. consortium1, A. Brea-Fernández5, C. Ruiz-Ponte5, A. Castells1, L. Bujanda6, P. Garre7, T. Caldés7, J. Cubiella8, F. Balaguer1, S. Castellví-Bel1; 1IDIBAPS, CIBEREHD, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Pathology, Hospital Clínic, 270 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Barcelona, Spain, 3Bioinformatics, CIBEREHD, Barcelona, Spain, 4CNAG, Barcelona, Spain, 5FPGMX, CIBERER, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 6Gastroenterology, CIBEREHD, Hospital Donostia, Donosti, Spain, 7IdISSC, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, non-tumor tissues to assess the diagnostic value of this biomarker in co- 8Gastroenterology, CIBEREHD, Hospital de Ourense, Ourense, Spain. lorectal cancer and its relationship with the clinicopathological features of patients. Methods: Total RNA was extracted from 48 pairs of colorectal tumor tissue Introduction: Germline mutations in genes from the Fanconi anemia (FA) and adjacent non-tumor tissue. Afterwards cDNAs were synthesized and the DNA damage repair pathway are known to cause FA and breast and ovarian expression level of PTEN was quantified by real time PCR. The Correlation cancer predisposition. Very recently, mutations in BRCA2, FAN1 and BLM between the expression level of PTEN and clinicopathological features was genes have been postulated to cause familial colorectal cancer (CRC). studied and the capability of PTEN to function as a CRC tumor marker was Material and methods: Seventy-four patients from 40 families with strong also explored. CRC aggregation without alterations in the known hereditary genes were Results: The expression levels of PTEN (P<0.001) were significantly de- selected from four Spanish hospitals and the EPICOLON consortium. Whole- creased in colorectal tumors compared to adjacent non-tumor tissues. The exome sequencing was performed and variant filtering selected only very Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis on PTEN showed rare alterations, shared by individuals from the same family, with a putative that the area under the ROC curve was high (0.83). No correlation was ob- loss of function and located in genes with a role compatible with cancer. served between PTEN expression levels and clinicopathological features of Results: We detected enrichment for variants in the FA DNA damage re- patients. pair pathway genes in our cohort since six families carried heterozygous, Conclusion: Our results suggest that PTEN can serve as an important pro- rare (<0.01%), potentially pathogenic variants located in BRCA2/FANCD1, gnostic indicator in colorectal cancer and may provide valuable information BRI
P1 /FANCJ, FANCC, FANCE and REV3L/POLZ. Three of the variants corre- to diagnosis and targeted therapy purposes. 
P12 .064 sponded to frameshift alterations and three to missense variants predicted Expression of inhibitors of TRAIL apoptotic pathway in colorectal to be deleterious. Somatic studies also revealed loss of heterozygosity for tumours four of the variants. Interestingly, extracolonic neoplasms including gastric, S. Tsikalakis1, I. Chatziandreou1, O. Dimopoulou1, N. V. Michalopoulos2, G. breast, uterine, and prostate were present in five families. Theodoropoulos2, E. Patsouris1, A. Saetta1; Conclusions: Although further studies are needed to confirm its contribu- 1National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School, Department of tion, the FA DNA damage repair pathway could play an important role in Pathology, Athens, Greece, 2National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical the inherited predisposition to CRC. It is important to highlight also that School, 1st Department of Propaedeutic Surgery Hippokrateion Hospital, Athens, Greece. pleiotropy is becoming important in germline predisposition to cancer sin- ce a higher number genes may be involved in the genetic predisposition to a broader spectrum of neoplasms. Introduction: TRAIL (TNF related apoptosis inducing factor) is a member of 
P12 .062 the tumor necrosis factor superfamily which has been considered as a pro- Plasma RAS mutations for the selection and monitoring of colorectal mising drug target for cancer therapy due to its ability to selectively induce cancer patients treated with anti-EGFR therapy A. Dalmases1, J. Vidal1, M. Vela1, M. Muset1, G. Piquer1, L. Visa1, R. Correa1, G. López1, V. apoptotic death in transformed cells. Inhibitors of TRAIL induced apoptosis Sikri2, J. Albanell1, F. Jones2, C. Montagut1, B. Bellosillo1; include c-FLIP, XIAP, Mcl-1, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL genes. 1Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 2Sysmex Inostics Inc, Mundelein, IL, United States. Methods: 106 colorectal tumours (63 males, 43 females, median age 70 years) along with 20 normal tissues were analysed using RT-PCR, for relati- ve mRNA expression analysis with ΔΔCt method for total c-FLIP, XIAP, Mcl-1, Introduction: RAS testing in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients Bcl-2, Bcl-xL. Statistical analysis was performed in order to correlate relative in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is being investigated as a new method for mRNA levels with clinicopathological characteristics and with previous data detection and monitoring of actionable mutations. on relative mRNA expression of TRAIL, DR4, DR5, DcR1, and DcR2 genes. Material and Methods: 38 mCRC patients with known RAS status in tissue Results: Elevated mRNA levels were observed as follows: Bcl-2 16%,Mcl-1 sample were analysed. Plasma mutations were determined with Sysmex 8.7%, XIAP 4.9% and total c-FLIP 2.2%. Additionally, reduced mRNA levels Inostics BEAMing34 RAS mutation panel and compared to standard-of-care were observed for: total c-FLIP 88%, Bcl-2 84%, Bcl-xL 80%, XIAP 38.7% (SOC) RAS testing in tissue samples. and Mcl-1 96%. XIAP reduced mRNA levels were correlated with older pati- Results: Plasma and tissue results showed a concordance of 89.5% (table). ents (over 70 years old) and with smaller tumour size, T1/2. Finally, TRAIL In 2 patients in which a RAS mutation was identified in plasma but not in ligand mRNA levels were correlated with stage and DcR1 elevated mRNA tissue, one was treated with anti-EGFR therapy and did not respond; in the levels with patients’ age. other, the mutation was also detected in tissue by BEAMing re-examination. Conclusions: Apart from decoy receptors’ over expression, a small subset of In one of two cases in which a RAS mutation was detected in tissue but not cases showed elevated mRNA levels of apoptosis resistance genes. Our re- in plasma, BEAMing determination in tissue confirmed the same mutation sults depict a potential significant role of XIAP expression in limiting tumour detected by SOC. growth during colon tumorigenesis. TRAIL expression emerged as an early Longitudinal analysis of RAS mutations in serial plasma samples from 5 pa- event, possibly delaying disease progression. 
P12 .065 tients that progressed to anti-EGFR, showed emergence of RAS mutations in Field synopsis of genetic variation and colorectal cancer: unified 2016 2 patients (40%). update Conclusions: The high overall concordance between tissue and plasma BE- J. Little1, E. Theodoratou2, W. Zheng3, Z. Montazeri1; AMing determination supports the blood-based testing to determinate the 1University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United eligibility of CRC patients for anti-EGFR treatment. The detection of RAS Kingdom, 3Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, United States. mutations in plasma at progression to anti-EGFR suggests that BEAMing 34 RAS mutation panel may be used to monitor resistance. Tissue RAS Result Plasma RAS Positive Negative Total Background: According to current predictions of global demographic chan- Result ges, the WHO estimates a 77% increase in colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence Positive Negative and 80% increase in CRC-related deaths by 2030 (Bray et al., 2012). Iden- Total 38 tifying genetic variants that influence susceptibility to disease potentially 17 2 19 2 17 19 can inform the development of approaches for primary and secondary pre- 
P12 .063 19 19 vention. Two groups have published field synopses on genetic variants as- Expression analysis of PTEN in colorectal cancer sociated with CRC, in JNCI in 2012 and Gut in 2013. These groups are now M. Nemati1, E. Sakhinia2, N. Ajami3, S. Rezapour2; working together on an update. 1Tabriz Genetic Analysis Center (TGAC), Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Methods: We have searched all published (and some unpublished) genetic Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Tabriz University of Medical association data -including candidate gene and GWAS- for CRC to the end of Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic 2015. Furthermore, we have access to 4 GWAS datasets. We are conducting Science, Khoy Payam Noor University, Khoy, Iran, Islamic Republic of. meta-analyses. We have reached a consensus on the operationalization of the Venice guidelines on the credibility of genetic association, which had dif- fered between the two previous field synopses. Introduction: The tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog Results: More than 200 genes in about 770 SNPs were identified as putative- (PTEN) is involved in many important biological processes related to cell ly associated with CRC. For 450 SNPs, there was a single study only; for 90 survival, proliferation, and growth. Reduced expression of the PTEN is ob- SNPs, two studies; and for 230 SNPs, 3 or more studies. Meta-analysis will served in several human cancers, indicating a critical role in carcinogenesis be carried out for SNPs with 3 or more studies, and credibility of association and a potential as a tumor marker inE cSanHcGer. 2In0 t1hi6s p| rBoAspRecCtiEveL OstuNdyA, ,w Se PAaINsse |s WsedW acWco.rEdiSnHg tGo .tOheR VGenice criteria. 271 compared PTEN expression levels in colorectal tumor tissues with adjacentABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .068 Connexin43 Gap Junctions and Melatonin Receptors as Independent Conclusions: The identification of genetic variants with influence on CRC Marker for Prostate Cancer risk may reflect an importance of genes involved in colorectal cancer risk. A. Tavartkiladze1,2, R. Khutsishvili1, D. Khijakadze2; Our data should help results of genetic associations studies to be placed 1Institute For Personalized Medicine, Tbilisi, Georgia, 2Tbilisi State Medical University, in context and interpreted appropriately and should help direct future re- Tbilisi, Georgia. search effort. 
P12 .066 Gap junctions are intercellular channels that are formed from members of a Genomic imbalances in tumor and surrounding tissue detected by family of proteins, the connexins (Cxs). Gap junctions play an important role MLPA in Brazilian patients with colorectal cancer in vital functions, including the regulation of cell growth and cell differen- M. Rocha1,2, A. T. Dias2, E. A. Zanardo2, T. V. M. M. Costa2, F. A. R. Madia2, J. Damasceno2, tiation. Here, we examined the expression of Cx43, a major Cx in prostate C. Milani2, F. Balsamo1, S. D. F. Boratto1, S. H. C. Horta1, C. E. R. Corsi1, B. A. Bianco1, D. M. Christofolini1, C. P. Barbosa1, J. Waisberg1, L. D. Kulikowski1,2; tissue, in 27 surgical specimens obtained from prostate cancer patients who 1Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Faculdade de Medicina da USP, São underwent a primary surgical castration prior to hormonotherapy or radio- Paulo, Brazil. therapy treatments. The expression of Cx43 gap junctions was compared to the levels of testosterone, melatonin (MLT1), and erbB2 tyrosine kinase receptors. In addition, a panel of prostate cancer cell lines and a series of Gains and losses of chromosome arms are usually detected in colorectal normal rat prostate tissues and rat prostate tumors induced in vivo by N- cancer (CRC) samples and may be linked to progression of this disease. Methylnitrosurea were studied. We demonstrated that the lack of Cx43 gap Thus, we investigated specific genomic unbalances associated with CRC in junctions is a common feature of human prostate cancer tissues compared Brazilian patients who underwent surgery without previous neoadjuvant to nonneoplastic prostate tissues surrounding primary tumors. Cx43 gap treatment. The tumors were histologically classified as low and high grade junctions were not observed in prostate adenocarcinomas, and they seem according to Brazilian Society of Pathology. The total of 30 tissue samples to be independent of testosterone, melatonin, and erbB2 receptor status. from neoplastic and non-neoplastic colorectal tissues was obtained from 10 In prostate cancer cell lines and rodent prostate carcinoma tissues, down- patients. Paired peripheral blood samples were used as controls. The DNA regulation of Cx43 occurs at the mRNA level, suggesting a transcriptional was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Blood Midi Kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, Ca- mechanism for the decrease of Cx43 protein in prostate cancer. In summary, lifornia) and investigated by MLPA method (MRC-Holland®, Amsterdam, this study provides evidence of decreased expression of Cx43 gap junctions The Netherlands) with combination of specific kits for CRC basic research in prostate cancer at various stages of progression as well as prostate cancer (
P413  and 
P146 ). The results were analyzed using the software GeneMar- cell lines and raises the possibility that Cx43 may be a useful marker for ker® (SoftGenetics, LLC, State College, PA - ww.softgenetics.com). The re- detecting early oncogenesis in the prostate. sults revealed alterations of several different regions: genomic gains in the 
P12 .069 long arm of 20 chromosome including probes located in ADMR1, OPR
L1 , Identification of two novel cases of constitutional mismatch repair MAPR
E1 , TPX2, ZNF217 genes and gains in the short arm of 17 chromosome deficiency syndrome in a spanish consanguineous family including MNT and OVCA2 gene. In addition we found losses in short arm of Y. Rodriguez1, D. Parraga2, I. Rey3, M. Gallego3, N. Carrizo3, J. Perea4, O. Toldos1, M. A. chromosome 8 including markers of CDCA2, NKX3, LPL genes and losses in Martinez Gonzalez1, J. L. Vivanco5, V. Perez Alonso5, L. Robles6, D. Rueda3; long arm of 13 chromosome including RB1, DACH, PSPC, ZMYM2 genes. Un- 1Pathology Department, Doce de Octubre Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 2Hereditary Cancer expectedly, we also detected similar genomic imbalances in adjacent control Genetic Diagnostics Laboratory, Madrid, Spain, 3Hereditary Cancer Genetic Diagnostics tissues for some patients suggesting that there is a field of chromosomal in- Laboratory, Doce de Octubre Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 4Surgery Department, Doce de stability surrounding the tumor. Therefore the accurate genomic characteri- Octubre Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 5Pediatric Oncology and Hematology Department, Doce de Octubre Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 6Familial Cancer Unit, Doce de Octubre Hospital, zation of these tissues is critical to screening the progression of this disease. 
P12 .067 Madrid, Spain. Analysis of complex karyotypes in patients with haematological neoplasms H. Podgornik, U. Mlakar, M. Sever, P. Černelč; Introduction: The Constitutional MisMatch Repair Deficiency (CMMRD) Department of Hematology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. syndrome (OMIN #276300) is a rare autosomal recessive cancer predis- position disease caused by inactivating biallelic germline mutations in mis- match repair (MMR) genes. Carriers develop in their childhood hematologic Background. Most studies define complex karyotype (CK) as ≥3 or ≥5 inde- malignancies, central nervous system tumors or colorectal tumors, as well pendent abnormalities. In the last few years a new definitions have arisen as other neoplasia. Many patients overlap neurofibromatosis type I features as structurally CK and monosomal (MCK). The mentioned CKs have been such as cafe-au-lait spots. claimed to be the strongest predictor of an inferior outcome in patients with Patient and Methods: MMR genes were studied by amplicon based NGS on haematological neoplasms. We analysed subgroups of CKs in our patients. a suspected CMMRD patient belonging to a consanguineous Spanish family. Methods. GTG banding, FISH and spectral karyotyping were combined to re- Directed genetic study was extended to other family members, collecting. solve karyotypes. CKs were subdivided according to the number of aberrati- clinical and pathological data. Microsatellite Instability (MSI) status and in- ons (3, 4, ≥5), to monosomal (M), and structurally rearranged (S). munohistochemical (IHC) studies on mismatch repair complex proteins was Results. 147 CKs were observed in the last 4 years. The majority of cases performed on tumor and normal tissues. (77%) corresponded to AML and MDS followed by CLL patients. Frequency Results: Two siblings carrying homozygous nonsense mutation on MSH6 of different subtypes of CKs is given in Table 1. 73% of CKs had ≥5 aber- gene were identified: one developed an abdominal B-cell non-Hodgkin lym- rations. 89%of them were also structurally rearranged. 56% of CKs corre- phoma and two lymphoblastic T-cell lymphoma, and the other a nephroblas- sponded to monosomal and structurally complex at the same time (CKMS). toma. Both of them were diagnosed at early age and presented cafe-au-lait All monosomal CKs with ≥5 aberrations were also structurally rearranged macules. IHQ on different tumors showed absence of staining for the MSH6 (CKM
S5 ). This was the main group of CKs in MDS and AML. Structurally re- protein both in malignant and normal tissues. However, MSI was only ob- arranged karyotypes (CK
S4  and CK
S5 ) were significantly more frequent in served in tumor but not in blood or oral epithelium controls. CLL than in AML or MDS (P<0.05). Conclusions: Our results confirm previous clinical and molecular observa- Conclusions. In MDS a distinction between CK with 3 and 4 aberrations is tions for CMMRD patients. Remarkably both homozygous carriers scored already crucial for prognistification. To give comprehensive information to positive for the indication criteria for CMMRD testing suggested by the clinicians CKs should be analysed even more extensively. European Consortium „Care for CMMRD“. Additional molecular studies are currently being performed in order to better characterized this poorly Frequency of CK subtypes. known cancer syndrome. Karyotype All patients AML MDS KLL 
P12 .070 subtype (N=147) (N=56) (N=46) (N=17) Expression of Contactin 4 is associated with malignant behaviour in CK3 1 (1%) 1 (2%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas CK
S3  18 (12%) 8 (14%) 5 (11%) 2 (12%) CKM3 4 (3%) 2 (4%) 2 (4%) 0 (0%) L. Evenepoel1,2, F. H. van Nederveen3, L. Oudijk4, T. G. Papathomas5,4, D. F. Restuccia4, E. J. CKM
S3  2 (1%) 1 (2%) 1 (2%) 0 (0%) T. Belt4, G. J. H. Franssen4, R. A. Feelders4, A. Perren6, S. van Eeden7, H. J. L. M. Timmers8, W. CK4 2 (1%) 1 (2%) 1 (2%) 0 (0%) W. de Herder4, L. Vroonen9, S. Aydin10, M. Vikkula1, R. R. de Krijger4,11, W. N. M. Dinjens4, A. CK
S4  9 (6%) 2 (4%) 1 (2%) 4 (24%) Persu2, E. Korpershoek4; CKM4 2 (1%) 0 (0%) 1 (2%) 1 (6%) CKM
S4  2 (1%) 0 (0%) 2 (4%) 0 (0%) 1de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique, CK5 2 (1%) 3 (5%) 3 (7%) 0 (0%) Brussels, Belgium, 3Laboratory for Pathology, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 4Erasmus MC CK
S5  26 (18%) 3 (5%) 5 (11%) 4 (24%) Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5King‘s College Hospital, London, United CKM5 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 2
C7 K2M
S5  79 (54%) 35 (63%E )SH 2G 5 2 (50 41 %6 ) | B 6A (3R 5C %E )LONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Kingdom, 6Clinical Pathology Division, Bern, Switzerland, 7Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Liège, Liège, Belgium, 10Cliniques sing proportion of Colorectal Cancer (CRC) and it is a heterogeneous entity universitaires Saint Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 11Reinier de Graaf Hospital, Delft, that probably encompasses specific subclasses. It has been reported that Netherlands. shortering of telomere length is associated with an increased risk of cancer. Telomeres are the protective end-complexes of eukaryotic chromosomes since they are involved in the maintenance of normal chromosome struc- Introduction: Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGL) are rare and ture and function. It has been demonstrated that telomerase is crucial for mostly benign tumours. Approximately 10% of PPGL are malignant, as de- controlling telomere length, however, telomeres undergo a shortening with fined by the presence of metastases, i.e chromaffin tissue at a location that each cell division. In addition, it has been reported that telomeric shortening usually does not contain chromaffin cells. However, up to 35% of tumours is associated with an early onset cancer. in patients carrying an SDHB mutation appears to be malignant. No reliable Initially, we performed a cytogenetic study (CGH-Array) 46 tumors of late- marker allows prediction of whether a PPGL is, or will become malignant. In onset CRC patients (over 70 years) and 45 tumors of early-onset CRC pati- addition, there are no curative treatments if metastases occur. ents (under 45). We identified a group of tumors (mostly early-onset) that Materials and methods: In order to identify genetic markers allowing to di- had a similar cytogenetic profile so the aim of our study was to analyze diffe- stinguish benign from malignant tumours, 40 benign and 11 malignant PPGL rences in telomeric length between tumors with the same cytogenetic profi- were investigated for differences in mRNA expression with Affymetrix arrays. le (early and late-onset) versus tumors with a different profile. Expression data were normalized according to Affymetrix recommendati- Our results show that telomere length correlates with the cytogenetic pro- ons. Then, using Pomelo II (http://pomelo2.bioinfo.cnio.es/), a Limma t-test file in early-onset CRC tumors. Interestingly, there are not significant diffe- was performed, to assess which genes were differentially expressed between rences when compare the telomeric length of early-onset CRC tumors with benign and malignant PPGL. Clustered and non-clustered analysis were per- the same cytogenetic profile versus late-onset CRC tumors. formed, and 15 genes with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) below 0.05 and a These results reinforce the hypothesis that early-onset CRC cancer repre- relative overexpression ratio of at least 4 were found. They were further in- sents a specific subgroup of colon cancer. vestigated using qRT-PCR, and immunohistochemistry on Tissue Micro Array Supported by FIS-FEDER PI13/01741 including 88 benign and 13 malignant PPGL. Subsequently, slides of malignant 
P12 .073 and benign tumours (n= 32 respectively) were stained. Using of droplet digital PCR for tumor heterogenity testing in Results: Contactin 4 (CNTN4) was significantly overexpressed (FDR=0.001, gastrointestinal stromal tumors and p=0.004 for the IHC) in malignant compared to benign tumours. K. Jasek1, P. Szepe2, L. Plank2, Z. Lasabova1; Conclusion: CNTN4 overexpression is associated with malignant PPGL, and 1Biomedical Centre, Martin, Slovakia, 2Department of Pathological Anatomy, Martin, may thus predict metastatic dissemination in patients with PPGL. Notably, Slovakia. CNTN1 has been shown to be associated with malignancy in different tu- mours including gliomas. KIT/PDGFRa Introduction: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are charBaRctAeFrized by 
P12 .071 mutations. However, around 10-15% of all diagnosed GISTs are Panel gene testing identified PTEN mutation in family that did referredB tRoA Fas wild-type (WT) GISTs and V600E mutation in was in not fulfill criteria for clinical diagnosis. Are we considering PTEN <5% of cases. The aim of this study was to confirm and quantify the pres- screening as often as we should? ence of mutation using sensitive droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) in GISTs D. Georgiou, V. Kiesel; samples previously positive for V600E by allele-specific approach and/or GeneHealth UK, Cambridge, United Kingdom. dideoxysequencing. Material and methods: DNA was extracted from 9 FFPE tissue section of V600E positive GISTs patients. Different amount of DNA – 130/100/10ng The majority of colorectal cancer is sporadic; however up to 10% may be were used to prepare master mix with ddPCR Mut Assay BRAF and droplets inherited; with Lynch syndrome, Familial Adenomatous polyposis and MU- were generated. Serial dilutions of V600E- positive RKO cell line DNA in TYH associated polyposis the most common known hereditary colorectal wild-type DNA were used for calibration. cancer syndromes. Other conditions, such as Cowden syndrome are rare Results: The average number of droplets was 13696/PCR. The mutation causes of colorectal cancer and colorectal polyps; hence genetic testing is could be detected in a dilution of 0.08%. The presence of V600E mutation in not routinely offered. Historically, genetic counselling has involved perfor- the 8 tested samples (positive by allele-specific PCR) was 1.9 % up to 0.34%. ming a risk assessment based on an individual’s family history of cancer and Sample positive for 1.9 % and 0.34% showed positivity and negativity by sequential single gene testing. With the advent of panel testing it is beco- Sanger sequencing, respectively. One sample shows positivity below the li- ming possible to simultaneously examine multiple genes, which is eliciting mit of the detection of 0.06%, however was positive by allele- specific PCR. unusual phenotypes. Conclusions: The BRAF mutation in GISTs occur in a very low number of This case report presents an individual tested through GeneHealth UK due cells, however, the detection of these mutations is particularly important in to a personal history of colorectal polyps and a family history of colorectal terms of propped treatment and targeted therapy. The method should be cancer and polyps. No history of learning difficulties, skin lesions, other can- evaluated to higher sensitivity and used in order to improve the therapy op- cers/tumours was noted. The proband was counselled and offered Bowel- portunities of patients. Gene panel testing, which tests 11 genes associated with colorectal cancer Supported by Biomedical Center Martin-ITMS 26220220187 and colorectal polyps using NextGeneration sequencing on an illumine plat- 
P12 .075 form. A pathogenic mutation was found in the PTEN gene, which confirmed The excision of centromere as stabilization mechanism of dicentric a diagnosis of Cowden syndrome, which is thought to affect 1 in 200 000 chromosomes in bone marrow cells of two patients with acute individuals in the population. myeloid leukemia This report illustrates the importance of learning more about established I. Sarova1,2, J. Brezinova1, S. Ransdorfova1, Z. Zemanova2, L. Pavlistova2, K. Svobodova2, J. phenotypes, clinical diagnostic criteria and the impact of panel testing. It Cermak1, A. Jonasova3, K. Michalova1,2; explores challenges in identifying patients with unexpected mutations and 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Center of the importance of recommending validated cancer screening. Reflection on Oncocytogenetics, IMBLD, General University Hospital and First Faculty of Medicine, such cases can be helpful in improving our understanding of panel testing, Prague, Czech Republic, 31st Department of Internal Medicine of General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. rare cancer susceptibilities and improving patient and family experiences. 
P12 .072 Telomeric length analysis in CRC tumors P. Mogollón Arroyo1,2, J. Pérez1, J. Perea3, J. García4, M. Urioste5, D. Rueda6, M. Arriba3, R. Dicentric chromosomes (DCs), have been observed in variety types of mali- González-Sarmiento1,2,7; gnancies. Barbara McClintock (1939) first described their unstable behavior 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Department of medicine, during cell division. The segregation of centromeres to opposite spindle po- University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Centre for biomedical research of 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 4Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology les can result in a cascade of chromosomal damages (the breakage-fusion- of Cancer (IBMCC), Salamanca, Spain, 5Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare bridge cycle) and consequently in a complex unbalanced rearrangement of Diseases (CIBERER), Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 6Molecular biology the karyotype. Three possible mechanisms of dicentric stabilization have laboratory, 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 7Biomedical Research been observed: epigenetic inactivation, reduction in the intercentromeric Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain. distance, and shortening/deletion of a centromere, resulting in a secondari- ly monocentric chromosome. We describe two patients with acute myeloid leukemia and complex karyo- Early-onset Colorectal Cancer (ECRC)E rSeHprGes e2n0ts1 a6 s |ig BniAficRaCntE aLnOd NinAcre, aS-PAtIyNp e| iWnvWolvWed .dEeSriHvaGtiv.Oe cRhGromosomes: der(11)(11pter→11q25::11q2237→31ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1q25::9p24→9p23::11q14→11q25::11q23→11q25::9p23→9p11::11q14.3 susceptibility. However, germline mutations are identified only in a minori- →11q14.3::9q11→9qter) in one case and der(17)(17qter→17p11.2::11p11. ty of patients, suggesting a role for different risk factors. Among those, we 2::11q11.2→11qter) accompanied by the separately localized centromere of considered PTEN levels, which in mouse models were associated to BC risk. chromosome 11, present as a small marker chromosome, in the second one. We assessed PTEN expression in 31 women with early-onset BC (26-35 On the basis of molecular cytogenetic results (FISH, mFISH, mBAND), we years), who had tested negative for BRCA1/2 mutations, using q-real time inferred that the derivative chromosome der(11), respective der(17) were PCR. Expression levels were compared to the mean level of 23 healthy fema- primary dicentric chromosomes, stabilized by the excision of centromere 9, le blood donors aged 50 or older. Patients were then subdivided into three respective 11. groups: 13 patients under-expressing PTEN (≤80%), 8 over-expressing In 2011, MacKinnon and Campbell first described centromere deletion in PTEN (≥125%) and 10 with expression similar to controls. If compared to naturally occurring cancer chromosomes. Some studies suggest that the patients with normal or lower levels, patients overexpressing PTEN had centromere excision is under-diagnosed, because centromere as a small a more recent diagnosis (7,38 vs 8,10 vs 11,15 years, respectively), larger marker chromosome can be usually detected by FISH only. Not in all cases, tumors (mean diameter: 21,7 mm vs 17,6 vs 18, respectively), with a T2 the centromere fragment is preserved as we present in patient 1. In conclu- stage in 50% of the group compared to 22.2% and 16.7% in normal and low sion, the centromere excision is an important stabilization mechanism of expression groups, respectively. These differences, however, did not reach DCs however further analyses on the larger cohort of patients are needed to the statistical significance; no other differences were detected between the establish its true incidence. groups. To explore the mechanisms underlying different PTEN levels, PTEN Supported by MHCR project 00023736, RVO-VFN64165, GACR-
P302 /12/ mutations and defect of methylation were analyzed, with no alterations de- G157, PRVOUK-
P27 /LF1/1. tected. Our findings seem to exclude that PTEN levels may be a relevant risk factor 
P12 .076 for BC occurrence, but might suggest the presence of regulatory mechanis- DICER1 cancer predisposition syndrome: Expanding the phenotype ms raising PTEN levels after BC diagnosis, especially for larger size tumors. J. J. O‘Byrne, M. Duff, A. J. Green, L. Bradley; Department of Clinical Genetics, Dublin 12, Ireland. 
P12 .078 The experience of EGFR-genotyping for the individualization in Introduction: treatment of the patients with lung cancer in Federal State Budgetary DICER1 is a cancer predisposition syndrome. Although Institution “RCRC named after N.N. Blokhin” of the Ministry of Health germline mutations are known to increase the risk of many diverse, rare of the Russian Federation tumours such as pleuropulmonary blastoma and sertoli leydig cell tumours O. Arkhipova, M. Filippova, A. Semyanikhina, T. Dubrovina, K. Laktionov, L. Lyubchenko; FSBI „Russian cancer research center named after N.N. Blokhin“, Moscow, Russian and multinodular goitre, the complete phenotype is still poorly understood. Federation. The variability in expression and the lack of penetrance data continues to make DICER1 a difficult condition to diagnose and counsel around. In this EGFR Mstuadteyr ai aclosh aonrtd o Mf tehtrheoe dfasm: ilies with known pathogenic mutations is presen- Introduction: ActivaEtGinFgR somatic mutations in the gene can be detec- ted which expands the known phenotype. ted in up to 30% cases of non-small-cell lung canEcGerF R(NSCLC). According to Clinical review and pedigree analysis of three fa- clinAiLcKa-l EgMuiLd4elines -genotyping is a routine diagnostic procedure be- mReilsiueslt ws:ith a known DICER1 pathogenic mutation was conducted and the fore prescribing tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Aside -testing the detection phenotypes tabulated. of gene rearraEnGgeFmRents which occur in 4-10% of all adenocarci- TaF bam leily : N Fo amiliaM l u Dta It Cio En R mutaP coa tnt ih foio rnl mo sg ey da i Dn nI F Cda Em Rp i ml hy u em tnae tm oiob tne y r ps w ei sth P ma et mho bl eo rg sy n in o tf a ym eti tly e sted noma cases is recommended prior to initiating targeted therapy. ( Ca ag ne c eo rf onset - yrs) Non Cancer f (o ar g eD oIC f E oR n sm etu -t a yt ri so )n Methods and materials: -genotyping and ALK-testing of the DNA de- rived from the FFPE NSCLC samples were carried out. The specimens were 1 c.5003dupA; 1 Bilateral SLCT 1 MNG (50s) 1 Cervical Cancer (age collected from the 279 patients with NSCLC (179 women and 100 men). The ( CI ar ris ibh b/ e an) p (e.A xosn n1 26 56 -8 3f )s (18/20) unknown) median age at diagnosis was 57 years. Adenocarcinoma was diagnosed in 2 c.5493G>A; OSCT 3 MNG (19,21,22) 1 SLCT (17yrs) 87%. DNA-testing was performed using Cobas EGFR Mutation Test Kit. To (UK) p.Trp1831* Gynadroblas- 1 “abnormal womb 1 Ovarian Cyst (6) (exon 27) toma cells”(age unknown) 1 Bone Tumor (16) confirm the results SangerE sGeFqRuencing was performed. ALK screening was (15) 1 Brain Tumor (40s) carried out using the VENTANA anti-ALK (D5F3) assay. 3 c.2233C>T; ASK(6) 1 Aveolar RMS(9) (Irish) p.Arg745* 1 Brain Cancer (1) Results: Mutations in the gene were detected in 28,5% of all tested (exon 16) 1 Renal Cancer (8) 1 Leukaemia (9) samples. Mutations in exon 19 were found in 41%, 
L858 R in 35%, T790M 1 MNG (35) 1 Lung Cyst (age unkown) in 12%, G719C in 5% and an insertion in exon 20 in 7%. The combination of two activating mutations was revealed in two patients. We identified two ACoSKn c-l uAsniaopnlsa:stic sarcoma of the kidney; MNG - multinodular goitre; OSCT - ALKE-pGoFsRitive samples. Ovarian Sex Chord Stromal Tumor; RMS- Rhabdomyosarcoma Conclusion: Our data on the frequency and distribution of the mutations in the gene and ALK-rearrangements is comparable with the results pre- In this study: viously reported. The cases with two activating but functionally different •multinodular goitre and SLCT are confirmed as frequent phenotypes in mutations confirm the heterogeneity of NSCLC but further research is ne- people with DICER1 pathogenic mutations but no case of PPB was docu- cessary to determine the frequency of this phenomenon for a better under- mented. standing of the mechanisms of responsiveness to targeted therapy. •rare or very rare phenotypes such as OSCST, gynadroblastomas, ASK were 
P12 .079 observed, suggesting these may occur more frequently than expected. Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome: Screening ERC
C4  •the pene1trance is estimated to ~70%, while literature suggests a low pe- (FANCQ) when BRCAs Mutations are not the Origin netrance. C. Velázquez Pérez1, M. Durán Domínguez1, E. Esteban Cardeñosa1, M. Tascón Torres1, •the DICER1 cancer predisposition syndrome phenotype is extended which E. Lastra Aras2, G. Marcos García3, L. Hernández Sanz1, N. Martínez Martín1, M. Infante Rmeafye greunidcee tsh:e developmenett aolf, much needed, tumour screening recommen- Sanz1; dations. 1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Servicio de Oncología, Complejo Hospitalario Burgos, Burgos, Foulkes WD . Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14(10):662-72. Spain, 3Servicio de Oncología, Hospital Río Hortega, Valladolid, Spain. 
P12 .077 Constitutional PTEN expression in women with early-onset breast ERC
C4  is a versatile protein implicated in several DNA repair via: nucleotide cancer excision repair (NER) pathway and Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway. FA genes M. G. Tedesco1, S. Martini1, R. Zuntini1,2, S. Miccoli1,2, L. Godino1,2, A. Belardinelli3, G. products are involved in DNA interstrand crosslink repair. Biallelic mutati- Lanzoni1, A. Vaisfeld1, M. Romagnoli1, D. Turchetti1,2; ons in ERC
C4  cause FA subtype Q whereas monoallelic mutations contri- 1U.O.Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Centro di bute to inherited risk of Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome Ricerca sui Tumori Ereditari, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Immunoematologia e medicina trasfusionale, Policlinico (HBOC). In a clinical scope, via NER alterations conferred platinum sensiti- Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. vity, the standard therapy for breast and ovarian cancer. To investigate the role of ERC
C4  in HBOC we screened this gene for muta- tions in 125 Spanish ovarian cancer patients or breast cancer cases with Breast cancer (BC), the most common malignancy in women, mostly arises ovarian history in their pedigrees. All samples were negatives for BRCA mu- i2n 7p4eri-post menopausal age, while early age aEtS oHnsGet 2m0ay1 6su g| gBeAst RgeCnEetLicO NtAat,i oSnPsA. MINut a|t WionW scWre.eEnSinHg Gwa.Os pReGrformed by HA-CAE and subsequentlyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Sanger Sequencing of altered pattern. Missense mutations were evaluated or treatment suspensions due to toxicity, progression free survival (PFS) using CONDEL software that combines tools as SIFT, Polyphen and Muta- and overall survival. tionAssessor. Results: We found that CY
P3 A4 rs35599367 variant (CY
P3 A4*22 allele) Our study identified two novel variants (c.338+13A>G, c.1524 A>T) and carriers had higher everolimus blood concentration compared to wild type eleven previously described (c.251C>T, c.974-7A>G, c.974-53delTG, patients (P=0.019). ABCB1 rs1045642 was associated with risk of muco- c.1244G>A, c.1251T>A, c.1563C>G, c.1727G>C, c.1812-103G>A, c.1905- sitis (P=0.031), while PIK3R1 rs10515074 and RAPTOR rs9906827 were 35T>C, c.1905-28G>A and c.2505T>C). In Silico analysis predicted c.1244 associated with hyperglycemia and non-infectious pneumonitis (P=0.016 G>A and c.1727G>C as probably damaging. and 0.024, respectively). Furthermore, RAPTOR rs9906827 was associated We have identified ERC
C4  inactivating mutations in 0.8% of our population, with PFS (P=0.006). which is similar to other FA-BRCA genes. Hence, genetic testing of this gene Conclusions: CY
P3 A4*22 allele influenced plasma concentration of everoli- should be considered in high risk HBOC families as far as ERC
C4  mutations, mus and several SNPs in mTOR pathway genes were associated with treat- that compromise DNA repair, could preserve sensitivity to continuous pla- ment toxicities and prognosis. These results require replication, but suggest tinum therapy. that germline variation could influence everolimus outcomes in MBC. 
P12 .080 
P12 .082 Clinical and pathogenetic features of ETV6-related thrombocytopenia Mutational status of EZH2 and CD79B hot spots in mature B-cell non- with predisposition to childhood ALL Hodgkin’s lymphomas: novel CD79B variations have been revealed F. Melazzini1, F. Palombo2, A. Balduini3, D. De Rocco4, C. Marconi2, P. Noris1, C. Gnan5, T. G. Cetin1, I. Baris2, V. Caner1, B. Sarikepe1, N. Sen Turk3, E. Tepeli1, S. Hacioglu4, I. Sari4, G. Pippucci2, V. Bozzi1, M. Faleschini4, C. A. Di Buduo6, C. Alfano7, M. Seri2, C. L. Balduini1, A. Bagci1, A. Keskin4; Pecci1, A. Savoia5,4; 1Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Denizli, 1Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pavia-IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Turkey, 2Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University Denizli, Turkey, 3Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Medical of Bologna Medical Genetic Unit, Sant’Orsola Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy, Pathology, Denizli, Turkey, 4Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of 3Laboratory of Biotechnology, IRCCS San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 4Institute Hematology, Denizli, Turkey. for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 5Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 6Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 7Maurice Wohl Institute, King‘s College London, London, OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the hot spot mutational frequencies United Kingdom. of Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and cluster of differentiation 79B (CD79B) genes in a cohort of mature B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA samples from formalin-fixed and paraffin Inherited thrombocytopenias (ITs) are genetic disorders characterized by embedded (FFPE) tissues from a total of 37 patients with mature B-cell non- reduced blood platelet count. In addition to spontaneous bleedings, IT can Hodgkin lymphomas were included in the study. Molecular genetic analysis be associated with other features, including risk of leukemias as in the ITs was performed by direct sequencing of the DNA samples. caused by mutations of RUNX1 and ANKRD26. Thanks to an international RESULTS: We analyzed FFPE tumor tissue samples from 17 female and 20 collaboration, we have recently identified another form of IT with in in- male patients with a median age of 63.7 years at the time of diagnosis. None creased risk of hematological malignancies (ETV6-related thrombocytope- of the patients had previously reported hot spot mutations in EZH2 and nia; ETV6RT) that is caused by mutations of ETV6, a relatively well-known CD79B, but previously unreported single nucleotide variations of CD79B tumor-suppressor gene (Noetzli et al.,2015). We searched for ETV6 muta- were present in nine patients. rs779833118 was the most frequent variation tions in a series of 130 consecutive propositi with ITs of unknown origin (7/37 patients, 18.9%). A non-synonymous variation rs757407417, which and found 5 causative variants in 7 of them. Although the study of family could have a potentially damaging outcome, was detected in two patients. members revealed that degree of thrombocytopenia and bleeding tenden- CONCLUSIONS: None of the patients had well-known hot spot mutations in cy were mild, 4 patients had childhood B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia EZH2 and CD79B. However, we detected novel CD79B variations in mature (ALL), confirming that ETV6-RT is a ALL predisposition syndrome. In vitro B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma patients. studies revealed that patient megakaryocytes have defective maturation Grant Reference: This study was supported by the Pamukkale University and proplatelet formation, while platelet have reduced ability to spread on Scientific Research Unit (Grant No: 2015HZ
L009 ). fibrinogen; however clinical and laboratory findings did not identify any pe- culiar defect that can be used to suspect this disorder and also platelet size 
P12 .083 (usually enlarged in ITs) was normal.. For these reasons, we suggest that Extracolonic tumors as presenting symptoms of FAP in probands with mutation screening of ETV6 is performed in subjects with dominant ITs and a family history of FAP normally sized platelets. C. Vinkler1, K. I. Dayan2, A. Singer3, R. Berger4, D. Lev1; 1Institute of Clinical Genetics Wolfson Medical Ctr, Holon, Israel, 2Dpt of Surgery, 
P12 .081 Wolfson Med Ctr., Holon, Israel, 3Department of Community Genetics Ministry of Health, Polymorphisms associated with everolimus pharmacokinetics, jerusalem, Israel, 4Institute of Oncology Wolfson Medical Ctr, Holon, Israel. toxicity and survival in metastatic breast cancer M. Apellániz-Ruiz1, T. Pascual-Martínez2, C. Pernaut3, C. Cueto-Felgueroso4, P. Villalba4, C. Álvarez4, L. Manso3, L. Inglada-Pérez1,5, M. Robledo1,5, C. Rodríguez-Antona1,5, E. Sporadic desmoid tumors is estimated at 1 to 2 per million, whereas more Ciruelos3; than 15% of patients suffering from familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) 1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Medical Oncology Department, La Princesa University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 3Medical Oncology develop desmoid tumors. Department, 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 4Biochemistry Nonmedullary Thyroid Cancer (NMTC) has an incidence of 12.1:100,000. Department, 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 5Centro de Investigación 5-10% are familial cases caused by germline mutations in specific genes. Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain. A small number are associated with known syndromes. Rarely NMTC is an extracolonic manifestation of FAP. FAP is a colon cancer susceptibility syndrome in which hundreds to thou- Background: Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) progressing after endocrine sands of colonic polyps develop. By 35y, 95% of individuals with FAP have therapy frequently activates mTOR pathway. The BOLERO-2 trial showed polyps. that everolimus-exemestane achieves increased progression free survival We report two patients with FAP presenting first with extracolonic mani- (PFS) compared with exemestane. However, there is great inter-patient vari- festation. ability in toxicity and response to exemestane-everolimus treatment. The A 33 y old woman with thyroid goiter whose sister and her father have objective of this study was to explore the implication of single nucleotide NMTC. Her 35y old brother had GI bleeding and three adenomatous polyps polymorphisms (SNPs) on outcomes from this treatment through a phar- removed on colonoscopy. Sequencing of APC gene in the brother revealed a macogenetic analysis. frame shift mutation p.Arg332fs* Patients and Methods: Blood was collected from 90 postmenopausal women A 53-year-old male presented first with intestinal obstruction. Two small with hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative MBC treated with exemes- adenomatous polyps were found during colonoscopy. A large peritoneal tane-everolimus following progression after prior treatment with a non- desmoid tumor was removed and symptoms were alleviated. FAP has been steroidal aromatase inhibitor. Everolimus pharmacokinetics was measured diagnosed previously in other family members. He was found to carry a fra- in 37 patients. Twelve SNPs in genes involved in everolimus pharmacokinet- meshift mutation in the APC gene p.Ser299Cysfs*. ics and pharmacodynamics were genotyped and associations assessed with This unusual presentation demonstrates the clinical importance of a com- drug plasma levels, clinically relevant toxicities (non-infectious pneumoni- prehensive evaluation of familial cancer cases. It also shows the intrafamilial ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 275 tis, mucositis, hyperglycemia and hematological toxicities), dose reductions variability in the phenotypic manifestations of the familial mutations. It mayABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .087 FANCM: A novel breast cancer gene subjected to an international be postulated that difference in genetic background along with environmen- validation study tal factors may be involved in modifying the phenotypic expression in these G. Neidhardt1,2,3, J. Hauke1,2,3, S. Heilmann-Heimbach4,5, H. Hellebrand6, H. Surowy7, cases. K. Klaschik1,2,3, E. Honisch8, A. Gehrig9, C. Sutter10, A. Rump11, N. Bogdanova-Markov12, P. Bugert13, E. Mangold4, D. Steinemann14, A. Ramirez15, N. Ditsch6, N. Arnold16, D. 
P12 .085 Niederacher8, B. Burwinkel7, H. Thiele17, J. Altmüller17,18, P. Nürnberg17,18,19, C. Engel20, B. Identification of susceptibility genes to define the genetic basis of Wappenschmidt1,2,3, K. Rhiem1,2,3, A. Meindl6, R. K. Schmutzler1,2,3, E. Hahnen1,2,3; familial testicular cancer by whole exome sequencing 1Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for B. Paumard Hernandez1, M. Urioste1,2, E. Gonzalez Billalabeitia3, I. Marquez-Rodas4, J. Integrated Oncology (CIO), Cologne, Germany, 3Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne Maroto5, G. Anguera Palacios6, N. Romero-Laorden7, J. Triviño8, H. Tejero1, J. Benítez9,2; (CMMC), Cologne, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, 1Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Center for Biomedical Germany, 5Life&Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 6Department of Gynaecoloegy and Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Universitario Obstetrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar at the Technical University, Munich, Germany, Morales Meseguer, Murcia, Spain, 4Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio 7Molecular Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and Molecular Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 5Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, Biology of Breast Cancer, Heidelberg University Women‘s Hospital, Heidelberg, 6Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,, Barcelona, Spain, 7Centro Integral Oncologico Germany, 8Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center Clara Campal, Madrid, Spain, 8Sistemas Genómicos, Valencia, Spain, 9Spanish National Düsseldorf, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 9Department of Human Cancer Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. Genetics, University Würzburg, Biozentrum, Würzburg, Germany, 10Institute of Human Genetics, Ruprecht-Karls University, Heidelberg, Germany, 11Institute for Clinical Genetics, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 12Institute of Human Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 13Institute of Transfusion Medicine Introduction: Testicular cancer represents ~1-1.5% of male tumors, with and Immunology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, German Red a peak incidence between 15 and 45 years. Human Testicular germ cell tu- Cross Blood Service Baden-Wuerttemberg-Hessia, Mannheim, Germany, 14Institute of mors (TGCT) have a strong genetic component, familial aggregation is ob- Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 15Department of Psychiatry served in ~1% of cases, although no high penetrance genes have been iden- and Psychotherapy of Bonn University Hospital, Bonn, Germany, 16Division of Oncology, tified so far. The aim is the identification of high-/moderate susceptibility Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, genes by WES technique. Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany, 17Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 18Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Materials and Methods: Currently, 20 families with at least two affected Cologne, Germany, 19Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging- members were selected, from them, 8 have already been sequenced using a Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 20Institute for HiSeq2000. Data was analyzed according to the specific pipeline described Medical Inform by our group based on different filters. Considering the recent findings in the genetic background of the TGCTs and our preliminary results, we are working on the hypothesis of a polygenic model of inheritance, making a Recently, Kiiski et al. reported a significant association between the trun- family-based association test in parallel with a population-based associati- cating FANCM mutation p.Gln1701Ter and BC risk in the Finish populati- on test with the FB-SKAT test, to evaluate the level of additive effect that our on (OR 1.86, 95% CI = 1.26-2.75; P =0.0018). By analyzing the exomes of variants could have with the familial aggregation of the disease. 24 BRCA1/2-negative index cases from high-risk BC/OC families of Ger- Results: 87 variants were identified in candidate genes, whose functions man origin, we also found the p.Gln1701Ter mutation. Mutational analysis have been implicated in pathways involving male germ cell development, of the FANCM gene by NGS in 2,211 familial BRCA1/2-negative BC and/ spermatogenesis, microtubule assembly, DNA damage response, steroid or OC index cases identified 7 different truncating alterations in 26 cases hormone signaling or telomerase function. From them, 65 were validated by (1x p.Gln156Ter, 12x p.Gln1701Ter, 1x p.Arg1030Ter, 1x p.Arg185Glufs, 5x Sanger sequencing and segregation analysis performed. p.Arg1931Ter, 5x p.Arg658Ter, 1x p.Val1095Tyrfs; 26/2,211 CF=1.176%). Nine, seven and one variants are shared between 2, 3 and 4 different fami- We were able to calculate an OR of 2.24 (95%CI=1.26-3.95 p=0.004) by lies, respectively. comparing our findings to the FANCM mutation load in 5,335 control in- Conclusion: Our preliminary results show that a number of moderate-low dividuals of which 28 were tested positive (28/5,335 CF=0.525%). In an susceptibility alleles from specific pathways could be involved in this type extended cohort of 6,117 familial BRCA1/2-negative BC and/or OC in- of familial tumors. dex cases of German origin we genotyped the p.Gln1701Ter mutation 20 B.Paumard holds a Caixa Fellow grant. times (20/6,117, CF=0.327%) and 14 times in 9,786 control individu- 
P12 .086 als (14/9,786, CF=0.143%), resulting in an OR of 2.29 (95%CI=1.10-4.77 Identification of germline FAN1 variants in MSH2-deficient Lynch-like p=0.013). The mean age at first BC diagnosis of individuals carrying trunca- syndrome patients ting FANCM alterations was 49 years with predominantly ER+, PR+, HER2- G. Vargas1, E. Dámaso1, M. Navarro1, T. Pons2, L. Mina3, A. Fernández1, L. Feliubadaló1, A. tumours of grade 2. Due to the apparently low FANCM mutation frequency, Solanes4, S. Iglesias1, À. Velasco5, J. Balmaña6, T. Ramón y Cajal7, A. Valencia2, J. Brunet5, J. a large collaborative international study group was founded (FANCM study Surrallés3, C. Lázaro1, L. Valle1, M. Pineda1, G. Capellá1; group), including research groups from Finland, Germany, Italy and the USA 1Institut d‘Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge-Institut Català d‘Oncologia, L‘Hospitalet to quantify the risk for BC and possibly other cancer entities associated with de Llobregat, Spain, 2Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, deleterious FANCM alterations. Spain, 3Department of Genetics and Micobiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 4Institut d‘Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol-Institut Català 
P12 .088 d‘Oncologia, Badalona, Spain, 5Institut d‘Investigacio Biomèdica de Girona Doctor Josep Modelling the Fanconi anemia/BRCA pathway by TALEN and CRISPR/ Trueta-Institut Català d‘Oncologia, Girona, Spain, 6University Hospital Vall d‘Hebron and Cas9 engineered nucleases Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain, 7Santa Creu i Sant Pau Hospital, M. Aza1,2, M. Bogliolo1,2, M. Marín1,2, L. Mina1,2, Á. Muñoz1, M. Ramírez1,2, J. Surrallés1,2; Barcelona, Spain. 1Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: In about 55% of individuals harboring mismatch repair (MMR) deficient tumors, germline mutations or somatic methylation in MMR genes are not identified, being referred as Lynch-like syndrome (LLS) patients. Re- Introduction: Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genome instability disorder cli- cently FAN1 germline mutations have been associated to MMR proficient nically characterized by developmental abnormalities, high predisposition colorectal cancer (CRC) and pancreatic cancer predisposition. The aim of to cancer and bone marrow failure. Many of the available cell lines from FA this study was to determine whether germline FAN1 play also a role in LLS. anemia patients are difficult to manipulate and are not isogenic. Patients and methods: Germline analysis of FAN1 was performed in 30 LLS Objectives: Due to current limitations of FA cell models, we decided to unrelated individuals showing MSH2 loss of expression in tumors. Pathoge- knock-out (KO) genes implicated in the FA/BRCA pathway (FANCA, FANCD1, nicity assessment of identified variants was performed using computational FANCQ and FAN1) in the genetically amenable human HEK293T cell line. and cosegregation analyses. Methods: We used TALENs and CRISPR/Cas9 for gene KO. Specific gene dis- Results: We identified three rare missense variants in 3 unrelated LLS ruption was proven by genetic complementation with the corresponding patients (10% of the studied sample). Two of the 3 identified variants, wildtype gene using lentiviral vectors or transient transfection. c.434G>A [p.(R145H)] and c.1129C>T [p.(R377W)], cosegregated with Results: We successfully generated FANCA, FANCD1, FANCQ and FAN1 KO colorectal cancer-affected relatives. The remaining variant, c.1856T>A HEK293T cells using engineered nucleases. All these cells are sensitive to (p.M619K), for which no cosegregation data was available, was classified as DNA crosslinking agents, thus mimicking cells from patients with defects likely pathogenic based on functional and computational analyses. in the FA/BRCA pathway. Moreover, all FA genes KO cells get blocked in the Conclusion: The obtained results suggest the involvement of the FAN1 gene G2/M phase upon treatment with DNA crosslinkers, a typical FA cellular i 2n 7M 6SH2-deficient LLS. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONpAh,e SnoPtAypIeN. F |i nWallWy, tWhe.sEe SFAH cGel.lOs rRepGroduce gene-specific defects: FANCA-/- Funding: SAF2012-33636, AECC, 2014SGR388. cells have impaired FANCD2 monoubiquitination, FANCD1-/- cells are unab-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .092 Genetic susceptibility to gastric cancer: Immunohistochemical le to form Rad51 foci after irradiation and are sensitive to PARP inhibitors, characterization of genes significantly associated with gastric cancer and FANCQ-/- cells are sensitive to UV-light radiation. A. V. Sanchez Romero1, N. García Lozano1, M. Paúles Villar2, L. Luján Barroso1, M. Galán Conclusion: Genome editing with targeted engineered nucleases is a valu- Guzmán1, N. Sala Serra1; able tool to generate isogenic and genetically amenable FA cell models. The 1Catalan Institute of Oncology-Bellvitge Institute for Biomedical Research (ICO- generated FA/BRCA KO isogenic cells will facilitate translational studies in- IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 2University Hospital of Bellvitge- IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. cluding the analysis of pathogenicity of variants of unknown significance, large-scale drug screenings or proteomic projects to identify new FA/BRCA pathway genes. IMnUtrCo1duTcFtiFo1n:N FQroOm1 prevPioTuPsN s1tu1dies, we confirmed the association between 
P12 .089 gastric cancer (GC) in Europeans and variants in different genes, of which Germline T
P53  mutation in a patient with fibrolamellar carcinoma: , , and were selected for further characterization new association to Li-Fraumeni Syndrome? of their role in gastric carcinogenesis. R. C. Andrade1, M. A. F. D. Lima2, P. A. S. Faria3, F. R. Vargas1,4,5; Objectives: To analyze the immunohistochemical (IHC) expression of these 1Genetics Division, Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Programa de four genes in paired samples of tumor-normal gastric mucosa, according to Internato em Genética, Universidade UnigranRio, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3Pathology the genotypes of their GC associated variants. Division, Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 4Genetics and Molecular Biology Department, Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Methods: IHC staining was performed on tissue slides of 100 pairs of FFPE Brazil, 5Birth Defects Epidemiology Laboratory, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, tissue blocks of tumor and adjacent non-tumor gastric mucosa from 100 Brazil. patients with GC. Samples were grouped in three categories according to the percentage of IHC stained cells in gastric mucosa: 0-10%, >10-50% and T
P53  >50-100%. The kappa statistic was used to evaluate the agreement between TLiP-5F3raumeni (LFS) syndrome is a rare hereditary cancer predisposition tumor and paired non-tumor tissues. The Fisher exact test was used to ana- syndrome associated with germline mutations in gene. We performed lyze TdFifFf1er ences between the histolog MicUalC s1u btypes of gastric cancer in tu- mutation screening in a cohort of 14 probands whose family cancer mNQoOr 1samples. Association between IHC expression of TFF1, MU
C1  and NQO1 histories presented at least one LFS core cancer before age 45, and a second and rs2839488 and rs9976977, rs3814316 and rs4072037 and cancer of any type before age 45, irrespecTtiPve5 3of degree of kinship. These rs7359387, was analyzed by logistic regression. features are reminiscent of LFS, yet not compatible with LFS or Li-Fraumeni Results: TFF1 was significantly decreased or absent in tumor mucosa. MU
C1  like (LFL) published criteria. A pathogenic mutation was identified in and NQO1 were expressed in both normal and tumor mucosa, particularly 1/14 probands (7.1%), a 14 year-old female diagnosed with fibrolamTePll5a3r of the intestinal-type, but expression decreased in tumor samples. PTPN11 carcinoma (FLC). FLC is a rare variant of hepatocellular carcinoma with di- expression was absent in 95% of the samples. None of the analyzed genetic stinct molecular features. The proband is a heterozygote carrier of the variants was associated with the IHC expression of their genes. c.467G>A (p.Arg1T5
P65 H3is) in exon 5, and her mother is an asymptomatic car- Conclusion: The genotype of the analyzed GC-associated genetic variants rier. Analysis of tumor DNTAP 5d3isclosed an additional alteration (c.461G>A; does not contribute to the IHC expression of their genes. p.Gly154Asp) in . This is the first case of a proband with FLC exhibiting Grants:ISCIII PI12/01187 and MICITT/FI-049B-14 a germline and a somatic pathogenic mutation, possibly acting as dri- 
P12 .093 ver alterations. This report adds information to the molecular etiology of Profiling of mutations in gastric cancer FLC, and to the coTnPt5in3u ously growing spectrum of tumors related to LFS. K. I. Kirillova1,2, V. V. Strelnikov1,2, M. V. Nemtsova1,3, I. I. Bykov4, A. S. Tanas1,2; IGmrapnotr:tantly, probands with family history reminiscent of LFS/LFL should 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian be considered for screening. National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian Medical FRV is a recipient of the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimen- Academy for Postgraduate Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4I.M.Sechenov First to Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) grant 486599/2012– 4 and Funda- Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. ção de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (FAPERJ) grant 
E26 /110.535/2012. RCA is recipient of a Ministério da Saúde / Instituto Nacional de Câncer grant. Introduction: Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common oncological diseases with high morbidity and mortality. Genetic factors may increase the 
P12 .090 risk of developing GC. The aims of this study are to identify new genes invol- Cloud-based informatics enables the design and analysis of massively ved in the development of GC and to characterize mutations in these genes. multiplex custom gene fusion panels for next-generation sequencing Materials and methods: The study included GC 52 patients aged 35-59 on FFPE RNA samples. years, who had given the tumor material, normal gastric tissue and venous R. Gottimukkala, E. Ballesteros, H. Breu, Y. Lou, S. Myrand, M. Hogan, K. Bramlett, G. Liu, blood. Search for mutations in 52 cancer related genes was carried out by S. Sadis, F. Hyland, F. Hernandez-Guzman; Thermo Fisher, South San Francisco, CA, United States. high-throughput parallel DNA sequencing. For the validation of the detected mutations we used Sanger sequencing. Determination of germline or soma- tic nature of the identified mutations was done by DNA sequencing of nor- Gene fusions, a combination of two genes, are caused by structural DNA re- mal tissues of the same patients. arrangements. Many gene fusions are strong driver mutations in neoplasia, Results: Mutations were found in 22 out of 52 genes. We show that diffuse and are important in understanding interaction with targeted therapy and and intestinal GC types are distinguished by the spectra of somatic muta- risk stratification. tions: somatic mutations in the CDH1 gene are more common in the dif- Massively multiplex Ampliseq gene fusion assays with next-generation se- fuse type (p=0.04) and mutations in the T
P53  gene are more common in quencing enable enrichment of fusion transcripts using 10 ng of RNA ex- the intestinal type of GC (p=0.04). Germline mutations in patients with tracted from FFPE samples, with sensitive detection of particular fusion GC were for the first time detected in the genes MET (p.N375S, p.R970C), isoforms for defined gene pairs. Ion Torrent sequencing reveals the full se- RB1 (p.H686N), EGFR (p.V292M), JAK3 (p.V722I), APC (p.I1289K), ATM quence of the gene fusion. (p.F858L), CDKN2A (p.D86N). New mutations were discovered in the CDH1 We developed cloud-based software to enable the design of a custom Ampli- gene (c.-71C>G, p.K182N, p.T303P, p.
S838 G, c.1320+2T>G). seq gene fusion panel, with up to 1,000 fusions and gene expression assays. C Po 1n 2c .0lu 9s 4ions: Our results suggest that germline mutations in genes other We extensively mined the scientific literature and the COSMIC database for t Mh Aan P 3C KDH 6 1 e xm pi rg eh st s c io on nt r ai nb du t me t eo t hG yC l ad te iv oe nl o pp rm ofe in let . in sporadic Gastric fusions. We rigorously curated this data, including correction of reported Cancer sequence to obtain genomic coordinates, breakpoints, exon junctions, and A. S. Valente1, P. Oliveira1, P. Ferreira1, J. Carvalho1, H. Pinheiro1, C. Oliveira1,2; selected wet lab testing. We created a database containing over 1000 high 1Ipatimup/i3S, Porto, Portugal, 2Medical Faculty of the University of Porto, Porto, quality fusion isoforms, including 70 ALK, 60 RET, 26 RO
S1 , and 21 NTRK1 Portugal. fusions. We designed multiplexable Ampliseq primers for all fusions. Introduction: We developed cloud-based analysis software to analyze sequencing data, utilizing the rich annotation information. The reads are mapped to a custom Every year, >1 million new Gastric Cancer (GC) cases are fusion reference sequence; an optimized algorithm selects confidently map- diagnosed and around 700.000 GC-related deaths are reported. Despite all ped reads using overlap and breakpoint information, and sensitively detects efforts, much remains to be known on the molecular events involved. Impor- gene fusions. Software QC steps for total number of mapped reads, number tant lessons can be learned from studies of familial cases as the genes and of reads for gene expression controls, and elimination of cross-talk artifacts mechanisms are frequently shared with those found in the sporadic setting. result in a highly sensitive and specificE dSeHteGcti o2n0 o1f f6u s|i oBnAs, RwCithE LLOODN bAelo, wS PARINec e|n WtlyW, wWe d.EesScHribGed.O MRAG
P3 K6 germline mutations in hereditary GC 2. 7S 7o- 1%. Fusion results can be viewed, annotated, exported. matic hypermethylation of an intragenic CpG island, overlapping a DNase-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .096 Gene expression analysis of Gastric cancer Patients from Saudi hypersensitive site predicted to harbour a promoter-associated rMegautelartioarlys Arabian Population aelnedm Menett, hhoads sb:e en presented as a putative second-hit. The aim of the present F. Bibi1, M. I. Nasser2, S. Akhtar2, E. I. Azhar1,3, M. Yasir4, A. A. Jiman-Fatani5, A. Sawan6; work was to evaluate the relevance of MA
P3 K6 in sporadic GC. 1Special Infectious Agents Unit, King Fahd Medical Research Centre, King Abdulaziz MA
P3 K6 expression was evaluated by qRT-PCR in RRNeAs furlotms: University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 2Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research sporadic GC cases and corresponding adjacent normal mucosa. Methylation (CEGMR), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Medical Laboratory Technology, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, profile of MA
P3 K6 promoter and gene-body was assessed by RRBS. Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 4Special Infectious Agents Unit, King Fahd Medical Research Overall, MA
P3 K6 was consistently downregulated in GC samples in compa- Centre, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 5Department of Medical rison to corresponding adjacent mucosa. ProCmoontcelru hsyiopnoms: ethylation was a Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, King, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, common event in tumours, but the methylation profile at the intragenic CpG 6Department of Anatomical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, King, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. island was unchanged compared to normal. MA
P3 K6down- regulation seems to be a common event in GC, correlating with promoter hypomethylation. These observations suggest the existence of a repressor The role of small non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) in several types of can- binding site within MA
P3 K6 promoter, which becomes active upon deme- cer has been evident. However, its expression has not been studied in Saudi thylation. Further studies are warranted to corroborate these findings as population in gastric cancer (GC) patients. First time this study was con- well as to disclose the role of MA
P3 K6 in gastric carcinogenesis. ducted to identify miRNAs that are differentially expressed in gastric cancer The study was supported by FCT Fellowships (SFRH/BPD/89764/2012; patients compared with normal controls using miRNA microarray analysis SFRH/BPD/86543/2012; SFRH/BPD/79499/2011), iFCT Programmes and validated the results by Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). Our ob- 2014, POPH—QREN Type 4.2, European Social Fund and Portuguese MC- jective was to investigate the role of microRNAs in GC patients from Saudi TES. population using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues of 34 
P12 .095 samples from GC patients and 15from normal control.We obtainedP expres- The tumorigenic pathways of MSI and CIN sporadic gastric cancers sion data of 1082P expressed genes, from cancer tissues and noncancerous J. Carvalho1,2, P. Ferreira1,2, P. Oliveira1,2, G. M. Almeida1,2, H. Pinheiro1,2, S. Rocha1,2, D. tissues (48 samples in total). Where 129 genes are up-regulated ( > 0.05) Ferreira1,2, A. S. Valente1,2, M. Santos1,2,3, F. Carneiro1,2,4, C. Oliveira1,2,3,4; and 953 genes ( > 0.05) are down-regulated in 45 FFPE tissue samples. 1Expression Regulation in Cancer Group, IPATIMUP, Institute of Molecular Pathology After candi[[Unsupported Character - Codename &shy;]]date miRNAs were and Immunology of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Instituto de Investigação selected, qPCR further confirmed that four miRNAs (hsa-miR-361-5p, hsa- e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Department of Medical miR-3687, hsa-miR-3613-3p, hsa-miR-1263) were significantly aberrant in Sciences and Institute of Biomedicine – iBiMED, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal, GC tissues compared to the normal gastric tissues. In this study we provide 4Medical Faculty of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. miRNAs profile of GC where many miRNAs showed aberrant expression, Introduction: suggesting the involvement of these genes in the development and progres- sion of gastric cancer. Taken together, the results provided potential roles of Gastric cancer (GC) kills ~700.000 people per year and these candidates’ miRNAs in the diagnosis, prognosis biomarkers, or thera- 5-year overall survival is below 25%, due to late diagnosis and lack of ef- py targets of gastric cancer in Saudi population. fective therapies. Surgery is the single curative treatment, however helpful only for early-stage tumors. Targeted therapies are just starting to be ap- 
P12 .097 plied with limited success. Recently, NGS technology provided the spectrum Stomach Specific eQTLs represent Risk Factors for the Development of somatic alterations in several GC series but its usefulness for decision- of Gastric Carcinoma making in clinical practice is still scarce. We Maiamteerdi aalt acnhda rMacettehroizdinsg: two T. Hess1,2, U. Gyvyte3, J. Becker1,2, S. Heinrichs1,2, S. Lindenberg2, M. Leja4, M. Venerito5, J. GC molecular subgroups and predict targetable molecular signatures, which Kupcinskas3, J. Schumacher1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of may guide better therapy selection strategies. Fifty Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Gastroenterology, GC tumour/normal pairs either showing Chromosomal Instability (CIN=25) Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania, 4Digestive Diseases Center and bad prognosis, or Microsatellite Instability (MSI=25) and better progno- GASTRO, Riga East University Hospital, University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia, 5Department sRies,s wuletrse: analyzed by Whole genome and Methylome sequencing and inte- of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, University of Magdeburg, grative bioinformatics. Data was validated in independent TCGA datasets. Magdeburg, Germany. MSI tumours displayed hypermethylated tumour suppressor genes and activating point mutations in oncogenes. CIN tumours displayed gene amplification at oncogenes and drug-resistance genes and hypomethylati- Introduction: Gastric carcinoma (GC) represents the forth most common on at oncogene promoters. The same type of differential mechanisms was cancer type worldwide. To find genetic risk factors priming for GC develop- found for Chromatin remodeling, and Cell cycle control, but Splicing factors ment, GWAS in Asian populations have been performed already with suc- and RNA-binding proteins were affected similarly in botCho snucblgursoiuopnss.: Despi- cess. However, genetic GC studies in patients of European origin are scarce te differences in mechanisms, genes encoding targetable oncogenic signal- and so far have focused on small sets of candidate loci only. ling proteins were similarly affected in both subgroups. These Materials and Methods: To identify germline variants playing a role in the data demonstrate that most tumors present similar tumorigenic pathways development of GC in patients of European descent, we genotyped a set of independently of the molecular subgroup, and that differences in prognosis 27 SNPs in a Eastern European sample comprising 502 GC cases and 507 and drug response are likely related with the action of modifier proteins. controls. As disease associated variants often reside in gene regulatory elements, we selected the SNPs based on the latest data release of the Ge- notype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) consortium, focusing on strong stomach specific expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). Results: Three of the tested SNPs showed at least nominal significance for theP dSeCvAe.lopment of GC (P < 0-.805). SNP rs2976397 showed the strongest GC association signal (P = 2Nx1
P0 PAe ) at the same time influencing th-e2 expression of SNP rs198408 showed GC association (P = 1K.6LR7xB110e ) and regu- lates the expression -2of . Additionally, SNP rs10771539 was GC asso- ciated (P = 2.31x10e ) regulating the transcription of . Conclusion: In summary, using stomach specific eQTLs we identified three SNPs that are associated with GC development. Further replication studies in a large independent European sample are currently performed to further elucidate the role of eQTLs in the development of this fatal disease. 278 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .098 
P12 .100 Deciphering the genetic bases of gastric carcinoids: from human to genetic investigation of familial hematological malignancies mouse model.. A knockin mouse model with a missense mutation W. Hamadou1, S. Besbes1, R. El abed1, V. Bourdon2, Y. Ben youssef3, M. Laatiri4, S. Jemni5, in the AT
P4 a gene mimics an aggressive familial form of gastric T. Noguchi6, A. Khelif3, H. Sobol6, Z. Soua1; 1Faculty of Medicine of Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Institut Paoli-Calmette, marseille, neuroendocrine tumor type I in humans France, 3Service of Clinical Hematology. CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Service of O. Calvete1, A. Varro2, P. Vargiu3, S. Dodd2, D. Pritchard2, M. Garcia4, J. Reyes5, S. Ortega3, Clinical Hematology. CHU Fattouma Bourguiba, monastir, Tunisia, 5Regional center of J. Benítez1; Blood transfusion . CHU F. Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 6Institut Paoli-Calmette, Marseille, 1Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncologicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Department France. of cellular and molecular physiology. Institute of translational medicine. University of Liverpool., Liverpool, United Kingdom, 3Transgenic mice core unit. Spanish national cancer research center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 4Animal facility core unit. Spanish national cancer research center (CNIO)., Madrid, Spain, 5Department of Introduction: Familial aggregation among patients with several hematolo- gastroenterology. Hospital INCA., Majorca, Spain. gical malignancies has been revealed. This emphasizes the importance of genetic factors. Only few genes predisposing to familial hematological ma- lignancies have been reported until now due to the low occurrence. Few Introduction: The H,K-AT
P4 a proton pump acidifies the gastric lumen in variants that might contributing to the background of genetic factors were tight coordination with gastrin. We recently identified a missense mutation reported, this fact encourage us to extend our FinAvSe, sFtAigSaLtGio, nCAs StPo8 o, tChAeSrP c1o0-, in the human AT
P4 a gene that causes an aggressive form of familial gastric oPpReFr1ating genes. We targeCtR sAeFv, eBrRaAl Fg,e CnBeLs previously reported in sporCaEdBic- neuroendocrine tumor characterized by early age of onset, hypoacidity, hPAem, TaPto5l3o, gRicUaNl Xm1alignancies as apoptotic genes ( YY1, ASX
L1 , hypergastrinemia, iron-deficiency anemia, muscular infiltration, intestinal NPM1),, pJArKo2to-oncogenes ( ), tumor suppressor genes ( metaplasia and adenocarcinoma. Total gastrectomy was undertaken as the ) and genes involved in several cell process ( final treatment for the affected patients. ). Materials and Methods: In this study, we investigatedA tShXeLs1e Materials and Methods: We constructed a knockin mouse model for this mu- 15 candidate genes by direct sequencing in 20 Tunisian familial cases with tation to better understand the pathology developing and search for new aggregated hematological malignancies. Results: We report a new therapies gPeRrFm1line missense substitution p.Arg402Gln in two related patients that we Results: Mice mimic most of the alterations described in human patients, in- describe it for theI nfi rssilti ctoime in non-Hodgkin lymphoma. We report also a cluding achlorhydria, iron-deficiency anemia and hypergastrinemia, which p.Ala211Val variant in two related patients both diagnosed with Hod- validate the mutation as the primary responsible for this disease. While ginien lymphoma. analysis has predicted potential delJeAtKer2i ous e fafencdt mice developed severe hyperplasia, dysplasia and glandular metaplasia in of these two vaTrPia5n3t s and were totally absent in 200 control chromosomes. the stomach, gastric neuroendocrine tumors or adenocarcinomas as ob- We report also two intronic substitutions: c.1641+6 T>C in gene served in humans were not observed. Interestingly, gastric acidification by 559+1 G>A in gene in familial cases diagnosed respectively with Hod- treatment with 3% HCl in drinking water, both prevented (treatment since ginien lymphoma and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. This two substitutions birth) and reverted (treatment starting at 150 or 250 days after birth) the may disrupt the splice site aAnSdX Lim1pTaPc5t 3t,h JAe Kn2ormalP RprFo1tein function. Con- glandular metaplasia and severe dysplasia phenotype of mice and partially clusion: From an extended candidate genes analyzed in the field of familial restored the biochemical parameters in stomachs. hematological malignancies, , and might be involved. Conclusions: Preliminary preclinical experiments with HCl drinking water These variants should be considered as potential candidate genes since a prevent and revert the gastric pathology in mouse model. These results potential damaging effect was predicted. suggest a therapeutic alternative for the treatment of human patients. Fur- 
P12 .101 thermore, the knockin mouse model represents a unique and novel tool for Establishment and characterization of a primary glioblastoma studying pathologies related to stomach acid disturbances. multiforme human cell line with 
C176 F T
P53  mutation This work is partially funded by CIBERER, H2020 BRIDGES and the Spanish L. Muñoz-Hidalgo1, C. López-Ginés2, R. Gil-Benso2, S. Rodríguez3, J. Mejías2, T. San Ministry of Health PI12/00070 supported by FEDER. Miguel2, M. Cerdá-Nicolás2; 
P12 .099 1Foundation for research HCU-INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain, 2University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 3Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. Genomic classification of oral squamous cell carcinoma: the role of copy number alterations I. P. Ribeiro1,2, F. Caramelo3, F. Marques2,4,5, A. Santos1, L. Barroso6, M. Mesquita6, T. Lopes6, M. J. Julião7, A. Ferreira6, I. P. Baptista2,4, J. B. Melo1,2, I. M. Carreira1,2; Introduction: Primary glioblastoma (GBM) is the most frequent and most 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, malignant neoplasm of the human brain tumors which, despite current Coimbra, Portugal, 2CIMAGO - Center of Investigation on Environment, Genetics therapies, usually causes the patient’s death within one year following dia- and Oncobiology - Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, gnosis. Cell lines derived from primary tumors represent an important tool 3Laboratory of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, IBILI - Faculty of Medicine, for studying the biological behavior of these malignant neoplasms and sear- University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Department of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Stomatology Unit, Coimbra Hospital and ching for new drugs and treatments. The objective of the present work was University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Maxillofacial Surgery Unit, Coimbra the immunohistochemical and genetic characterization of a new human cell Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Department of line established from a primary GBM, named GBM-HC-44. Pathology, Coimbra Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal. Material and Methods: We have analyzed immunohistochemical markers, cytogenetics and molecular characteristics of the cell line and the prima- ry tumor. We have analyzed the variation in the number of copies and the Introduction: Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma (OSCC) is a phenotypic, ae- methylation status of genes involved in cancer by MLPA technique (MLPA tiological, biological and clinical heterogeneous malignancy. The current 
P105 -D1 gliomas and M
E001 -
C2  tumor suppressor-1). EGFR /CE
P7  expres- attempts of risk stratification do not have utility in clinical routine and con- sion was analyzed by FISH technique. Likewise, sequencing for T
P53 , SKY sequently in the patients survival. We aimed to molecularly discriminate and CGH array were performed. these heterogeneous OSCC patients based in chromosomal gains and losses Comments: We report the characterization of GBM-HC-44 cell line, derived and consequently find a clinical meaning to the molecular groups identi- from a primary GBM with 
C176 F mutation in T
P53  and without EGFR am- fied. Material and Methods: Array-comparative genomic hybridization in 93 plification. Numerical and structural alterations in chromosomes as triso- OSCC samples was performed using an Agilent oligonucleotide microarray mies 7, 14, 15, 18, 20 and 21, and further deletions in chromosomes regions 4x180K. Healthy donors were used as controls. Results: Our results confir- 10, 13, 16 and 19 were detected. The study of GBM-HC-44 cell line and its med the regions previously reported as altered in these tumors, including comparison with features of the primary tumor may improve the know- gain of chromosomes 3q, 8q and 11q13 and loss in 3p, 5q and 9p. The pre- ledge about these neoplasms and could be a very useful material for basic sence or absence of metastasis/relapses is one of the most important pre- research of GBM. dictors of disease outcome. Using cluster analysis based only in the genomic Supported by FIS 
P114 /01669 and PROMETEO II/2015/007 profile we were able to separate our cohort in two groups, one of which was correlated with a high risk of metastasis/relapses development during or after treatment, (χ2(1)=6.7610637; p=0.0093168 and OR=3.868,I
C95 % (1.478; 10.12). This specific genomic signature identified seems to have the power to predict outcome in OSCC with huge implications in terms of treat- ment choices, disease control and prevention. Conclusions: These results re- present a significant step forward in the translation of genomic biomarkers for OSCC management in the clinical daily use. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 279ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .102 Early onset of Glioblasoma in Indian consanguineous family is caused by R802X PM
S2  homozygous mutation thylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT). Little is known about the ti- S. E. Antonarakis1, G. Chetan2, M. Adrianova3, V. Zoete4, M. Sibin2, K. Narasinga Rao5, O. ming of MGMT silencing during gliomagenesis, the distribution of MGMT Michielin6, P. Ribaux1, V. Seplyarskiy3, S. I. Nikolaev7; methylated alleles and the potential association with MGMT deletion (10q 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of human genetics. Nimhans, LOH). We investigated the associations among MGMT methylation levels, Bangalore, India, 3Institute of Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy IDH genotyping and 10q allelic loss. of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4SIB, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Department METHODS: We quantitatively assessed by pyrosequencing the IDH1 R132H of Neurosurgery. Nimhans,, Bangalore, India, 6SIB, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, allele frequency and the MGMT methylation percentages in 208 primitive 7University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. glioma samples. The 10q LOH was determined by Short Tandem Repeats genotyping or array-CGH. RESULTS: 1. IDH1 was heterozygously mutated in virtually all cancer cells, We have performed exome sequencing of two second cousin patients with whereas MGMT methylated alleles were not homogeneously distributed in the early onset of glioblastoma and their parents from a consanguineous tumor cells. family with likely autosomal recessive inheritance. 1.3% of the patients ge- 2. The MGMT methylation percentages directly correlated with increasing nomes were identical by decent and homozygous; the homozygous segment OS. included a germline p.R802X variant in the PM
S2  gene. We have confirmed 3. The MGMT LOH acts as a late event during gliomagenesis, not related to that the mutation segregated with the phenotype. Additionally, we have per- methylation. formed the exome sequencing of the tumors, and revealed extremely high CONCLUSION: The incomplete overlap between the percentages of IDH1 somatic mutation rates: one tumor contained 12621 somatic mutations mutated and MGMT methylated alleles in tumor cells suggests that only a including truncating in PAR
P1 , ARID2, CREBBP and T
P53 ; and the other - fraction of tumor cells undergo MGMT silencing, indicating an incomplete 6764 mutations including two drivers in PIK3CA (p.R88Q and p.T1025A) association between the two events. Nevertheless, MGMT methylation is a and truncating mutations in APC and in NF1. Interestingly both tumors positive prognostic marker irrespective of IDH1 status. Finally, MGMT can harbored somatic mutations in the proofreading domain of POLE (p.
P436 H be considered a tumor suppressor completely inactivated by 10q LOH and and p.
L424 V), polymerase that replicates the leading strand during DNA methylation in more advanced tumors. replication. In-silico modeling suggested these mutations cause significant structural instability of the protein. Most interestingly we have observed in 
P12 .105 both cancers that the vast majority of mutations were consistent with the si- Identification of GPR
C5 A as a novel risk factor for the triple negative gnature of PolE exo-: C>A and C>T mutations which occurred on the leading tumor phenotype in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers strand. This genetic analysis revealed the cause and functional mechanism K. Klaschik1,2,3, E. Pohl1,2,3, J. Hauke1,2,3, G. Neidhardt1,2,3, S. Kröber1,2,3, S. Heilmann- of familial glioblastoma and provided additional diagnostic opportunity in Heimbach4,5, H. Hellebrand6, H. Surowy7, J. Altmüller8,9, P. Nürnberg8,9,10, C. Engel11, B. the studied family. Wappenschmidt1,2,3, K. Rhiem1,2,3, A. Meindl6, R. Schmutzler1,2,3, E. Hahnen1,2,3; 1Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for 
P12 .103 Integrated Oncology (CIO), Cologne, Germany, 3Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne Over expression of hMSH2 mRNA is associated with poor prognosis in (CMMC), Cologne, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, high grade glioma Germany, 5Life&Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 6Department of Gynaecoloegy and C. K. Ghati; Obstetrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar at the Technical University, Munich, Germany, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuroscinces, Bangalore, India. 7Molecular Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and Molecular Biology of Breast Cancer, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, hMSH2 10Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases Introduction:Glioblastoma and anaplastic oligodendroglioma are high gra- (CECAD), Cologne, Germany, 11Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and de gliomas (HGG). HuhmMaSnH M2 utS homolog2 ( ) is the most consistently Epidemiology (IMISE)Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Leipzig, Germany. expressed MMR gene and a key component for mismatch recognition. Pro- GPR
C5 A ficient expression of hMSmHR2N A is important for efficient functioning of Gprc5a MMR, thereby maintaining micro-satellite and genomic stability. We studied encodes an orphan G-protein coupled receptor highly expressed in the expression levels of and its role in progression free survival lung tissue. knockout mice spontaneously develop lung adenomas (PFS) in high grade glioma. hMSH2 and adenocarcinomas suggestive of a role in cancer predisposition. Within a Materials and Methods:Our study group consisted of 39 glioma patients consanguGiPnReCo5uAs breast cancer (BC) family from Turkey, we identified a ho- (frontal lobe) and 8 non-glioma patients. Expression of mRNA was mozygous frameshift mutation (c.183delG; p.R61Sfs*59) in the first coding studied using qRT-PCR (ABI Taqman Gene expression assay). Kruskal Wallis exon of in two affected sisters via GexPoRm
C5 eA sequencing, suggesting test was used for comparison of mRNA expression between various groups. anB aRuCtoAs1omal recessive trait. Interestingly, SokBoRleCnAk1o et al. (2014) repor- Kaplan M eier survival analyhsiMs SwHa2s used for variables with prognosis and ted a ten-fold increase of theG PhRetCe5rAozygous p.R61Sfs*59 mutation Cox proportional hazard regression was used for multivariate analysis. in c.5266dupC BC patients compared to -negative BC patients. Results:Over expression of with median fold change of 2.48h M(RSaHn2- Thus, we hypothesized that GPR aCc5tsA as recessive BC gene and disease ge-0.01-114.98) was found in 51.5% cases significantly different from non- modifier when heterozygously inactivated. While the seBaRrCcAh 1f/o2r homozy- glioma tissues (p=0.036). Positive correlation was seen between gous or compound hBeRtCeAro1z/y2gous mutation carriers is ongoing, we gene expression and age [r = +0.4 (p=0.01)]. Age, histological type,h gMraSdHe2, genotyped the p.R61Sfs*59 mutation in a large serieBsR oCfA 1/2 mutation extent of resection and post surgery adjuvant therapy (RT+CT) were as- carriers (n=1,841), -negative familial cases (n=5,841) and control sociated with PFS of patients in univariate analysis (p<0.05). Low individuals (n=8,305). The detailed analysis of the GPR m
C5 uAtation car- expression with RT+CT was seen to have significantly better prognosis riers, consisting of 1,282 BC, 131 ovarian cancer (OC), 106 BC/OC patients (median=22months), when compared to high expression with RT+CT and 322 healthy mutation carriers, revBeRaCleAd1 t/h2at the 17 mutation (median=10 months, p=0.011). ThuMmSoHr 2ty pe, grade and effective therapy in- carriers solely coincide with the BC subgroup (CF=1,33%). Remarkably, the dependently predicted PFS (p<0.05) using multivariate analysis. mutation was particularly frequent in -positive triple negative BC Conclusion:Over expression of mRNA suggests higher number of cases (11/540, CF=2.04%) and presenGtPeRdC a5 sAtatistically significant associa- mispair DNA mutations in high grade glioma. This can be used as a potential tion withB tRhCisA B1C/ 2subtype (odds ratio: 2.362; 95%CI=1.177-4.627; p=0.007). prognostic biomarker. In summary, we provide evidence for p.R61Sfs*59 as a disease mo- 
P12 .104 difier in mutation caGrPriReCr5s,A especially in BC cases affected by the Methylated MGMT alleles are distributed heterogeneously in glioma, triple negative subtype. We are now starting functional analyses to elucidate irrespective of IDH status and chromosome 10q deletion the molecular mechanisms of p.Arg61fs in BC pathogenesis. C. Pesenti1,2, L. Fontana2, S. Tabano2, E. Bonaparte1,2, R. Falcone1,2, G. Marfia2,3, M. Caroli1, S. Guerneri1, M. Baccarin1, N. Carlessi1, S. Sirchia2, S. Bosari1,2, M. Miozzo1,2; 1Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda-Ospedale Policlinico di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda-Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico di Milano, Milano, Italy. INTRODUCTION: The evaluation of molecular markers in glioma is part of clinical assessment and glioma classification. Mutations in the dehydrogenases IDH1-IDH2 are prognostic markers in 280 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG glioma, strongly associated with the epigenetic silencing of the O6-me-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .106 
P12 .108 Prostate cancer susceptibility assessed by GWAS risk variants in Famosa study: evaluation of a multigene panel in patients with Finnish men suspected HBOC C. Sipeky1, T. L. J. Tammela2, A. Auvinen3, t. PRACTICAL consortium4, J. Schleutker1,5; E. Adrover1, I. Esteban2, A. G. Calabuig1, G. Llort3, S. Servitja4, A. Nuñez5, I. Garau6, J. M. 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Cano7, R. Serrano8, M. López9, S. González9, M. Juan10, C. Alonso11, A. Casas12, B. Graña13, Finland, 2Department of Urology, Tampere University Hospital and Medical School, A. Teulé14, A. Marquez15, J. Alés16, C. Guillén17, A. Antón18, J. Brunet19, F. Balaguer20, J. University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 3Department of Epidemiology, School of Balmaña2; Health Sciences, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 4Members from the Prostate 1C H. Universitario Albacete, Albacete, Spain, 2H Vall Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, 3H. Parc Cancer Association Group to Investigate Cancer Associated Alterations in the Genome Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 4H del Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 5H Mataró, Mataró, Spain, 6H. Son (PRACTICAL) consortium are provided in the Supplement/foot notes., *, Finland, 5Tyks Llatzer, Palma Mallorca, Spain, 7HG Ciudad Real, Ciudad Real, Spain, 8H. Reina Sofia, Microbiology and Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, Turku University Hospital, Córdoba, Spain, 9H. S. Pedro Alcántara, Cáceres, Spain, 10IVO, Valencia, Spain, 11H. de la Turku, Finland. Princesa, Madrid, Spain, 12H. Virgen Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 13H. Abente y Lago, Coruña, Spain, 14ICO Hospitalet, Hospitalet, Spain, 15H. Clínico Málaga, Málaga, Spain, 16H. Ntra. Sra. Sonsoles, Avila, Spain, 17H. Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 18H. Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 19H Josep Trueta, Gerona, Spain, 20H. Clínico, Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: Prostate cancer (PrCa) is the most common cancer in males in Finland with 5043 new cases in 2015. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified 101 common PrCa susceptibility loci, explaining 33% of OBJECTIVES: Characterize the frequency of mutations in patients with cli- familial risk of prostate cancer predominantly in mixed European popula- nical criteria for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) using a 25- tion. Our aim is to assess the association of selected GWAS “hot hits” with gene panel in a Spanish population (FAMOSA study). PrCa specifically in Finnish men. PATIENTS: Patients with breast or ovarian cancer who met the NCCN crite- Materials and methods: In order to subset GWAS variants with strong risk ria for genetic testing with a) prior testing for BRCA genes with NO mutation effect we applied the per allele odds ratio (OR) of ≥ 1.1, and with strong identified; or b) recently diagnosed (<6 months) and not genetically tested, protective effect the OR ≤ 0.9. Effect allele frequency was chosen as > 0.1. By were enrolled for multiplex cancer testing. applying these criteria we selected 37 known risk and 13 known protective RESULTS: From November 14 to February 15, 210 patients were included variants from 101 GWAS hits in PrCa. Germline DNA samples for common in the FAMOSA study (109 HBOC). 61 (56%) patients were previously te- PrCa risk loci were genotyped for 5165 Finnish subjects (n=2764 unselec- sted for BRCA1/2 gene mutations with conventional techniques; median ted cases, n=2401 controls) within the Collaborative Oncological Gene- age: 44y (22-77); gender: 3 males / 106 females; cancer types: breast 96 Environment Study (COGS) using Illumina iSelect custom SNP genotyping (87.3%); ovary 14 (12.7%). Overall 23 (21%) pathogenic variants were platform. Statistical analyses of case-control logistic regression model was identified in 19 patients; 10 BRCA1, 2 BRCA2, 2 PALB2, 3 MYH, 1 CDKN2A; performed by using PLINK software. 3 ATM, 1 BRAD1, 1 BRI
P1 . One patient had an unexpected mutation in CD- Results and Conclusions: 13 of 37 common European risk variants (1/3), KN2A gene (gluteus sarcoma age 20; bilateral breast ca; ages 45 and 50; and 4 of 13 common European protective variants were not found as sta- father lung ca, age 70; brother melanoma, age 35). Of 61 patients previously tistically significant on GWAS level in Finnish samples. The highest PrCa tested, 1 had a pathogenic variant in BRCA1 and 17/19 patients with VUS susceptibility variant is at 8q24 CAS
C8  gene region (p=5.26x10-12), which were classified negative in BRCA genes with the 25-gene panel. seems to play an important role in PrCa genetics in Finns. CONCLUSIONS: Panel testing in patients with HBOC yielded a 21% mutation * Information of the consortium can be found at http://practical.ccge.med- rate, increasing the yield of genetic mutations beyond BRCA; one unexpec- schl.cam.ac.uk/. ted finding in CDKN2A was identified. 
P12 .107 
P12 .109 Post-mortem testing: Germline variant detection in genes related to Identification of novel candidate genes for Hereditary Breast Cancer hereditary breast, ovarian and colorectal cancer using archival non- via Whole Exome Sequencing tumor tissue D. Turchetti1,2, R. Zuntini1,2, F. Isidori1, C. Diquigiovanni1, F. Buscherini1, F. Palombo1, S. T. D. Jensen, A. Petersen, M. Joergensen, A. Bojesen; Miccoli1,2, E. Bonora1,2; Department of Clinical Genetics, Lillebaelt Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. 1U.O.Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 2Centro di Ricerca sui Tumori Ereditari, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. Introduction: A sufficient evaluation of cancer risk in a family suspected of e.g. hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) or Lynch syndrome very BRCA1/2 often requires genetic testing. The task of identifying the disease-causing Hereditary breast cancer (HBC) accounts for 5-10% of breast cancer cases. mutation in a family is difficult without affected living family members. Germline mutations explain 60% of HBC, but no other major genes Identifying a mutation in tissue-derived DNA from deceased is technically have been identified in the remaining 40%. challenging and because of that, this diagnostic approach has not been offe- We BdeRcCiAd1ed/2 t.o perform whole exome sequencing (WES) in affected first-de- red on a regular basis by diagnostic departments or companies. gree cousin-pairs displaying features suggestive of HBC, who testednegative Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from 9x15 µm FFPE tissue for Based on their relationship, cousins share 1/8 of the entire sections per sample, and DNA integrity was estimated. DNA samples were genome, which helps filter and select candidate variants. To date, 4 cBoRuCsiAn2- subjected to HaloPlex Target Enrichment using a custom design (Agilent pairs were analyzed through WES and candidate variants were identified Technologies). After enrichment, HaloPlex libraries were diluted, pooled, in three different genes in 3 pairs, wROhSe1reaRsA tShAeL f1ourth oICnAe Msh5ared a denatured and 10 pM library pool was subjected to paired-end (2x150 bp), deletion not previously identified by Sanger sequencing. single index (8 bp) DNA sequencing on a MiSeq (Illumina). The candidate variants, afRfeOcSt1ing , and genes, were Results: In clinical use, a total of 304 samples (0-43 years) were investigated confirmed by direct sequencing. Further characterizRaOtSio1n of the variants is using our HBOC and colorectal cancer NGS panels. We identified 16 patho- ongoing. In particular, the variant affected a predicted canonic splice genic and 1 likely pathogenic BRCA1 variants, 11 pathogenic and 1 likely site, suggesting an effect on the correct splicing of , a tyrosine kinase pathogenic BRCA2 variants, 7 pathogenic and 1 likely pathogenic CDH1 va- receptor that has been implicated in several cancer types. We inserted the riants and 1 pathogenic PALB2 variant. Furthermore, we identified 5 patho- wild-type or mutant genomic region into a minigene plasmid, transfected genic APC variants. We did not detect any pathogenic variants in the Lynch it into CO
S7  cells, and found that the mutant cells used a cryptic intronic syndrome-associated genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PM
S2  and EPCAM. splice site 20 bp downstream, leading to the insertion of a premature stop- Conclusions: The possibility of identifying pathogenic mutations in de- codon in the protein. Future studies will explore the effect of the variant on ceased family members is a new and important tool in the process of de- cell growth/proliferation and invasion in CRISP/Cre-modified MCF10A and termining or evaluating the risk of certain cancers of family members who MCF7 cells. receive genetic counseling. Our findings support previous evidence that many different genes account for the fraction of HBC not related to BRCA1/2 mutations and led us to iden- tify promising novel variants for HBC. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 281ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .110 Oncology Department, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, Lleida, Spain, 7Medical Search for new high susceptibility genes in hereditary breast cancer Oncology Department, Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 8Unitat de families with a recessive pattern of inheritance Consell Genètic. Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí. Consorci Sanitari de Terrassa, Sabadell, A. Tavera1, M. de la Hoya2, A. Macías3, A. Barroso1, M. Urioste1, J. Benitez1, A. Osorio1; Spain, 9Departament d’Oncologia Mèdica. Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí Institut 1CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Morales Universitari-UAB, Sabadell, Spain, 10Departament d’Oncologia Mèdica. Consorci Sanitari de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain. Meseguer, Murcia, Spain. Pathogenic variants of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes (BRCA1/2) mostly Only two high-risk genes involved in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer include small insertions or deletions and nucleotide substitutions that ge- (HBOC) have been identified, BRCA1 and BRCA2, that do not explain more nerate a premature stop codon. Besides, large genomic rearrangements than 20% of HBOC cases. In the last years, Whole Exome Sequencing (WES), (LGRs) account for 5-10% of all deleterious variants in BRCA1/2. has been used to find novel susceptibility genes. Molecular characterization of LGRs is essential to know their genetic mecha- So far, dominant or polygenic patterns of inheritance have been considered, nisms, identify recurrent alterations, and investigate genotype/phenotype however, some publications have implemented simulations with different relationships. models of segregation in a large number of families which suggests that a We used multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) or mul- part of them could be explained by a model of recessive inheritance, a hypo- tiple amplicon quantification (MAQ) to identify BRCA1/2 LGRs in 1542 he- thesis that has remained unexplored. reditary breast/ovarian cancer families referred to three hospitals in Cata- Five families showing an apparent pattern of recessive inheritance were lonia. selected based on: presence of two or more affected siblings with BC at We used long-range PCR, CGH arrays, and cDNA analyses to characterize young age, absence of familial antecedents of the disease, availability of the the alterations at molecular level. We found 12 LGRs in BRCA1 and five in samples and no mutations in BRCA1/BRCA2 genes. Through WES, 23 candi- BRCA2. date variants following an apparent recessive inheritance model were iden- Breakpoints were fully characterized in fourteen of them. Six LGRs were tified and validated by Sanger sequencing. Segregation and loss of heterozy- novel: deletions targeting exons 1-2, exon 8, exons 16-17, two different de- gosity analyses in tumors samples are being performed. A further analysis letions of exon 24 in BRCA1 and one duplication of exon 21 in BRCA2. The considering a dominant inheritance pattern was also performed. 30 candi- BRCA1 deletion of exons 16-17 appears to be a Catalan founder mutation date variants were found in this analysis, including a truncating mutation explaining five independent families. in ATM, a known HBOC moderate risk gene, which lead us to the conclusion Both non-homologous and homologous events were involved in the aetio- that we cannot rule out other models of inheritance. Case-control associati- logy of the rearrangements. The cDNA analyses showed chimeric RNAs ex- on study in Spanish population is being performed to get insights about the pressed by BRCA1 alleles carrying exons 1-2 or exon 24 deletions. transcendence of these variants in the disease. Our study substantially increases the spectrum of BRCA1/2 LGRs fully cha- Grant References: La-Caixa fellowship, CNAG as part of the project “300 exo- racterized at the molecular level. Also highlights the relevance of cDNA ana- mes to elucidate rare diseases” (2013) lysis for a reliable prediction of protein effect of LGRs involving 5’ and 3’UTR 
P12 .111 expression regulatory regions. Introducing multigene panel testing for hereditary breast and ovarian (AECC and FIS PI12/02585, FIS PI13/01711 granted by Instituto de Salud cancer into routine practice: frequency of detected mutations in Carlos III and Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional-FEDER). Slovene patients A. Blatnik, M. Krajc, V. Stegel, P. Cerkovnik, S. Novaković; 
P12 .113 Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Transcriptional analysis of 36 BRCA1/BRCA2 variants with potential effects on splicing G. Montalban1,2, S. Bonache1, A. Tenés3, E. Carrasco4, N. Tuset5, I. Esteban4, N. Gadea6, J. Balmaña4,6, O. Díez1,3, S. Gutiérrez-Enríquez1; Introduction: Next generation sequencing (NGS) of breast/ovarian cancer 1Oncogenetics Group, Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology-VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, susceptibility genes has recently been shown to be an accurate and cost- 2Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Area of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, eBfRfeCcAt1ive method of performing genetic testing. NGS offers the possibility of Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 4High Risk and Cancer Prevention screening patients for mutations in high and moderate risk genes other than Group, Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology-VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, 5Medical Oncology /2. Subsequently, it increases the detection rate of variants of uncer- Department, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, Lleida, Spain, 6Medical Oncology tain significance. Our study aimed to determine the frequency of germline Department, Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. mutations found in Slovene patients using an NGS mBuRlCtAig1e/n2e panel. Methods: We retrospectively collected and analyzed data from a group of 306 patients selected in accordance with standard testing guideli- Introduction: Molecular diagnosis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes (BRCA1/2) nes and sequenced at our institution between OcBtRoCbAer1 2B0R1
C4 A a2ndT PN5o3vePmTbEeNr often identifies variants of unknown significance (VUS). An evaluation of 
S2 T0K1151. WCeD Has1seCsHseEdK 2thPeA fLreBq2uencyA ToMf mutations in genes associated with a their effect on mRNA splicing becomes essential to elucidate their clinical predisposition to breast/ovarian cancer, such as , , , , impact. In this study we perform experimental and bioinformatic analysis , , , aBnRdC A1 . BRCA2 to assess the role in disease development of a set of 36 VUS identified in Results: Pathogenic variants were detected in 29.4% of our patients. Most Spanish high-risk breast/ovarian cancer families. mutations werCeH iEdKen2tified in PALB2 (16.7%) aAnTdM (7C.8D%H)1. In additi- Methods: Bioinformatic tools were used to select 15 BRCA1 and 21 BRCA2 onT, 5P.523% carried a mutation in another breast/oBvRaCrAia2n cancAeTrM susceptibility VUS with potential splicing effects from 1200 patients screened for BRCA1/2 gene: 1.9% in , ~1% in , ~1% in , ~1% in and 0.3% pathogenic variants in genomic DNA. RNA from VUS carriers and 10 control in . One patient carrieBdR mCAu1ta/t2ions in both and CDH.1 samples was isolated from blood leukocytes. All variants are assessed by Conclusions: With NGS panel testing we were able to detect pathogenic va- RT-PCR, agarose gels and direct sequencing. A semiquantitative capillary riantsT inP 5g3enes other than in ~5% of our patients. mutations electrophoresis of fluorescent amplicons is performed to estimate the pro- were detected in patients with no family history of diffuse gastric cancer portion of aberrant and normal transcripts. The allele-specific transcript and a mutation was seen in a family with no Li-Fraumeni cancers apart expression will also be determined. from early-onset breast carcinoma, highlighting the benefits of this new ap- Results: Aberrant splicing patterns were observed in 5/15 BRCA1 and in proach. 7/21 BRCA2 variants. A preliminary semiquantitative analysis of the BRCA1 c.4675+1G>C and BRCA2 c.8023A>G shows differences in the abundance 
P12 .112 of the Δ15 and Δ18 isoforms compared to control samples, respectively. In Molecular characterization of BRCA1/BRCA2 large genomic both cases, the full-length transcript exhibits a significant reduced expressi- rearrangements in 1542 hereditary breast/ovarian cancer cases in on compared to controls, supporting the hypothesis that the variant alleles Catalonia only generate aberrant transcripts. S. Bonache1, A. Ruiz2, A. Tenés3, I. Hernan4, E. Carrasco5, N. Tuset6, I. Esteban5, N. Gadea7, Conclusions: Our findings highlight semiquantitative capillary electropho- G. Montalban1, C. Yagüe8, M. Seguí9, A. Arcusa10, G. Llort8, J. Balmaña5,7, S. Gutiérrez- Enríquez1, O. Díez1,3; resis as an essential tool to allow the clinical classification of VUS. 1Oncogenetics Group, Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology-VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, (AECC and FIS PI13/01711 granted by Instituto de Salud Carlos III and Fon- 2Laboratori de Genètica, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic, Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, do Europeo de Desarrollo Regional). Institut Universitari Parc Tauli-UAB, Sabadell, Spain, 3Area of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 4Unitat de Genètica Molecular. Hospital de Terrassa (CST), Terrassa, Spain, 5High Risk and Cancer Prevention Group, Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology-VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, 6Medical 282 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .114 Genetic testing for hereditary cancer: is exome sequencing ready or there is still room for ad hoc designed panels? the other novel, for which functional studies demonstrated its deleterious M. Gausachs1, L. Feliubadaló1, R. Tonda2,3, J. Trotta2,3, E. Castellanos4, A. López- nature. The family showed an atypical phenotype for MUYTH, characterized Doriga1, À. Teulé1, E. Tornero1, J. del Valle1, B. Gel4, M. Gut2,3, M. Pineda1, S. González1, M. by the absence of polyps, apparent autosomal dominant inheritance, and Menéndez1, M. Navarro1, G. Capellá1, I. Gut2,3, E. Serra4, J. Brunet1, S. Beltran2,3, C. Lázaro1; presence of a mismatch repair-deficient tumor. 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Joint Program on Hereditary Cancer Catalan Institute The study of the second family allowed us to identify a novel hereditary CRC of Oncology, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Centro Nacional de Análisis gene, FAN1. Functionally relevant mutations were identified in almost 3% of Genómico (CNAG-CRG), Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science Amsterdam-positive families. and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain, 3Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 4Genetic Variation in Cancer Group, Joint Program on Hereditary Cancer, Institut The third family carried of two mutated genes: a splice-site mutation in a de Medicina Predictiva i Personalitzada del Càncer, Badalona, Spain. tumor suppressor gene, and a missense mutation in a previously-proposed cancer-predisposing gene. Conclusions: The analysis of exomes in individual high-risk families allowed Introduction: Several Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) panels have been us to identify two novel genes for hereditary CRC, as well as mutations in developed for hereditary cancer diagnosis, although there is a debate about previously-known or -proposed CRC-predisposing genes. its cost-effectiveness compared to exome sequencing. The performance of Funding: MINECO-FEDER SAF2012-38885, Asociación Española Contra el two hereditary cancer panels is compared to exome sequencing. Cáncer Materials and Methods: Twenty-four patients were selected: ten with iden- 
P12 .116 tified pathogenic mutations (control set) and 14 suspicious of hereditary Increased utilization of multi-gene panel testing for hereditary cancer but without any identified mutation (discovery set). Two panels, cancer: overcoming initial barriers TruSight-Cancer (94 genes) and a custom panel (122 genes), were assessed E. K. Dalton, K. Fulk, A. F. Yussuf, R. McFarland, H. LaDuca, J. S. Dolinsky; alongside exome sequencing. Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States. Results: Eighty-three genes were targeted by all approaches. More than 99% of the bases had read depth over 30x (
C30 ) in the panels whereas exome covered 94% of these positions at 
C30 . Variant calling identified the 10 pa- Multi-gene panels (MGP) for hereditary cancer susceptibility became com- thogenic mutations in the control set except for MSH6 mutation c.255dupC mercially available in the United States in 2012. Both genetics and non-ge- in TruSight-Cancer. Two hundred and forty unique non-silent coding and ca- netics providers experienced initial concerns regarding utility and imple- nonic splice-site variants were identified in the remaining 14 samples in the mentation of MGP. However, research has demonstrated multiple benefits of 132 panel genes, 7 of them putatively pathogenic in ATM, BARD1, CHEK2, MGP, such as a higher diagnostic yield. This study analyzes the utilization of ERC
C3 , FANCL, FANCM and MSH2. The three approaches identified a similar MGP over a three-year period at a clinical diagnostic laboratory in the U.S. number of variants in the shared genes. In contrast, WES provides additio- Quarterly ordering trends for single-syndrome tests were compared to nal information. Exomes were on average three times more expensive than smaller and larger MGP from the third quarter (Q3) of 2013 to Q3 2015. Or- panel analyses. dering provider (OP) specialties and genetics provider (geneticist, genetic Conclusions: Ad hoc panels are an option for genetic diagnostics for heredi- counselor, advance practice nurse, or other clinician with genetics training) tary cancer. Benefits include lower cost and higher depth resulting in more extent of involvement was also noted. Statistical analysis was performed positions covered sufficiently for clinical interpretation. However WES iden- using the Fisher’s exact test. tifies variants in genes that are not currently targeted by panels. Comparison of single-syndrome tests in Q3 2013 versus Q3 2015 revealed Grant numbers: PI13/00285, PI
E13 /00022, RD12/0036/0008, that larger MGP significantly increased in frequency from 39% to 65% RD12/0036/0031, 2014SGR338 and SAF2012-33636. (p<0.01). MGP have been utilized more frequently across all OP specialties in 2015 compared to 2013. Genetics provider involvement significantly in- 
P12 .115 creased the utilization of MGP across all specialties (p<0.01). Identification of novel causal genes of hereditary colorectal cancer by Consistent with recent literature, this study demonstrates markedly in- performing whole-exome sequencing in individual high-risk families N. Segui1, F. Bellido1, M. Navarro1, L. Mina2, T. Pons3, M. Pineda1, R. Valdés-Mas4, N. Köger5, creased utilization of MGP compared to 2012 when initially available. Ho- G. Aiza1, P. Mur1, R. Sanz-Pamplona6, S. Belhadj1, S. Iglesias1, J. Soto7, M. Urioste8, T. wever, despite the overall decrease, single-syndrome and smaller MGP tests Caldés9, M. Balbín10, P. Blay11, D. Rueda12, M. Durán13, A. Valencia3, I. Blanco1, J. Brunet14, V. still account for 34% of total tests in Q3 2015, demonstrating clinicians’ Moreno6, G. Plotz5, J. Surrallés2, X. S. Puente4, C. Lázaro1, G. Capellá1, L. Valle1; desires for tiered testing options. Additional research is needed to directly 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de investigate OP attitudes towards MGP, however this study indicates that in- Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genome Instability and DNA Repair Group, Department itial concerns surrounding MGP have lessened over time, particularly when of Genetics and Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, genetics providers are involved in the ordering process. 3Structural Biology and Biocomputing Program, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 4Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, 
P12 .117 Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias, Universidad de Technological innovation in hereditary cancer risk assessment Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain, 5Biomedical Research Laboratory, Medizinische Klinik 1, A. Kulkarni1, A. Kenney2, V. Tripathi1, C. Compton1, S. Rose1, E. Haque1, D. Ruddy1, L. Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany, 6Unit of Biomarkers and Izatt1, A. Shaw1; Susceptibility, Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, 1Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2UBQO Limited, London, United Kingdom. Barcelona, Spain, 7Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Elche University Hospital, Elche, Spain, 8Familial Cancer Clinical Unit, Human Cancer Genetics Program, Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 9Laboratorio de Oncología Molecular, Servicio de Oncología Médica, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 10Laboratorio Guy’s Cancer Genetics guidelines are used across Southeast London, Kent de Oncología Molecular, Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias, & East Sussex and updated in line with national standards. However they Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 11Familial Cancer Unit, are currently presented in ‘non-interactive’ ‚pdf‘ format that is not always Department of Medical Oncology, Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado readily accessible. It is also difficult to ensure clinicians are using the most de Asturias, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 12Laboratory recent version of the guidelines. of Molecular Biology, 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 13Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular, IBGM-UVA-CSIC, Valladolid, Spain, 14Hereditary Cancer The Cancer Genetics application (App), developed by Guy’s Clinical Genetics Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBGi, Girona, Spain. department and UBQO with funding from Guy’s and St Thomas’ Charity, pro- vides streamlined hereditary cancer risk assessment and referral guidance for clinicians. Introduction: Inherited factors account for over 20% of all colorectal cancers The aim is to address inequity in referrals and improve patient access to our (CRC), but less than 6% can be explained by rare high-penetrance mutations service by targeting several key factors, including clinicians’ limited under- in known genes. We aimed at identifying novel hereditary cancer genes by standing of hereditary cancer, lack of time, confusion about where to refer performing whole-exome sequencing in individual hereditary CRC families. patients and use of outdated guidance. Materials and Methods: Exome enrichment (Agilent SureSelect Human The App contains a risk assessment tool and succinct reference guide, en- All Exon 50Mb) followed by massively parallel sequencing (Illumina Hi- abling clinicians to easily decide who requires genetic assessment of their Seq2000) was performed on blood DNA from at least 3 cancer-affected fami- cancer risk and who can be managed in primary or secondary care. Pati- ly members. Three Amsterdam-positive families were studied. Data analysis ents thereby have quicker access to cancer surveillance, genetic counselling, was performed using conventional algorithms. Validation studies in familial pharmaco-prevention and surgical options. cancer series and in silico and in vitro functional studies were also carried Cancer Genetics is freely available on iOS and android platforms and via a out. public website. It is certified as a Class 1 medical device and a secure content Results: One family harbored two mutations in the MUTYH gene -known management system allows quick central updates. polyposis (recesive) gene-, one recurE reS nH t iG n t2 he0 1 Eu6 r o| p B eaA nR pC opE uL laO tiN onA a, n S d PA WIN e w| W ill pW reW se. nE t S thH e G de. vO elR opG ment process, user feedback and integrati2on8 3ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .120 Novel NRAS mutation and clonal evolution detected by next- the App into primary and secondary care. Our goal is that Cancer Genetics generation sequencing in a patient with juvenile myelomonocytic will promote timely, evidence-based management of those at risk of here- leukemia ditary cancer. S. Lavrina1, V. Brilliantova1, I. Mersiyanova1, I. Shipitsina1, M. Kurnikova1,2, I. Kalinina1, A. Panfyorova1, E. Raykina1, A. Maschan1, M. Maschan1; 
P12 .118 1Federal Research Centre of Children Hematology, Oncology and Immunology named Exome sequencing identified potential causative candidate genes for after D.Rogachev, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2The Pirogov Russian National Research hyperplastic polyposis syndrome Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. S. Peters1, I. Spier1, C. Trueck1, J. Altmueller2,3, K. Kayser1, M. Kloth4, S. Holzapfel1, R. Adam1, H. Thiele2, M. M. Noethen1,5, S. Aretz1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Cologne Center Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a myeloproliferative neo- for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Institute of Pathology, University of Cologne, plasm of childhood with a poor prognosis. The only curative therapy is he- Cologne, Germany, 5Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Germany. matopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), with relapse being the most common reason for treatment failure. The patient is a 5-year-old boy with a 3,5 year history of JMML. The disease had progressed to acute leukemia Hyperplastic polyposis syndrome (HPS) is a poorly defined colorectal can- after low-dose chemotherapy, so the patient received allogeneic HSCT, and cer predisposition characterized by the occurrence of multiple and/or large he relapsed after the transplantation. We performed the genetic work up at serrated lesions throughout the colon. To date, only few molecular signatu- 3 points: at initial evaluation, at progression and at post-transplant relapse. res have been described and neither the etiology of the syndrome nor the DNA extracted from bone marrow was sequenced using Illumina TruSight distinct genetic alterations have been identified. Myeloid sequencing panel on the MiSeq platform, with following valida- To uncover predisposing causative genes, the exomes of 31 clinically well tion using Sanger sequencing. Analysis of the first point revealed a novel characterized HPS patients have been sequenced (Illumina HiSeq) using NRAS mutation NM_002524: c.29_31dupGAG (NP_002515: p.Gly10dup) leukocyte DNA. The variants were filtered for rare (homozygous/compound with 48% mutated allele frequencies. The point at progression revealed heterozygous: MAF≤ 1%, heterozygous: 0.01% according to dbSNP, EVS, and SETB1 c.2612T>C (p.Ile871Thr), ZRSR2 c.557+2T>G, ASX
L1  c.2131insA ExAC), truncating, and missense germline mutations (pathogenic by ≥ 2/3 (p.Thr711fs) and the same NRAS mutations in 24%, 96%, 45% and 49% of prediction tools). For data analysis and filtering the GATK software and the reads respectively. Relapse point revealed the same ZRSR2, ASX
L1  and NRAS Cartagenia Bench Lab NGS Software were applied. In a first preliminary ana- mutations in 83%, 39% and 48% of reads respectively. NRAS mutation was lysis, known cancer genes and candidate genes were analyzed. not found in buccal smear cells DNA samples indicating its somatic origin. After stringent filtering steps and manual inspection of the variants, potenti- NRAS is known to be one of the key genes in JMML pathogenesis, and this ally biallelic variants were found in 289 genes. However, none of the cancer novel mutation is in the hot spots region for JMML, while SETB
P1 , ASX
L1  genes contained a bAiTaMlle, lCicH mEKu2ta, tEioRnC Cth4,a tJA mKe2t, tMhEeT c, rNitUerPi2a1. A4,l lR iNn Fa4ll3, ,9 U4
S3 P g6e- and ZRSR2 are among targets for secondary mutations. The assessment of nATesM harboRrNedF 4h3eterozygous mutations in at least two patients, eight of which the mutational burden and clonal evolution in JMML can provide insight into are cancer genes ( ). the unfavorable outcome for the patient. and harbored recurrent mutations. These patients had variants 
P12 .121 in several cancer or candidate genes. Detection of KRAS gene mutation by liquid biopsy in patients with Preliminary data indicate that exome sequencing might identify relevant ge- colorectal cancer nes for HPS. However, the number of variants per patient is also in line with P. Riera1, D. Páez2,3, M. Cornet1, A. Sebio2, A. Lasa1,3; an oligogenic etiology of polyp predisposition. The current work-up inclu- 1Genetics Department. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Oncology des the inclusion of non-cancer genes and validation of variants by Sanger Department. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3U-705, CIBERER, sequencing. Barcelona, Spain. 
P12 .119 Multilocus Inherited Neoplasia Alleles Syndrome (MINAS) - A Case INTRODUCTION: Tumour KRAS mutational status is an important determi- Series and Literature Review nant of the response of metastatic colorectal cancer to targeted treatments J. Whitworth1, A. Skytte2, L. Sunde2, D. Lim3, M. Arends4, L. Happerfield5, I. Frayling6, R. with anti-EGFR-antibodies. Molecular analyses of somatic mutations are van Minkelen7, E. Woodward8, M. Tischkowitz1, E. Maher1; usually performed on tissue biopsies. However, repeat biopsies are difficult, 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Aarhus University Hospital, invasive and the results may be limited by intra-tumour heterogeneity. In Aarhus, Denmark, 3Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, light of these limitations, liquid biopsy has been proved to be a noninvasive 4University of Edinburgh and Institute for Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, way to detect cancer mutations. United Kingdom, 5Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 7Erasmus Medical Center, The aim of this study was to investigate the use of plasmatic cell-free tu- Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Central Manchester University Hospitals, Manchester, United mour DNA (ctDNA) to detect and quantify KRAS mutations using a digital Kingdom. PCR platform in a series of clinically relevant samples. MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of ten colon cancer patients with a KRAS mutation in the tumour sample were included in the study. Positive and ne- Mendelian causes of inherited cancer susceptibility are mostly rare and cha- gative control samples were also analyzed. racterised by variable expression and incomplete penetrance. Phenotypic DNA was extracted from 3ml of plasma with the QIAamp Circulating Nucleic variability may result from a range of causes such as allelic heterogeneity Acid Kit (Qiagen). PCR was performed with the Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) or genetic modifier effects. Another potential cause is the presence of two from BIO-RAD. or more inherited cancer predisposition alleles in the same individual, an RESULTS: The following table shows the ddPCR events obtained analyzing occurrence that may feasibly have a number of phenotypic consequences. ctDNA of patients and the different controls. As we expected, it seems that Although the frequency of such occurrences might be predicted to be low, samples at diagnosis have a higher number of KRAS mutated copies. such cases have probably been under-ascertained because standard clinical CONCLUSIONS: Cell-free tumour DNA (ctDNA) may be a surrogate for tu- practice has been to test candidate inherited cancer genes sequentially until mour DNA obtained from tissue biopsies. It constitutes a potential tool for a pathogenic mutation is detected. However, recent advances in sequencing identification and monitoring of KRAS somatic mutations during the course technologies now provide the opportunity to perform simultaneous parallel of therapy. testing of large numbers of inherited cancer genes. Patient ID Plasma/tumour KRAS MUT WT Fractional We describe five newly identified patients who harbour pathogenic variants Sample mutation events events abundance in multiple inherited cancer genes. Three cases involve FLCN mutations (%) 15-516 Diagnosis G12V 119 1308 8,3 in combination with those in NF1, T
P53  and MSH2 while combinations of 15-1252 Diagnosis G12D 584 1572 27,1 MLH1/XPA and BRCA2/NF1 account for the remaining cases. We also un- 15-2017 Diagnosis G12V 67 430 13,5 15-2261 Diagnosis G12D 401 2238 15,2 dertook a review of previously published examples to illustrate the complex 15-567 Follow-up G12V 0 5036 0 15-698 Follow-up G12V 4 3059 0,13 genotype-phenotype relationships in these cases. We suggest that clinicians 15-2034 Follow-up G12D 7 2086 0,33 15-1946 Follow-up G12V 0 642 0 should proactively consider the likelihood of this phenomenon (referred 15-949 Follow-up G12D 5 1036 0,48 to as multilocus inherited neoplasia alleles syndrome [MINAS]) in patients 15-2033 Follow-up G12D 13 818 1,6 15-1791 Plasma control wt 0 1016 0 with unusual inherited cancer syndrome phenotypes. To facilitate the clini- 15-1986 Plasma control wt 0 845 0 15-1669 Tumour control G12V 2224 8245 21,2 cal management of novel cases of MINAS, we have established the term as a 15-1607 Tumour control G12D 7870 8782 47,3 p 2h 8en 4otypic tag in the Leiden Open Variant DaEtaSbaHseG t o2 c0o1lle6c t| iBnfAorRmCatEioLnO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG on what is likely to be an increasingly recognized cohort of such individuals.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .122 Genotype - Phenotype spectrum in a large Indian Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) cohort T
P53  mutation carriers, that the most severe form of the disease, charac- M. Haque1, P. Kowtal1, D. Parchure2, G. Pandit1, R. Sarin1; terized by childhood tumours, is associated with missense mutations with 1Advanced Centre for Treatment Research and Education in Cancer, Tata Memorial dominant-negative activity (Bougeard et al., J Clin Oncol 2015). Thanks to a Centre, Navi Mumbai, India, 2National Institute of Immunohaematology, Mumbai, India. new p53 functional assay that we developed in lymphocytes (Zerdoumi et al., Hum Mutat 2013), we found that dominant-negative missense mutati- ons, in comparison to null mutations, drastically alter the p53 transcriptio- Introduction: LFS is a rare autosomal dominant hereditary syndrome with nal response to DNA damage and this assay has now been used to classify 56 early onset of diverse type of cancers, caused due to germline mutations distinct T
P53  germline alterations. To study, at the genome scale, the func- in T
P53  gene. Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) syndrome has relaxed criteria for age tional impact of heterozygous T
P53  mutations on DNA binding, we perfor- and type of cancers. The IARC database has about 900 families with germ- med chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massive parallel sequen- line T
P53  mutation with vast majority being from North America, Europe, cing (ChIP-seq) analysis on lymphocytes exposed to doxorubicin, a powerful Brazil, Australia and Japan. As there are no reports from South Asia, we have DNA damaging agent. ChIP-seq analyses of exposed control wild-type T
P53  done comprehensive clinical & genetic characterization in a large Indian co- lymphocytes accurately mapped 706 p53 binding sites. New p53 binding hort. sites were validated using a functional assay in yeast. ChIP-seq analysis of Materials and methods: Sanger sequencing and Multiplex Ligation-depen- LFS lymphocytes with T
P53  dominant-negative missense mutation reveals dent Probe Amplification (MLPA) of T
P53  gene was done in 8 classical LFS, only 25 binding sites and, for these sites, the depth of the corresponding 125 LFL and 97 familial cancer probands not fulfilling LFS/LFL criteria. peaks was drastically reduced. Altogether, our results show that the clinical Results: We identified 37 distinct deleterious germline T
P53  mutations (2 severity and predominance of T
P53  dominant-negative missense mutations novel) including 4 LGRs in 42/230 (18%) families. T
P53  mutations were are explained by a global alteration of p53 binding at the genome scale and identified in 87.5% of classical LFS and 17.6% of LFL families. Surprisingly, support that LFS results from a defect of the transcriptional response to deleterious T
P53  mutations were identified in 8/97 (8%) families with fa- DNA damage. milial cancers not fulfilling any LFS/LFL criteria. Comparing with the IARC 
P12 .125 database, the genotype phenotype differences in this Indian cohort include Phenotypic heterogeneity of Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome - 1) Absence of hotspot codon 337 mutation; 2) high frequency of splice site, two cases from one family frameshift an d LGRs and low frequency of missense mutations; 4) rarity of A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, M. Gos1, M. Rychłowska-Pruszyńska2, E. Obersztyn1; adrenocortical cancer and skin cancer. 1Department of Medical Genetic, Institute of the Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, Conclusions:Our study on the largest LFS/LFL Indian cohort reveals distinct 2Clinic of Oncologic Surgery, Institute of the Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. clinical and genetic features and highlights the need for T
P53  sequencing including MLPA for large genomic rearrangement in suspected LFS/LFL fa- milies for counseling and risk management. Introduction: Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS, OMIM 153480) Fellowship and Funding: ACTREC-TMC, Navi Mumbai, India belonging to the PTEN Hamartoma Tumor Syndrome family, is an autosomal 
P12 .123 dominant genetic disorder characterized by macrocephaly and high birth Colonic polyps assessment in T
P53  germline mutation carriers: case weight, benign mesodermal hamartomas (cutaneous and visceral lipomas, series report from a tertiary cancer center in Brazil multiple hemangiomas and intestinal polyps), pigmented macules of the T. Teixeira, E. Palmero, D. Gumarães, H. Galvão; glans of penis. IntePllTecEtNual delay, myopathic process and skeletal abnormali- Hospital de Câncer de Barretos, Barretos, Brazil. ties (joint hyperextensibility, pectus excavatum and scoliosis) are obsePrTvEeNd T
P53  in some patients. gene mutations located at 10q23.3 are identified in approximately 60% of BRRS patients. Individuals with BRRS and Introduction: Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), associated with germline pathogenic variants have higher cancer risk and should be offered tumor mutation, leads to predisposition to multiple malignancies. Core tumors de- surveillance protocols. scribed in LFS are breast cancer, soft tissue and osteosarcoma, adrenocor- Patients and methods: We present phenotypic manifestation in father and tical and central nervous system tumors. In addition, various other types of daughter affected with BRRS. The child at the age of 11 with developmental cancer are also mentioned, including colorectal cancer (CRC). Thus, annual delay, macrocephaly and lipomas was admitted to the genetic unit. Her fa- colonoscopy is recommended for patient screening, starting from 25 years ther presentePdT EwNit h high stature, macrocephaly, multinodular thyroid goiter of age. However, current scientific data does not provide robust information and subcutaneous fibromas but without lipomas. Because of the suspition on what type of lesions may be present at exams. of BRRS the gene was analysed using classic Sanger sequencing tech- Objective: To describe the prevalence of polyps detected by colonoscopy in nique. PTEN patients with LFS asTsePs5s3e d at Hospital de Câncer de Barretos, Brazil, from Results: The molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis of BRRS. The mu- November/2009 to October/2015. tation c.209+1G>A in intron 3 of gene was identified in both patients. Results: From 110 T
P53  mutation carriers followed, we have assessed We present th e detailed clinical data of these two cases of BRRS in compari- 58 patients (from 24 families) who underwent CRC screening (total of son with cases reported in medical literature. 95 colonoscopies). germline mutations identified in these families Conclusions:The correct diagnosis of BRRS allowed for the offering of tu- were: c.1010G>A (in 20/24 families), c.158G>A, c.814G>A, c.869G>A and mor surveillance protocol to both patients and for proper genetic counsel- c.997C>T (1/24 families, each). In 34 (58.6%) patients, polyps were found. ling with risk assessment. Hyperplastic polyps were found in 21 (36.2%) patients, sessile serrated po- Children presenting with lipomas should be examined for other signs of lyp was described in one (1.7%) patient, adenomas with low-grade dyspla- BRRS and the family pedigree should always be thoroughly analysed. sia in 20 (34.5%), adenomas with high-grade dysplasia in five (8.6%), and 
P12 .126 adenocarcinoma was found in one (1.7%) patient. In 36 screened individu- Techniques for measuring cancer burden in liquid biopsy samples T. Harkins, H. Fiske, L. Kurihara, C. Schumacher, J. Laliberte, S. Sandhu, J. Irish, V. als, the most recent colonoscopy was performed before 50 years, and 58.3% Makarov; of them already had polyps detected on exam. Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. Conclusion: Considering reports of early CRC in LFS and evidence that polyp excision reduces CRC incidence, this study corroborates the recommendati- on of CRC screening for LFS patients. Liquid biopsy is a non-invasive sample source that can be utilized to assess 
P12 .124 cancer burden by measuring the tumor-derived fraction of circulating, cell- ChIP-Seq analysis of lymphocytes from Li-Fraumeni patients reveals free DNA (cfDNA) from plasma. We evaluated two assays to monitor cancer the drastic impact on p53 DNA binding of heterozygous T
P53  burden using cfDNA: whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) and targe- mutations associated with early-onset cancers ted amplicon sequencing for 56 oncology-related genes. We tested samples Y. Zerdoumi, R. Lanos, I. Tournier, S. Raad, S. Baert-Desurmont, G. Bougeard, J. Flaman, with both assays to characterize their efficacy across a broad spectrum of T. Frebourg; cancer types, stages, and treatment regimens. cfDNA was extracted from Inserm U1079, Rouen University and Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, tumor-bearing patients and normal controls. To monitor methylation den- Normandy Centre for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France. sity, WGBS was performed using 5 ng of bisulfite-converted cfDNA with the Accel-NGS® Methyl-Seq DNA Library Kit. To detect tumor-specific mutati- ons, 10 ng of cfDNA was used for the Accel-Amplicon™ 56G Oncology Panel. Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) results from heterozygous germline mutati- Six out of eight cancer samples demonstrated significant hypomethylation ons of T
P53 , encoding a key transcriptional factor activated in response to in cfDNA, ranging from 2-40% when compared to healthy controls. The 56 DNA damage. We have recently shownE, fSroHmG a l2ar0g1e 6LF |S BseAriResC inEcLluOdiNngA 4,1 
S5  PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 285 gene amplicon panel identified point mutations in the cfDNA of only threeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index clinic for digestive surgery , Faculty of Medicine, University St Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3University clinic for ratiotherapy samples, but which also had the highest observed hypomethylation (18- and oncology, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. 40%). For all but two cancer samples, corresponding mutations were also found in the primary tumor at allele frequencies significantly higher than in the cfDNA fraction (e.g., 22% in tumor vs. 5% in cfDNA). The three cancer Lynch syndrome (LS) is an inherited autosomal dominant susceptibility samples that had primary tumor mutations that were not detected in cfD- to colorectal cancer (CRC) due to a germline mutation in mismatch repair NA also had the lowest observed hypomethylation. Therefore, a correlation (MMR) genes. The main aim of this study was to identify the underlying risk between hypomethylation and detection of tumor mutations in the cfDNA variants in 20 LS families from the R.Macedonia selected by the clinical Am- fraction may exist. Further studies will elucidate which assay is more sensi- sterdam criteria and MSI status, BRAF V600E/K mutation and MLH1 pro- tive at detecting tumor burden in cfDNA. moter methylation in tumor samples. Using targeted NGS of the coding regi- 
P12 .127 ons of MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PM
S2  genes we families of which 4 in MLH1 The European Hereditary Tumour Group (formerly the ‘Mallorca gene [p.
S131 X (c.392C>G), p.Thr82Ala (c.244A>G), p.Ala21Val (c.62C>T) Group’) hosts The Prospective Lynch Syndrome Database and the and IV
S12 +8G>C (c.1409+8C>G)], 2 in MSH2 gene [MSH2 IV
S14 -2A>C European Mismatch Repair cDNA Working Group and is open for all (c.2211-2A>C) and c.68_-72del] and one in PM
S2  gene [p.Ser128Leu (c.418 to join G>A)]. Three new mutations [MLH1 p.
S131 X (c.392C>G) and p.Thr82Ala P. Møller1, I. M. Frayling2,3, T. Seppälä4, I. Bernstein5,6, E. Holinski-Feder7,8, P. Sala9, D. Evans10,11, A. Lindblom12, F. Macrae13,14, I. Blanco15, R. Sijmons16, J. Jeffries2, H. Vasen17, J. (c.244A>G and MSH2 IV
S14 -2A>C (c.2211-2A>C)] were detected in 5, 3 and Burn18, S. Nakken19,20, E. Hovig19,20,21, E. A. Rødland19, K. Tharmaratnam22, W. H. de Vos tot 3 families, respectively, accounting for ~60% of the molecular defects sug- Nederveen Cappel23, J. Hill24, J. Wijnen25, K. Green10, F. Lalloo10, L. Sunde5,26,27, M. Mints28, L. gesting that they are founder mutations in our population. It was noted that Bertario9, M. Pineda15, M. Navarro15, M. Morak7,8, L. Renkonen-Sinisalo29,30, J. Plazzer13, K. the disease onset was earlier for 7-10 years in each successive generation in Pylvanainen31, J. R. Sampson32, G. Capella15, J. Mecklin31,33, M. Genuardi34, G. Möslein35, The these families, suggestive for the anticipation mechanism. Our data indicate Mallorca Group, European Hereditary Tumour Group (EHTG), International Society for that all new LS patients from the R. Macedonia should be initially screened Gastrointestinal Hereditary Tumours (InSiGHT), European MMR cDNA Working Group; for these 3 frequent variants and that CRC screening of carriers should start 1Research Group Inherited Cancer, Department of Medical Genetics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, >10 years earlier in each successive generations. Cardiff University School of Medicine, Heath Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Cardiff & 
P12 .129 Vale University Health Board, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Department of Surgery, Central The LynCE study: An assesment of endometrial cancer progression Finland Health Care District, Jyväskylä, Finland, 5Danish HNPCC Register; Hvidovre University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Department Surgical Gastroenterology, markers in Lynch syndrome Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 7Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik M. Arias Alonso1, R. Guarch Troyas2,1, I. Chirivella González3, E. Lastra Aras4, L. Robles IV, Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Ziemssenstr. 1, Munich, Díaz5, S. Moreno Laguna2,1, E. Recari Elizalde2,1, E. Urrutia Lafuente1, A. Millet Serrano3, Germany, 8MGZ—Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 9Unit of L. Navarro Cerveró3, M. Pascual Llorente4, F. Ayuso Hernández4, D. Rueda Fernández5, P. Hereditary Digestive Tract Tumors IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy, Pérez Segura6, M. Navarro García7, M. Urioste Azcorra8, A. M. Alonso Sanchez2,1; 10Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester University Hospitals 1Oncogenetics and Hereditary Cancer Group. IDISNA (Biomedical Research Institute of NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 11Manchester Centre for Genomic Navarre), Pamplona, Spain, 2Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, PAMPLONA. NAVARRA, Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 12Department of Spain, 3H. Clínico Universitario de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 4H Universitario/Complejo Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 13Colorectal Asistencial Burgos, Burgos, Spain, 5H. Universitario 12 Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 6H. Medicine and Genetics, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 7IDIBELL-ICO. Insti d‘Investigació Biomèdica Bellvitge- 14Department of Medicine, Melbourne University, Melbourne, Australia, 15Hereditary Inst Català d’Oncologia, Barcelona, Spain, 8CNIO Centro Nacional Investigaciones Cancer Program, Institut Català d’Oncologia-IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain. Barcelona, Spain, 16Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Nether Abnormal Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Microsatellite Instability (MSI) have been observed both in tumoural and normal endometrial biopsies in The Mallorca Group was formed by European members of the Internatio- Lynch Syndrome (LS). The potential use of these findings as markers for en- nal Society for Gastrointestinal Hereditary Tumours (InSiGHT), to facilitate dometrial cancer progression was confirmed in a pilot and is being investi- and coordinate European research on inherited colorectal cancer syndro- gated in a prospective multicentre study: the LynCE. mes and issue clinical guidelines (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub- Methods: med/23408351), and this year it has transformed into The European Here- 58 Lynch Syndrome (LS) carriers are now enrolled and are being followed ditary Tumour Group (EHTG), open for world-wide membership (Gabriela. using gynaecological/ US exam, and endometrial biopsies, accounting for a Moeslein@helios-kliniken.de). median follow-up of 10.11 months. Endometrial samples are being histo- The European MMR cDNA Working Group focuses on in-vitro testing for logically diagnosed and evaluated for IHC, MSI, and Methylator phenotype determining pathogenicity of MMR gene variants affecting splicing. (elke- (CIMP-MMR). holinski-feder@t-online.de). Ultimate classification of mutations (http:// Results: chromium.lovd.nl/LOVD2/colon_cancer/) is made by the InSiGHT Variant • All 112 gynaecological/US exams have been normal. 86/87 biopsies re- Interpretation Committee. (johnpaul.plazzer@gmail.com) sulted in normal endometrium and 1/87 in endometrial cancer. All (63/63) The Prospective Lynch Syndrome Database (moller.pal@gmail.com), esta- biopsies were MSI-Stable. 32/36 showed normal while 4/36 had CIMP- blished 2013, is open for all to join. The goal is to upgrade knowledge on MMR hypermethylation (all from a single constitutional MLH1 epimutation Lynch Syndrome (LS) from educated guesses based on retrospective series carrier). invalidated by selection biases, to prospectively obtained empirical know- • 33% (12/36) patients had abnormal IHC biopsies, 11/12 matching the ledge and revise clinical guidelines accordingly. Large numbers allow reliab- underlying germline genetic defect. All abnormal IHC samples were hetero- le results: the database includes ~3,200 LS patients prospectively observed geneous, 15/16 also showing adjacent normal IHC areas. for ~25,000 years. • 3 patients progressed from normal to abnormal IHC (median=13 months) Results currently published (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub- but no other clinical, ultrasound, pathological, MSI or CIMP-MMR sign ac- med/26657901) or in preparation include: Colonoscopy with removal of companied this progression. adenomas does not prevent colorectal cancer as assumed, but survival is Conclusion: excellent. Less than 3 years between colonoscopies was neither associated Heterogeneous abnormal IHC is present in a subset of normal endometrium with lower incidence of colorectal cancer nor worse survival. Endometrial biopsies from Lynch Syndrome patients, sometimes evolving from normal cancer has the highest incidence and has excellent survival. Ovarian cancer IHC. Other abnormalities as MSI (in the pilot study), CIMP-MMR, and patho- is seen early in life but most are cured. These results call for a reconsiderati- logy changes could follow this IHC abnormality anticipating the progression on of clinical guidelines for identification of, and health care to, LS patients. to endometrial cancer. The web-site http://lscarisk.org shows the risk for cancer according to age, Funding: Strategic Action for Research (AES PI13/01955) Spanish Ministry genotype and gender for a LS patient at any age. of Economy-Competitiveness; Fundación Caja Navarra (FCN2/2014) and 
P12 .128 Government of Navarra (GN31/2014). Anticipation in Lynch syndrome patients with high frequency founder mutations from R.Macedonia 
P12 .130 M. Staninova1, N. Matevska-Geshkovska1, M. Panovski2, N. Petrusevska3, B. Grozdanovska Evaluation of a 25-gene panel in patients with suspected Lynch - Angelovska3, A. J. Dimovski1; syndrome: preliminary results from the FAMOSA study 1Centar for biomolecular pharmaceutical analyses, Faculty of Pharmacy, University St F. Balaguer1, J. Balmaña2, T. Ocaña3, I. Esteban2, A. Sanchez3, G. Llort4, R. Jover5, Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University J. Cubiella6, M. Herraiz7, L. Cid8, A. Nuñez9, M. Oruezábal Moreno10, C. Garau11, S. 286 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Khorrami12, A. Herreros de Tejada13, R. Morales14, J. Cano15, R. Serrano16, C. Guillen17, A. 
P12 .132 Sánchez Heras18, E. Adrover19, E. Carrasco2, N. Gadea2, J. Brunet20; Whole gene capture analysis of 15 CRC susceptibility genes in 1Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, CIBERehd, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 2Medical Oncology suspected Lynch Syndrome patients Department, Vall d’Hebron Hospital and Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, A. M. L. Jansen1,2, T. van Wezel2, S. C. Jagmohan-Changur1, D. Ruano2, H. M. van der Klift3, Spain, 3Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Sabadell-Parc Taulí, B. E. W. M. van den Akker2, J. F. J. Laros1, M. van Galen1, A. Wagner4, T. G. W. Letteboer5, Sabadell, Spain, 5Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 6Complejo E. B. Gómez-García6, C. M. J. Tops3, H. F. Vasen7, P. Devilee1, F. J. Hes3, H. Morreau2, J. T. Hospitalario Ourense,, Ourense, Spain, 7Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Wijnen1,3; Spain, 8Instituto Investigación Biomédica, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Vigo, 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, Vigo, Spain, 9Hospital de Mataró, Mataró, Spain, 10Hospital Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, 2Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, Spain, 11Hospital Son Llatzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 12Hospital Son Espases, Palma 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, de Mallorca, Spain, 13Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain, 14Hospital 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, La Mancha Centro, Ciudad Real, Spain, 15Hospital General de Ciudad Real, Ciudad Real, Netherlands, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Spain, 16Hospital Reina Sofia de Córdoba, Cordoba, Spain, 17Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, Madrid, Spain, 18Oncología Médica, Unidad de Consejo Genético en Cáncer Hospital Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Leiden General Universitario de Elche, Elche, Spain, 19Hospital Universitario General de University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Albacete, Albacete, Spain, 20Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Girona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: Lynch Syndrome (LS) is caused by pathogenic germline vari- ants in one of the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. However in up to 60% of Introduction: The role of multigene panels for hereditary cancer risk as- MMR-deficient colorectal cancers no pathogenic germline MMR variant is sessment is yet to be established. We aimed at describing the prevalence found. Clinical management of these suspected Lynch Syndrome (sLS) cases of cancer predisposition gene mutations identified by a multigene panel in remains difficult. individuals with suspected Lynch syndrome. Materials and Methods: Using targeted next-generation sequencing, we ana- Patients and methods: We performed germline analysis with a next-genera- lyzed the entire non-repetitive genomic sequence, including intronic and tion sequencing 25-gene panel (Myriad myRisk™ Hereditary Cancer) using regulatory sequences, of 15 CRC susceptibility genes in 34 unrelated sLS DNA from 95 patients with suspected Lynch syndrome (endometrial can- patients and 11 patients with MLH1 hypermethylated tumors with a clear cer <50 y-o and/or fulfillment of revised Bethesda criteria) from Nov-2014 family history for LS. In addition, tumor DNA from 28 sLS patients was ana- through March-2015 within the FAMOSA study. We classified all identified lyzed for somatic MMR variants. germline variants for pathogenicity and calculated the prevalence of patho- Results: Of 1979 germline variants found in 34 sLS patients, one was a pre- genic mutations and variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUS). We dicted pathogenic variant (MLH1 c.1667+1delG). The 11 MLH1 hyperme- analyzed data on patients’ personal and family history of cancer. thylated tumors were negative for germline variants in CRC susceptibility Results: We included 95 patients [female: 46 (48.5%), mean age: 48.6+12]: genes and for germline MLH1 hypermethylation. However, somatic DNA 8 (8.5%) patients with endometrial cancer and 87 (91.5%) with colorectal analysis of 28 sLS tumors identified nine (32%) cases of biallelic somatic cancer. Multigene panel testing identified 20 (21%) patients with Lynch inactivation and nine cases with (32%) one (likely) pathogenic somatic va- syndrome mutations (8 MLH1, 7 MSH2, 4 MSH6, 1 PM
S2 ) and 1 (1%) with riant. a mutation in BRCA2 in a 35 y-o woman without personal/familial history Conclusions: This is the first study in sLS patients to include the entire geno- of breast/ovarian cancer. In patients diagnosed with mutations in the MMR mic sequence of CRC susceptibility genes. An underlying somatic or germ- genes and prior molecular screening (n=9), two displayed MMR proficiency line MMR gene defect was identified in ten of 34 sLS patients (29%). In the and five patients had a negative prior genetic result by conventional tech- remaining sLS patients, the underlying genetic defect explaining the MMR- niques. deficiency in tumors might be found outside the genomic regions harboring Conclusions: In individuals with suspected Lynch syndrome, multigene pa- the MMR and other known CRC susceptibility genes. This work was suppor- nel testing identified unexpected high-penetrance mutations in 1% of cases. ted by the Dutch Cancer Society under study number U
L2012 -5542 Parallel sequencing also detected a meaningful number of cases with pre- 
P12 .133 vious false negative results. Classification of 8 mismatch repair variants identified in MSH2 and 
P12 .131 MSH6 genes using multifactorial likelihood analysis Elucidating the molecular basis of MSH2-deficient tumors in Lynch M. González Acosta1, B. A. Thompson2, M. Navarro1, A. Fernández1, G. Vargas1, S. syndrome suspected patients Iglesias1, A. Velasco3, A. Solanes4, J. Balmaña5, C. Lázaro1, J. Brunet3, G. Capellà1, M. G. Vargas1, E. Dámaso1, T. Pons2, J. del Valle1, S. Iglesias1, À. Velasco3, A. Solanes4, A. Pineda1; Valencia2, J. Brunet3, L. Feliubadaló1, C. Lázaro1, M. Navarro1, M. Pineda1, G. Capellá1; 1Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute - Catalan Institute of Oncology (IDIBELL-ICO), 1Institut d‘Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge-Institut Català d‘Oncologia, L‘Hospitalet Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Circle de Llobregat, Spain, 2Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3Catalan Institute of Oncology, IdIBGI, Girona, 3Institut de Investigacio Biomedica de Girona Doctor Josep Trueta-Institut Català Spain, 4Catalan Institute of Oncology, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain, d‘Oncologia, Girona, Spain, 4Institut d‘Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol-Institut Català 5University Hospital Vall Hebron - Vall Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. d‘Oncologia, L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. Introduction: Up to 30% of the DNA variants identified in mismatch repair In about 55% of individuals harboring mismatch repair (MMR) defiPcOieLnEt (MMR) genes are variants of unknown significance (VUS). A standardized tumoMrsU, TgYeHrm line mutations or somatic methylat ion in MMR genes are not classification scheme based on quantitative and qualitative algorithms has identified, being referred as Lynch-like syndrome (LLS). Mutations in recently been proposed for their interpretation according to the five class and and double somatic events in MMRgenes have been found in IARC scheme. The aim of this study was to assess the pathogenicity of MSH2 a proportion of these patients. The aim of this study was to elucidate the and MSH6 variants by means of multifactorial likelihood calculations. molecular basis of MSH2-deficient LLS cases by means of a comprehensive Patients and Methods: Eight variants (5 missense, 2 intronic and 1 small analysis of colorectal cancer (CRC) associated genes at germline and soma- in-frame duplication), identified in multiple families or associated to mul- tic level. tiple tumors, were selected. Four of them had previously been classified as Eighteen LLS individuals harboring MSH2-deficient tumors were included. probably pathogenic whereas the remaining were VUS. Frequency in con- A customized NGS subexome panel including CRC associated genes was de- trol population was searched in public databases. Variants were screened in signed. PBL and matched FFPE DNA from available tumors (4M cSoHlo2recBtUaBl, 11 DNA samples from available relatives by Sanger sequencing. Pathological in- SeEnTdDom2eFtAriNal1) wereM aUnTaYlyHz ed. formation was collected. Multifactorial likelihood analysis based on estimat- Predicted pathogenic germline heterozygous variants in , , ed prior probabilities of pathogenicity, likelihood ratios for segregation and , anMdS H2 MSwHe6re identified in6 of the 18 (33%) cases analy- microsatellite instability in colorectal tumors was conducted as described zed. TMhSeH s2omatic analysis of tumors demonstrated the presence of: double (Thompson et al. 2013). somatic hits in or in 2 cases; and apparent loss of heterozygozi- Results: None of the selected variants were reported in control population. ty in locus and coAePxCis, tAeXnIcNe2 o, fB dMoPuRb1leA s, oPmTEaNti c mBuUtaBt1ioBns in other MMR The collected tumor data and the results of cosegregation analysis were and/or POLE/POLD1 genes in the remaining ones. Also, somatic mutations used in likelihood ratio calculations. Posterior probability of pathogenic- in other cancer genes ( or ) coexisted with ity resulted >0.999 for all the analyzed variants, allowing reclassification as the above mentioned alterations. In all, alterations putatively responsible pathogenic mutations of the 8 variants analyzed. for LLS were detected in 60% of the cases. Conclusions: These results highlight the benefit of collecting segregation The evaluation of germline and somatic mutational status of CRC-associated and tumor data for variant classification. Current multifactorial models will genes by means of a subexome panel is useful for the elucidation of the likely be improved when information concerning IHC patterns and MSI/IHC molecular basis of LS-suspected cases. results of extracolonic tumors are included. Funding: SAF2012-33636, AECC, 2014ESSGHR3G88 2.016 | BARCELONA, SPAFINun d| iWngW: MWutu.Ea SMHadGri.lOeñRa GA
P114252013  and SAF2012-33636. 287ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .135 Institute of Oncology (ICO-IDIBELL), L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. The role of 22 common susceptibility loci in phenotype variability in Lynch Syndrome patients carrying a germline PM
S2  mutation S. W. ten Broeke1, F. A. Elsayed1, L. Pagan1, M. J. W. Berends-Olderode2, E. Gomez Garcia3, Around half of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours (MPNSTs) de- H. J. P. Gille4, L. P. van Hest4, T. G. W. Letteboer5, F. H. Menko6, A. R. Mensenkamp7, T. A. velop in the context of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), normally progres- van Os8, L. Spruijt7, B. J. W. Redeker8, Y. J. Vos2, A. Wagner9, C. M. Tops1, J. T. Wijnen1, T. van sing from pre-existing benign plexiform neurofibromas (pNFs). A genomic Wezel1, M. Nielsen1; characterization of a set of MPNSTs confirmed the acquisition of hyperploid 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, genomes and recurrent somatic copy number alterations for these tumours. Netherlands, 4VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5University Medical Center To study the impact of these regional alterations on the transcriptome, mi- Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, croarray expression data was used. Mapping on the genome the differential Netherlands, 7Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Academic gene expression between MPNSTs and pNFs, we identified transcriptional Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, imbalances (TIs), genomic regions with a significant abundance of over- or Netherlands. underexpressed genes. Using information from TIs, some mitotic kinesin ge- nes were identified as potential candidates for MPNST pathogenesis, which were functionally characterized in vitro using MPNST-derived cell lines. Background: Lynch syndrome (LS) patients are at high risk of developing Most of these kinesin genes were significantly overexpressed in MPNSTs in colorectal cancer (CRC). Notably, LS families show a marked intra-and inter- the microarray. Expression knockdown by siRNA of KIF23, involved in telo- familial phenotype variability. This might in part be explained by common phase and cytokinesis, showed that KIF23 is essential for cell survival and susceptibility loci, or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Previous cell cycle progression of MPNST cell lines. Chemical inhibition of the early studies have shown conflicting results and have mainly focused on MLH1, mitotic kinesins KIF11 and KIF10 with ispinesib and GSK923295, respec- MSH2 and MSH6 carriers. We now aim to investigate the role of these SNPs tively, reduced cell viability in a set of MPNST cell lines. Moreover, according in a large cohort of PM
S2  carriers. to their I
C50  values, these lines were more sensitive to these compounds, Methods: Twenty-two candidate SNPs from previous Genome Wide Asso- especially for ispinesib, than a fibroblast cell line. Although in vivo validati- ciation studies (GWAS) were selected (rs6687758, rs6691170, rs10936599, on is needed, our results suggest that mitotic kinesins are important players rs1321311, rs16892766, rs6983267, rs10795668, rs3802842, rs3824999, in the pathogenesis of MPNSTs, and we propose KIF11 as a new potential rs4444235, rs9929218, rs4939827, rs12953717, rs10411210, rs961253, therapeutic target for these tumours. rs4925386, rs1569686, rs2736100, rs1800734, rs1799945, rs36053993, Work supported by grants PI11/01609, PI14/00577, ISCIIIRTICC, Rs1048943), which have previously been associated with (sporadic) CRC. RD12/0036/0008 and 2009SGR290. These SNPs were genotyped in 353 PM
S2  carriers ascertained from family cancer clinics (77 cases, 276 controls). Hazard ratios were corrected for fa- 
P12 .138 milial clustering and calculated using a weighted cox regression analysis to Gene copy number variation analysis in male breast cancer correct for ascertainment bias. Possible effects were examined using both a L. Rollán Manso1,2, I. Aurrekoetxea Rodríguez1,2,3, J. García Hernández1,3, E. Sánchez dominant/recessive and an additive (per allele) model. Tapia1,3, A. Pascual Rodríguez1,2,3, E. Lumbreras1, J. Hernández Rivas1,4,3, J. Cruz Results: We found no evidence of an association between CRC risk and cu- Hernández5,3, T. Martín Gómez6, R. Martín7, R. González Sarmiento1,2,3; 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Departamento de Medicina, mulative number of risk alleles (HR=0.99 (95%CI: 0.90-1.08)). Moreover, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3IBSAL (Instituto none of the SNPs individually showed a risk modifying effect. de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca), Salamanca, Spain, 4Servicio de Hematología, Discussion: There was no evidence of a risk modifying effect of twenty-two Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 5Servicio de analyzed SNPs in PM
S2  carriers, thus they do not appear to be of any clini- oncología médica, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, cal utility. Other explanations for phenotype variability that warrant further 6Servicio de Oncología médica, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, exploration include gene-environment interaction and risk modification by Salamanca, Spain, 7Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Nuestra Señora de other genetic variants. Sonsoles de Ávila, Ávila, Salamanca, Spain. Supported by the Dutch Cancer Society 
P12 .136 Introduction: Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare disease and little is known Lymphoid malignancies and myeloproliferative neoplasms about its etiology. So, there is limited knowledge of the disease at both gene- concurrently diagnosed: the experience of a single center tic and molecular levels. The identification of DNA copy number variations M. S. Dencic Fekete, M. Peruničić-Jovanović, J. Jovanović, V. Đorđević, S. Bižić, D. Šefer, D. (CNV) on MBC may results in an appropriate strategy to understand tumor Antić, B. Anđelić, A. Bogdanović; pathogenesis. Therefore, the aim of this study was to analyze DNA imbalan- Clinic of hematology, Belgrade, Serbia. ces using aCGH. Materials and methods: Twelve FFPE tissue blocks of male breast cancer were used for analyze CNA utilizing Affymetrix® CytoScan 750K Array. The coexistence of lymphoproliferative and myeloproliferative neoplasms Results: All cases of male breast cancer samples displayed some chromoso- (LPN/MPN) is a rare event and has been sporadically reported in the litera- mal instability. An average of 179 segmented altered per cases were obser- ture. We retrospectively analyzed the clinical and biological characteristics ved (range 16-339). Gains were most frequent than losses (1570 vs 369). of 7 patients with concomitant LPN and MPN - 3 chronic lymphocytic leuke- The most frequent chromosome regions affected by gains were 1q21-q44, mia (CLL) with Polycythemia Vera (PV), 2 CLL with Essential thrombocyto- 8q11-q24, 16p13-p11 and 20q, (5/12), 17q and Xq (3/12). Deletions of sis (ET), 1 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with PV and one multiple 8p23-p12 and X were observed in 2 cases. Minimal common regions (MCRs) myeloma (MM) with ET - who presented to our clinic between 1995 and were detected on 7q11.23 (11/12), 8q21.11 (4/12), 8q24.3 (4/12), 16p11.2 2013. The average time to secondary malignancy was 62 months: LPN was (8/12), Xq21.3 (6/12) and 1q41 (5/12). MCR on 1p13.3, 6q15 21q21 and diagnosed as a first disease in 1 patient (pt) and as a second in 6 patients Xq13.1 (3/12) were the most frequent affected by loss. (pts). Five patients were treated for MPN and two for LPN. Both of the pati- Conclusions: the analysis of genomic changes by aCGH and the detection of ents treated for LPN achieved complete remission. After a median follow-up recurrent MCRs can lead to the identification of functional important genes from MPN diagnosis of 149 months, 6 pts are steel alive and 1 died. Cyto- involved in MBC. In view of our results, male breast cancer could be conside- genetics was done in 6 patients: 5 pts had normal karyotype, while one pt red as a different molecular entity than female breast cancer. had abnormal karyotype with derivative chromosome 18. Interphase FISH Supported by FIS-FEDER PI13/01741 analysis was performed with CLL panel probes in three patients, showing del(13)(q14.3) in all of them. One patient with MM was analyzed with FISH 
P12 .139 probes for D13
S319 , T
P53 , IGH/FGFR3 and IGH/MAF genes and showed Mutated MCM9 is associated with predisposition to hereditary mixed no rearrangements. Four patients were tested for JAK 2 mutation: 3 with polyposis and colorectal cancer in addition to primary ovarian failure PV were positive while 1 with ET was negative. This retrospective analysis Y. Goldberg; showed that MPN was diagnosed before LPN in a majority of our patients. Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. Coexistence of LPN/MPN does not appear to predict worse outcome. 
P12 .137 Mutations in MCM9 encoding DNA helicase were recently shown to cause Mitotic kinesins are important players in the pathogenesis of a clinical phenotype of primary ovarian failure and chromosomal instabi- malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours lity. MCM9 plays an essential role in homologous recombination-mediated E. Terribas1, B. Gel1, J. Biayna1, J. Fernández-Rodríguez2, C. Lázaro2, E. Serra1; double-strand breaks repair. We describe a multiplex family with early co- 1Institut de Medicina Predictiva i Personalitzada del Càncer, Badalona, Spain, 2Catalan lorectal carcinoma and mixed polyposis associated with primary hypergo- 288 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONnAa,d SotProApIiNc h |y WpogWonWad.iEsmSH. AG c.oOmRbiGnation of whole genome homozygosityABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .144 Qualitative analysis of RET protooncogene mutations responsible for mapping as well as exome sequencing and targeted gene sequencing identi- Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndrome in Lithuania fied a homozygous c.672_673delGGinsC mutation which predicts a trunca- L. Juodele1, D. Serapinas2, L. Kucinskas2, V. Asmoniene2, E. Juozaityte3; ted protein, p.Glu225Lysfs*4. Our data expands the phenotypic spectrum of 1Lithuanian university of Health sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Department of Genetics MCM9 mutations and suggests a link between MCM9 and inherited predis- and molecular medicine, Lithuanian university of Health sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania, position to mixed polyposis and early onset colorectal cancer. 3Institute of Oncology, Lithuanian university of Health sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania. 
P12 .140 Investigation of gene expression alterations in metastatic colorectal Introduction. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) is a rare syndro- cancer me, inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, characterized by combi- V. P. Shubin, A. Ponomarenko, A. Tsukanov, Y. Shelygin, O. Mainovskaya, E. Rybakov, N. nation of medullary thyroid carcinoma with pheochromacytoma, tumors Pospekhova; of the parathyroid glands and more rare tumors. The aim of the study was Ministry of Health / State Scientific Center of Coloproctology, Moscow, Russian Federation. to determine and evaluate RET protooncogene mutations in patients with MEN2 syndrome in Lithuania. Materials and Methods. A total of 47 unrelated patients with medullary thy- Metastases of colorectal cancer (CRC) are main cause of patients’ death. roid carcinoma were enrolled into the study. Patients underwent genetic Data concerning gene expression alteration in primary tumors and liver me- testing by DNA sequencing, detecting germline mutations causing MEN2 tastases can served for prognosis of disease outcome. syndrome. Methods. The materials for the study were 30 CRC tumors (T3-4N0-2cM1) Results. RET protooncogene mutations causing MEN2 syndrome were de- and corresponding liver metastases. Expression the most important (accor- tected in 8 patients of the 47 medullary thyroid carcinoma cases - 17.02% ding scientific literature data) genes CFTR, FLNA, PROM1, SFR
P2 , PL
S3 , BMI (CI 95% 6.4 - 27.7%). The most frequent RET protooncogene mutations (in was investigated by RT- PCR. Analysis of gene expression was performed by 611 (n=2), 618(n=1), 634 (n=2) codons) were detected to cause MEN2A clustering. syndrome (62.5%), less frequent mutation in 918 codone (n=2) that caused Results. As a result of cluster analysis all tumors and metastases were di- MEN2B syndrome, most rare - familial medullary thyroid carcinoma syndro- vided into 3 groups. The first cluster of tumors (6 cases) characterized by: me causative mutation in 791 codone (n=1). In patients with detected MEN2 CFTR +, FLNA-, PROM1 +, SFR
P2  +, PL
S3 -, BMI +; the second cluster (8 ca- syndrome causative mutations in RET protooncogene, medullary thyroid ses): CFTR +, FLNA +, PROM1-, SFR
P2 -, PL
S3  +, BMI +; the third cluster (17 carcinoma manifested in younger age - 29.8 ±16.1 years, comparing with cases): CFTR +, FLNA +, PROM1, SFR
P2  +, PL
S3  +, BMI +. The first cluster of sporadic cases - 49.5±10.7 years (p<0.05). metastases (11 cases) characterized by: CFTR +, FLNA +, PROM1 +, SFR
P2 -, Conclusions. In unrelated patients with medullary thyroid carcinoma de- PL
S3  +, BMI +; the second cluster (8 cases) by: CFTR +, FLNA +, PROM1-, tected frequency of probands and germline RET protooncogene mutations SFR
P2 -, PL
S3  +, BMI +; the third cluster (12 cases) characterized by: CFTR +, causing MEN2 syndrome was 17.02 (CI 95% 6.4 - 27.7%). FLNA +, PROM1-, SFR
P2  +, PL
S3  +, BMI +. 
P12 .145 Conclusion. The most significant alterations of expression were detected for Epigenetic inactivation of tumor suppressor genes correlates with FLNA, PROM1, SFR
P2 , PLS genes in primary tumors and for PROM1, SFR
P2  tumor recurrence in histologically benign meningiomas genes in metastases. T. San-Miguel1, L. Navarro1, J. Megías1, L. Muñoz-Hidalgo2, R. Gil-Benso1, M. Cerdá- 
P12 .142 Nicolás1, C. López-Ginés1; 1Department of Pathology, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 2INCLIVA, Valencia, Gene expression profile in melanoma cell lines carrying BRAF and Spain. NRAS mutations P. Giménez-Xavier1,2, E. Martínez-Barrios3, J. A. Puig-Butillé2,3, G. Tell-Martí1,2, M. Potrony1, C. Badenas2,3, J. Malvehy1,2, D. Benítez4, S. Puig1,2; 1Dermatology Department, Melanoma Unit, Hospital Clínic of Barcelona and Institut Meningiomas are the most frequent tumors of the central nervous system. d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de Histologically, they are divided in three grades according to their aggres- Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, siveness. Grade I tumors are the most common, and they are usually slow- 3Biochemical and Molecular Genetics Service, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona and Institut growing tumors, curables by surgery. Nevertheless, in absolute numbers, d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain, 4Centro de they cause the majority of recurrences. Despite cytogenetic and genetic Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), approaches for meningioma progression, prediction of recurrence in histo- Barcelona, Spain. logically benign meningioma remains a challenge. The aim of this work was to characterize epigenetic changes in recurrent versus non-recurrent grade I meningiomas. We completed the study compa- Introduction: Malignant mBReAlaFn omNa RisA So, ne of the most aggressive human ring primary meningiomas with tumor recurrences, in order to determine cancers due to its high metastatic propensity. It is well known that somatic characteristic changes in progressed tumors. Formalin-fixed paraffin-em- oncogenic alterations in or membersB oRfA tFh e MAPK (mitogen- bedded specimens were used for DNA extraction and studied by Methylati- activated protein kinase) pathway, are a coNmRmASo n and initial event in me- on-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification with M
E001 - lanocyte transformation. The oncogenic p.V600E mutation is found 
C2  tumor suppressor genes (TSG) kit (MRC-Holland). This technique pro- in 50% of mBeRlaAnFo maNs, RwAhSi le mutations in gene are found in 20% of vides promoter hypermethylation information of several genes in just one melanomas. Thus, identifying a gene expression profile associated with the reaction. presence of or mutations in melanoma cell-lines can provide a The study revealed a statistically significant increase in the global number better understanding of their role in melanoma development and progres- of hypermethylated TSG in grade I recurrent tumors in a similar way that sion. happens in the recurrences analyzed versus primary tumors. Specifically, Materials and Methods: A panel of 12 melanoBmRaA Fc ell linNeRsA dS erived from epigenetic changes of MLH1, RASSF1A and CDKN2B correlated to the ten- cutaneous melanoma or melanoma metastases was used. Cell lines were dency to recur. In addition, the epigenetic landscape of grade I-recurrent classified according to the mutational status of and genes. Ana- tumors resembled to the one found on recurrences. lysis of whole genome expression of the cell lines was conducted by gene Our results suggest that TSG hypermethylation is an early event in the acqui- expression microarrays (SurePrint G3 Human Gene Expression v3 8x60K, sition of aggressiveness in benign meningioma and the role of these genes Agilent) and differential expression was analyzed using limma. TrBaRnAscFr ipts that are implicated in DNA-reparation, neoangyogenesis and cell-cycle con- with an adjusted p-value (FDR) <0.05 werNe RseAlSe cted. trol should be further studied. Results: We found a genomic signature associated with p.V600E BR(A36F This work was supported by PROMETEO11/083-INCLIVA and TS by V- transcripts) aNndR AaSn other associated with mutations (42 transcripts). Segles-UVEG grant Moreover, 103 transcripts were foBuRnAdF d eregNuRlaAtSe d between p.V600E cell lines and mutated cell lines. Conclusions: We have identifieBdR aA F aNnRdA S associated gene expressi- on profile in a set of melanoma cell lines. These profiles can help to improve our knowledge of the role of and mutations in melanoma pro- gression and treatment response. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 289ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .146 Evaluation of Microsatellite Instability in Tumor and Tumor Marginal Samples of Sporadic Colorectal Cancer Using Mononucleotide Markers Mitochondrial anomalies have been linked to carcinogenic processes. The J. Nouri Nojadeh, E. Sakhinia, S. Hashemzadeh, S. Behrouz Sharif; production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) increases the probability of Tabriz University of Medical Sience, Tabriz, Iran, Islamic Republic of. suffering oxidative damage and, consequently, the accumulation of mito- chondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations, affecting conserved positions probably contributing to the development of disease. This study aims to characterize Background: Microsatellite instability in tumor DNA is defined as the pre- the whole mitochondrial genome in patients affected by glioma. A total of sence of alternate sized repetitive DNA sequences that are not seen in the 27 glioma cancer patients were studied. Brain tumour and blood samples corresponding germline DNA. Microsatellite instability (MSI) is a molecular were collected for each patient and 10 brain samples from healthy indivi- phenotype due to a defective DNA mismatch repair system. The presence duals were added to the study. mtDNA was sequenced using Nextera XT kit of MSI is found in sporadic colon, gastric, sporadic endometrial and the with MiSeq sequencer from Illumina. Comparing tumour and blood samples majority of other cancers. Determination of MSI status in CRC has a clinical from the same patient, results show that the vast majority of the mutati- use in the form of identifying patients with germline defects predisposing ons were present in both tissues (87.02%), assuming a high representation to MMR-deficiency. Additionally, MSI status has prognostic and therapeutic of germinal mutations. Somatic mutations in brain tumours (12.98%) are implications, due to MSI CRCs typically exhibiting a better prognosis. For mainly in heteroplasmy (70.59%). The comparison between brain tumour these reasons microsatellite instability analysis is becoming more impor- samples and brain samples from healthy individuals shows that both pre- tant in detecting sporadic primary tumors. sent a low percentage of mutations in heteroplasmy and their frequencies Material and methods: In this study we investigated tumoral DNA and tumor are very similar (18.32% in brain tumour samples; 18.18% in brain samples marginal DNA of 50 sporadic CRC patients who have not received chemo- from healthy individuals). The study could contribute to understanding the therapy. Five mononucleotide markers, BAT-25, BAT-26, NR-21, NR-22 and implication of mtDNA in cancer development, specifically its role in glioma NR-27 w ere used as a pentaplex PCR panel to evaluate for microsatellite in- tumorigenesis. stability status. Acknowledgments: This work was supported by MICINN (CG
L2009 -08205) Results:Our primary finding showed that MSI was detected in about 40% and by Generalitat de Catalunya (Ref. 2014SGR1420). of specimens. Instability was observed in the tumoral DNA compared to the 
P12 .149 DNA from the normal DNA sample. Our primary results showed that the fre- The genomic landscape of mitochondrial DNA mutations in chronic quency of in stability NR-21, BAT-25 and NR-27 markers more than other myeloid leukaemia I. S. Pagani1,2, C. H. Kok1,3, V. Saunders1, J. Goyne1, J. McLean1, M. VanderHoek1, S. Heatley1, markers and its frequency almost were similar. A. P. Schwarer4, T. P. Hughes1,3,5, D. L. White1,3, D. M. Ross1,5,6; Conclusion: Our study showed NR-21, BAT-25 and NR-27 were the most 1South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, Australia, 2The useful markers for diagnosing sporadic CRC, Therefore these markers have University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 3School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, shown promise in their potential use for determining MSI status in patients Australia, 4Box Hill Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 5Department of Haematology, SA with sporadic colorectal cancer. Pathology, Adelaide, Australia, 6Flinders University and Medical Centre, Adelaide, Australia. 
P12 .147 The phenotype of the POLE germline mutation p.(Val411Leu) overlaps with constitutional mismatch repair deficiency syndrome Introduction: Genomic instability in BCR-AB
L1 -positive chronic myeloid K. Wimmer1, A. Beilken2, R. Nustede3, T. Ripperger4, B. Ure3, D. Steinmann5, J. Zschocke1, leukaemia (CML) is reported to be associated with increased reactive oxy- C. Fauth1, C. Kratz2; gen species (ROS). The mitochondrial (mt) genome is susceptible to ROS- 1Division Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Pediatric induced mutations due to oxidative stress in the mitochondrion and limited Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 3Department DNA-repair mechanisms. of Surgery, Childrens Hospital, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 4Institute Rationale: To describe the mt-genomic landscape in CML, and to identify di- of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 5Department of Radiotherapy and Special Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. versity in the apparently uniform leukemic clone. Methods: We performed targeted next-generation sequencing on mt-geno- me in 27 CML patients at diagnosis and after 12 months of therapy. Patients were selected as good (n=15) or poor (n=12) respISonders based on achie- There are three adenomatous polyposis and colorectal cancer (CRC) suscep- vement of major molecular response (BCR-AB
L1  ≤0.1%) at 12 months. tibility syndromes that result from constitutional DNA repair defects. The Mesenchymal stem cells or hair follicles were used to exclude germline po- phenotypes of the constitutional base excision repair defect, MUTYH-asso- lymorphisms. ciated polyposis (MAP), and of impaired exonuclease function of replicative Results: We identified 87 somatic mutations at diagnosis, in 14/15 good re- polymerases, polymerase proofreading-associated polyposis (PPAP), are sponders and in 9/12 poor responders. The number of somatic mutations characterized by multiple adenomas and/or carcinoma usually diagnosed per patient tended to be higher in good responders than in poor responders. in adulthood. Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency (CMMRD) confers All somatic mutations identified at diagnosis were heteroplasmic, reverting a more penetrant phenotype with a high risk for childhood or adolescence to wild type at follow up. Seven good responders and 5 poor responders had onset of polyposis and CRC as well as for other malignancies. Despite the new heteroplasmic mutations detected in follow-up samples. The distribu- presence of multiple café-au-lait macules (CALM) and one pilomatricoma, tion of mutations across the mt-genome did not differ between good and which serve as diagnostic signposts for CMMRD in young cancer patients, poor responders, and did not show an excess of G>T transversions that are this diagnosis was ruled-out by gMSI and mutation analysis of the four MMR considered the hallmark of ROS-induced damage. genes in a 14-year-old boy with polyposis and a rectosigmoid cancer expres- Conclusions: MtDNA mutations are common in CML, and identify clonal di- sing all four MMR genes. The only functionally-relevant variation found by versity both at diagnosis and follow up. Mitochondrial mutations are not analysis of eight polyposis genes is p.(Val411Leu) in POLE (NM_006231.3). directly related to ROS damage or clinical outcome. The significance of mu- This somatic hot-spot mutation recurrently found in ‘ultramutated’ sporadic tations in remission requires further study. CRC was never before observed as germline alteration. It impairs Polε’s exo- Funding from Royal-Adelaide-Hospital-Contributing-Haematologists‘-Com- nuclease activity and, therefore, is considered responsible for the phenotype mittee. of this youngest reported CRC patient with PPAP. This PPAP case reminis- cent of CMMRD raises the question of a skin phenotype that is common to different types of constitutional DNA repair defects and results from post- 
P12 .150 zygotic mutations secondary to the repair defect. Together with anecdotic Molecular characterization of constitutional MLH1 epimutations E. Dámaso1, A. Castillejo2, M. Arias3, G. Vargas1, P. Mur1, M. Genuardi4, D. Rueda5, Á. reports of multiple CALM and pilomatricomas in MAP patients, this case Alonso3, J. Soto2, M. Pineda1, G. Capellá1; supports this notion and should prompt investigations for skin features in 1Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute - Catalan Institute of Oncology, L‘Hospitalet MAP and PPAP patients. de Llobregat, Spain, 2Elche University Hospital, Elche, Spain, 3Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 4Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy, 5Doce 
P12 .148 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain. Mitochondrial DNA mutational changes in glioma M. M. González1, C. Santos1, A. Ramos1, M. Cos2, C. F. Alarcón3, J. J. Acebes3, M. P. Aluja1; 1Unitat d’Antropologia Biològica, Departament BABVE, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei de Neuro-radiologia, Institut Introduction: Constitutional epimutations in MLH1 have been identified in de Diagnòstic per la Imatge, Centre Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, a subset of Lynch syndrome patients (0-2%). Little is known about their 3Servei de Neurocirurgia, Ciutat Sanitària i Universitària de Bellvitge, Hospitalet de mechanistic basis and consequently its inheritance pattern. The aim of this Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. study was to perform a genetic and epigenetic characterization of constitu- 290 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONtAio,n SalP MALIHN1 |e WpimWutWati.oEnSs.HG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Methods: Twelve patients carriers of constitutional MLH1epimutations tunaitne-lsyi, lmicoore than 40% of the sequence variants found in routine analysis were recruited (8 previously reported). Mutational analysis of MLH1 pro- are of unclear pathogenicity. While several biochemical, molecular, genetics moter and intron 1 was performed by Sanger sequencing. The presence and analysis may help in interpreting such variants, there still rest of structural alterations was evaluated using a customized array with 15K an important percentage with unclear clinical value. probes (Agilent Technologies), surroundingMLH1 gene. Clonal bisulfite se- Herien -wsilei cporeseinnt- tsreavnesral distinct unclassified variants (UV) and how they quencing of the promoter was used to determine the methylated allele. In- could be interpreted for a clinical purpose. Case 1: Validating a UV to benign heritance pattern was determined by haplotype and MS-MLPA analyses in by or analysis; Case 2: Validating a UV to benign by func- probands’ first-degree relatives. Global methylome analysis was performed tional tests; Case 3: doubts persisting when the result is level 2 “probably using Infinium 450K array (Illumina). benign”; Case 4: Segregation and likage analysis for results level 4 “probably Results: The variant c.-234_-236del was identified in one of 12 cases ana- benign”; Case 5: The ultimate challenge - the level 3 absolute unclassified lyzed and rearrangements in the locus surrounding MLH1 were found in 4 of variant. the 11 analyzed patients. Methylation was confined to a single allele in two Interpreting such variants, as well as communicating the diagnosis results analyzed cases, associated to MLH1 transcriptional inactivation. Subsequent both to patients, families or clinicians, are the biggest challenges for present methylation and haplotype analyses in relatives revealed intergenerational molecular diagnosis. erasure. Global methylome analysis in the 12 cases revealed thatMLH1-EP- 
P12 .153 M2AI
P1  promoter CpG island is the most differentially methylated region Investigation of gene expression of myeloma cells in bone marrow of of MLH1 epimutants when compared with 21 MLH1 mutation carriers. multiple myeloma patiens by transcriptome analysis Conclusions: Structural alterations are found in a significant proportion M. Sariman1, S. Sirma Ekmekci1, N. Abacı1, A. Cakiris1, F. Pacal Percin1, D. Ustek1, M. of MLH1 constitutional epimutations. Further studies are needed to assess Ayer2, M. Yenerel3, S. Besisik Kalayoglu3, K. Cefle4, S. Palanduz4, S. Ozturk4; its putative causal relationship. Refined molecular characterization is need- 1Istanbul University, Research Institute of Experimental Medicine Department of ed to elucidate their mechanistic basis and heritability. Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Haseki Education and Research Hospital, Department Funding: SAF2012-33636, AECC, 2014SGR338, UGP-14-192. of Hematology, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine , Department of Internal Medicine Department of Hematology, İstanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul 
P12 .151 University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of A novel mutation in hMLH1 causing positive hMLH1 Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey. immunohistochemical staining, but defective binding to and loss of hPM
S2  A. Stella, M. Patruno, D. C. Loconte, S. Di Tommaso, C. Ranieri, C. Simone, D. Varvara, R. Introduction: Multiple Myeloma (MM) is the hematological disease charac- Bagnulo, P. Lastella, N. Resta; terized by transformation of B cells into malignant cells. Our aim of the stu- Division of Medical Genetics- Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, dy was to investigate transcriptome profiles in bone marrow myeloma cells University Of Bari, Bari, Italy. by next generation sequencing technology. Method: In this study we performed RNA-Seq using the Ion Torrent PGM platform to compare the transcriptome profiles of untreated four MM pati- Introduction: The advent of NGS has caused the identification of novel vari- ents and four healthy donors. Myeloma cells (CD38+,CD138+,CD19-,CD56+ ants in Lynch syndrome patients, whose clinical consequences are difficult ) and healthy B cells (CD38+ ,CD138+ ,CD19+ ,CD56- ) from bone marrow to predict especially when associated with conflicting results of immunohi- were selected using cell surface marker in FACSAria II Cell Sorter. Transcrip- stochemistry analyses. We here report a novel mutation in hMLH1 which, tome libraries were prepared from rRNA deplated RNA extracted from pool albeit leading to normal hMLH1 expression impairs its ability to bind to of myeloma cells and healty donors B cells. These libraries were sequenced hPM
S2  causing PM
S2  lack of expression and aligned the reads to the human genome (GRCh37/hg19) and mapped Materials and Methods: The index case was represented by a 23 years old sequences to the RefSeq database. male diagnosed with a pT3N1M1 colon adenocarcinoma. DNA isolated from Result: Here, we characterize transciptional profiles in MM patients. In ad- PBL was deep sequenced using an Ion AmpliSeq custom panel on an Ion dition, 18806 transcript (17760 of transcripts were reported), 490 deletion, Torrent PGM. IHC for MLH1,MSH2,PM
S2  and MSH6 was done according 1397 insertion, 8402 single nucleotide variants 415 reported fusion gene, standard methods. In silico analysis was performed using the following soft- 983 novel fusion gene were detected. The genes found differentially ex- ware prediction tools: Variant Effect Predictor (VEP), PredictProtein, and pressed underwent Gene Set Enrichment Analysis by MSigDB. We identified i-Mutant. significant overlap between EEF1A1, UBC, UBB, CALR, CXCR4, JUND, FOS, Results: NGS analysis revealed the presence of a c.122C>T, p. D41V in the PIM2, JUN, GAPDH, HS
P90 B1 that was previosly reported upregulation of hMLH1 coding sequence as the most likely pathogenic variant. IHC demon- MM . strated positive staining for MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 but not for PM
S2 . In silico Conclusion: We were determined some variations and different mRNA ex- analysis showed the following results: VEP returned a moderate score for pression pattern in some previous reported genes that especially in ubi- the pathogenicity of this variant with all predictions from SIFT, Polyphen, qutin-proteosomal pathway. Possible candidate genes detected in this study and MutationTaster either deleterious or probably damaging. PredictProte- should be confirmed with real time PCR and sanger sequencing in a large in computed for the mutant protein the loss of five binding sites, the reduc- groups of patients. tion in length of additional two, while three novel binding sites were gained. Finally, i-mutant predicted a stability decrease for the mutant protein 
P12 .154 Conclusions: The identified variant falls in the ATPase domain where 50% of Clonal evolution in bone-marrow cells of patients with missense variants cluster despite accounting for less than 25% of aminoacid myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and deletion 5q sequence. K. Svobodova1, Z. Zemanova1, H. Lhotska1, M. Novakova1, M. Belickova2, J. Brezinova2, I. Sarova1,2, S. Izakova1, L. Lizcova1, A. Berkova1, A. Jonasova3, J. Cermak2, K. Michalova1,2; 
P12 .152 1Center of Oncocytogenetics, IMBLD, General University Hospital and 1st Faculty Unclassified sequence variants: a challenge for molecular oncogenetic of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute diagnostics of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3First Medical L. Negura1, A. Chicos1, D. Azoicai1, A. Negura2; Department, General University Hospital and First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 1Gr. T. Popa Medicine and Pharmacy University, Iasi, Romania, 2Alexandru Ioan Cuza University in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic. University, Iasi, Romania. The most common recurrent chromosomal change in bone-marrow cells Oncogenetics was developed 20 years ago as a clinical and psychological of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) is interstitial deletion follow-up addressing to patients and families with hereditary risk of can- of the long arm of chromosome 5. Finding of the sole del(5q) is associated cer. Oncogenetic approach developed together with the identification of with good prognosis. Acquisition of additional aberrations during clonal predisposition genes to breast, ovarian or colorectal cancer, and with the evolution usually leads to rapid disease progression. The aim of our study progress in molecular diagnosis abilities. Today, the only molecular techni- was to thoroughly analyze bone-marrow cells of five MDS patients with sole que accepted and validated for oncogenetic diagnosis is Sanger sequencing del(5q) in the original clone and with successive linear or divergent clonal of all exons and exon-intron boundaries for the known predisposition genes. evolution proved in ancestral cell clones. When completely sequencing and decrypting thousands of DNA nucleoti- Bone-marrow samples were analyzed by conventional G-banding, I-FISH/ des, many sequence variants are identified, most of them being single nu- mFISH/mBAND (MetaSystems) and aCGH/SNP microarray (Illumina). To cleotide polymorphisms. Current practice classifies sequence variants in a detect T
P53  mutations, NGS (GS Junior system, Roche) was used. 5-levels frame, from deleterious pathoEgSeHnicG t o2 p0o1ly6m |o rBpAhiRc CbeEnLigOn.N UAnf,o rS-PAIInN a|l lW fiWve Wpa.tEieSnHts,G i.nOteRrsGtitial del(5q), extending between 5q13.42 9an1dABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .156 Association between NBN mutation and lung cancer - a new risk 5q35.2, encompassed commonly deleted regions 5q31 and 5q33. Clonal factor evolution concerning 5q included the duplication of deleted chromosome J. S. Nowak1, E. Kałużna1, J. Rembowska1, I. Ziółkowska-Suchanek1, B. Światek-Kościelna1, 5 in one sample and new translocation t(X;5)(q13;q12) in the other one. P. Gabryel2, W. Dyszkiewicz3; However, additional chromosomal changes acquired during clonal evolution 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of Thoracic Surgery were identified across the whole genome. Most frequently affected chromo- University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Thoracic Surgery University of Medical Sciencesical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. some arms were 11q (9x), 11p (6x) and 17p (6x). In four of five patients copy number neutral loss of heterozygosity (CN-LOH) of 17p and corre- sponding missense mutations of T
P53  gene (17p13.1) were found. The evaluation of primary and secondary aberrations is important for iden- The NBN gene, also known as NB
S1 , is located on chromosome band 8q21.3 tification of mechanisms involved in clonal evolution of pathological cells, and encodes 754-amino acids protein called nibrin. This protein is a mem- which can contribute to better understanding of the disease progression ber of the MRN nuclear complex, and is involved in numerous cell processes and is indeed very important for prognosis of the patients. essential for maintaining genomic stability. Heterozygous variants in the Supported by RVO-VFN64165, GACR 
P302 /12/G157, PRVOUK-
P27 /LF1/1. NBN gene, including p.I171V, c.657del5 and p.R215W, have been described as a risk factors for the development of several malignancies. However, there 
P12 .155 is no report regarding the association of these mutations with lung cancer The expression analysis of F2R gene in JAK2V617F mutation positive thus far. Therefore, the present study aimed to evaluate whether there is Polycythemia Vera (PV) an association between heterozygous p.I171V, c.657del5 and p.R215W vari- I. Uslu1, H. Hekimoglu1, A. S. Yavuz2, S. Sözer Tokdemir1; ants of the NBN gene and the risk of developing lung cancer. 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Experimental Medicine, İstanbul University, The frequency of these variants was estimated in a group of 453 adults Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Internal Medicine Division, Department diagnosed with non-small cell lung cancer and in healthy controls (2,400 of Hematology, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. for p.I171V, 2,090 for c.657del5 and 498 for p.R215W). The p.I171V was assessed by restriction fragments length polymorphism analysis of polyme- rase chain reaction (PCR) products, using MunI (MfeI) restriction enzyme, Introduction: Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are stem cell origina- whereas the c.657del5 and p.R215W were assessed by PCR-single-strand ted diseases associated with high risk of thrombosis. 50- 98% of patients conformation polymorphism method. carry JAK2V617F. F2R gene, has a role as a receptor regulates thrombotic A significantly increased risk of developing lung cancer was observed for the response. The aim of this study is to analyze the F2R gene expression levels p.I171V variant, which was present in 17 (3.75%) of the 453 cases of lung both in CD34+ and mononuclear cells (MNC) of patients related with the cancer and in 12 (0.5%) of the 2,400 healthy individuals (odds ratio,7.759; JAK2V617F. P<0.0001). Materials-Methods; The results obtained indicated an association between the p.I171V mutati- MNCs were isolated from peripheral blood of 5 patients who were dia- on and the development of lung cancer. Therefore, this variant may be con- gnosed with PV and one cord blood (CB). The cells were stained and sor- sidered as a risk factor for non-small cell lung cancer. ted against CD34. JAK2V617F were investigated in CD34+ and MNCs using allele-specific nested PCR. F2R gene expression evaluation were performed 
P12 .158 by real-time RT-PCR in MNCs, CD34+ and HEL. The analysis was performed Neuroendocrine tumors in 483 children in the Netherlands: a by using 2-ΔCT. descriptive study of tumor characteristics and genetic predisposition Results: The analysis for JAK2V617F in patients revealed that four were I. J. Diets1, I. Nagtegaal2, J. Loeffen3, E. Waanders1, I. de Blaauw4, N. Hoogerbrugge1, M. heterozygous JAK2V617F and one was wild type(wt) JAK2 allele. F2R gene Jongmans1; expression analysis of CD34+ between patients and CB revealed the 60.1 ± 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre and Radboud 49.1 fold increase whereas the MNCs of the same patients has 4.5± 5.7 fold Institute for Molecular Life Science, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, increase compared to CB. There was no difference between JAK2V617F-/+ Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, Sophia Children‘s Hospital, Erasmus Medical Centre, patients regarding to F2R. HEL, homozygous for JAK2V617F, has 4.1 fold in- Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Surgery - Division of Pediatric Surgery, Amalia crease. Children‘s Hospital, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Conclusion: The analysis of the F2R gene expression has revealed that the CD34+ of patients has statistically significant increase compared to controls. This is the first investigation in literature demonstrating the role of F2R in Introduction: Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are rare in children. Genetic MPN related with the JAK2V617F. The further studies are needed to address predisposition for these tumors has been described, but only limited data the exact role of F2R and its relationship between disease and pathophy- are available. We conducted a large cohort study to specify tumor and pa- siology. Table1. Mutations determined by resequencing and patient characteristics Patient Age/Gender Mutation Predicted Change ClinVar HGMD Leiden Open Clinical findings No Variation additional to cafe Database au lait spots 1 7/Male c.1541_1542delAG p.Gln514Argfs*43 rs267606600, CM1110944 Pathogenic Unknown pathogenic 2 4/Male c.6709C>T p.Arg2237Ter Not Reported CM000815 Pathogenic Unknown 3 8/Male c.5389C>T p.Arg1947Ter rs137854552, CM900173 Pathogenic surgery due pathogenic to instestinal obstruction at age 3 neurofibroma in the left eye T2 flair hyperintense signals in basal ganglia in cranial MRI 4 2/Male c.6756+1G>T splice donor site Not Reported C
S982281  Pathogenic facial assymetry changes micrognatia 5 13/Female c.7395-2A>G splice acceptor site Not Reported C
S098053  Pathogenic multiple changes hamartomas in the brain 6 7/Male c.3113+1G>C splice donor site Not Reported Not Reported Pathogenic nodular lesions changes with high signal intensities on both corpus callosum 7 41/Male c.4867G>C p.Asp1632His Not Reported Not Reported Pathogenic neurofibromas Strong contrast regions in femur MRI peripheral nerve sheath tumor signs 8 1/Female c.4802delT p.Leu1601Cysfs*2 Not Reported Not Reported Not Reported lower right tibia break 9 3/Female c.5630T>A p.Leu1877Ter Not Reported Not Reported Not Reported unknown 10 6/Male c.7907+1_7907+4del splice donor site Not Reported Not Reported Not Reported lipoma in the waist changes neurofibroma on the neck and on the right arm 292 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tient characteristics of children with a NET. We aimed to investigate the role lines in two cases. In one case, nonsense mosaicism disease-causing change of genetic predisposition in the etiology of pediatric NETs by collecting data (c.3916C>T; p.Arg1306*) was detected. In the other case, two different of second primary malignancies and comorbidities suggestive of genetic changes in the same position of the cDNA, in at least two different cell lines predisposition. (c.7806+2T>G and c.7806+2T>A), were detected Patients and methods: Using the nationwide pathology database PALGA, we The combination of different techniques that includes NGS DNA sequencing, collected patient- and tumor data of all children diagnosed with a NET in the mRNA Sanger sequencing, and MLPA provides higher diagnostic yield for Netherlands between 1991 and 2013 (N=483). the detection of disease-causing mutations in NF1 patients. Results: The incidence of NETs in children in the Netherlands is 5.40 per one 
P12 .162 million per year. The majority of NETs were appendiceal tumors (N=441; Comprehensive analysis of NF1 gene by using targeted resequencing 91.3%). In only 16 patients (3.3%) either locoregional lymph node or dis- and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification in patients tant metastases were present. Three patients with pancreatic NETs were with neurofibromatosis type I diagnosed with the known tumor predisposition syndromes Von Hippel S. Demir Ulusal1, H. Gürkan1, E. Atlı1, D. Eker1, S. A. Özal2, H. Tozkır1; Lindau disease (N=2) and Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia syndrome type 1 1Trakya University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Edirne, Turkey, (N=1). One additional patient with NETs in the stomach and pancreas had 2Trakya University Faculty of Medicine Department of Ophthalmology, Edirne, Turkey. MEN-1 syndrome. In one patient with an appendiceal NET Familial Adeno- matous Polyposis was diagnosed. A role of genetic predisposition was sug- gestive in several others, e.g. in patients with second primary malignancies Introduction: (N=6, 1.2%) or multiple NETs (N=5, 1.0%). NF1 gene consists 57 exons (NM_000267.3) and involvement of various Conclusion: We identified a significant number of patients with a confirmed pathogenic variants including single nucleotide variants, in/dels and copy o Pr 1 s 2u .1sp 6e 0cted tumor predisposition syndrome and show that pediatric pan- number variants makes difficult to analyse it. We aimed to summarize ge- c Nr Fe 1at aic n N dE ST Ps R i En Dp 1ar mtic uu tl aa tr i oa nre a a l s ss po ec cia trte ud m w oi ft h 1 .c 1a 0n 0ce ur n p sr eo ln ee c ts ey dn d pr ao tm iee ns t. s netic analysis results of 17 neurofibromatosis patients studied between No- suspected of having Neurofibromatosis Type 1 vember 2014-January 2016. B. Campos1, O. Abad2, J. Gardenyes2, P. Fabregas2, E. López-Toledano2, V. Volpini2; Methods: 1Reference Laboratory Genetics, L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood samples. NF1 coding regi- de Llobregat, Spain. ons were captured with IonAmpliseq DNA Library Preperation Kit and enri- ched by OT2 200 Kit. Resequencing performed on the Ion Personal Genome Machine. 
P081 .B2 /
P82 .B2 and 
P373 -B1 multiplex ligation dependent pro- Introduction: NeurofNibFr1omatosis type 1 (NF1) [MIM 162200] is a common be amplification (MLPA) probes were used to detect large deletions. ACMG dominant autosomal disSoPrRdEeDr,1 affecting 1 in 3500 individuals and caused 2015 guidelines, Human Genome Mutation Database, ClinVar,and Leiden by mutations in the gene at 17q11.2. Legius syndrome [MIM 611431], Open Variation Database, were used for evaluation of the variant pathoge- caused by mutations in gene (15q13.2), is characterized by clinical nicity. manifesNtFa1tions tShPaRt EoDve1rlap NF1, as café-au-lait spots and freckling. Mate- Results: rials and Methods: We screened 1.100 unrelated NF1 patients forN mF1utati- 4 splice mutations, 2 frameshift deletions, 1 missense and 3 nonsense muta- ons inS PRE Da1nd genes, using directN cFD1NA sequencing complemen- tions defined. Additionally, NF1 whole gene deletion was found in a patient ted with MLPA analysis. Results: We identified 710 mutations in and with MLPA. 27,2% of the mutations found were not previously reported. 19 in . Among the 710 changes in , 184 (26%) nonsense, 180 Conclusion: (25%) were frameshift mutations, 173 (24%) splice errors, 105 (15%) were NF1 mutation frequency detected by genomic DNA sequencing was re- missense and 12 (2%) were in frame amino acid deletions/insertions. Fur- ported to be about 61% compared to our study (58,8%, Table1). MLPA in- thermore, uSsPinRgE DM1LPA approach we found 55 mutations (8%): 29 total gene creased the diagnositc yield up to 64,7%. There was at least one additional deletions, 23 multiexon deletions and 3 multiexon duplications. The subset symptom to cafe-au-lait spots in most of the NF1 mutant patients (72.7%) analysis of mutated group (n=19) showed 8 (42,5%) missense mu- compared to the patients without a mutation or deletion. We suggest that tations, 6 (31,5%) frameshift, 2 (10,5%) nonsense, 2 (10,5%) splice errors targeted resequencing and MLPA together offer a powerfull diagnostic ap- and 1 (5%) total gene deletion. RNA analysis allowed us to identify 80/729 proach for neurofibromatosis in addition to clinical examination. (11%) mutations that we would not be able to detect or characterize using 
P12 .163 DNA-based methodologies, as deep intronic mutations or other intronic The transfer of multigene panel testing for hereditary breast and changes out of canonical GT-AG splice sitNesF.1 ConcluSPsiRoEnDs:1 Our results con- ovarian cancer to healthcare: What are the implications for the firm that RNA analysis together with MLPA provide a sensitive and speci- management of patients and families? fic method for the rapid identification of and mutations. RNA M. Eliade1, J. Skrzypski2, A. Baurand1, C. Jacquot1, G. Bertolone1, C. Loustalot3, C. Coutant3, analysis improved our sensitivity over DNA-based methodologies, allowing F. Guy4, P. Fumoleau5, Y. Duffourd6, L. Arnould7, A. Delignette8, M. Padéano3, C. Lepage9, G. accurate genetic counselling. Raichon-Patru10, A. Boudrant11, M. Bône-Lépinoy12, A. Villing13, S. Chevrier7, F. Végran7, N. Sevenet14, F. Ghiringhelli5, R. Boidot7, S. Lizard7, L. Faivre1; 
P12 .161 1Centre de Génétique, Hôpital des Enfants, Dijon, France, 2Unité d‘oncogénétique, Genetic diagnosis of NF1: A 5-year retrospective study evaluating Centre Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France, 3Service de Chirurgie, Centre Georges- different technologies François Leclerc, Dijon, France, 4Service de Radiologie, Centre Georges-François M. Lazaro, M. Molero, L. Rausell, A. Gomez, A. Arteche, M. Bermejo, C. Ruiz, J. Garcia- Leclerc, Dijon, France, 5Oncologie Médicale, Centre Georges-François Leclerc, Dijon, Planells, M. Garcia-Hoyos; France, 6Orphanomix, Dijon, France, 7Service de Biologie et pathologie des tumeurs, Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna, Spain. Centre Georges-François Leclerc, Dijon, France, 8Tour Elithis, Radiologie, Dijon, France, 9Service de Gastroentérologie, Hôpital François Mitterand, CHU, Dijon, France, 10Service d‘Oncologie, Centre Hospitalier Les Chanaux, Mâcon, France, 11Service d‘Oncologie, Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1; MIM#162200) is the most common auto- Centre Hospitalier William Morey, Chalon-sur-Saône, France, 12Service d‘Oncologie- Radiothérapie, Clinique Drevon, Dijon, France, 13Service d‘oncologie, Centre Hospitalier, somal-dominant neurocutaneous disorder associated with tumor predispo- Auxerre, France, 14Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire Département de bio-pathologie, sition. The primary clinical features of NF1 are multiple café-au- lait spots, Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France. axillary and inguinal freckling, Lisch nodules in the eye and benign periphe- ral nerve sheath tumors or neurofibromas. This disorder is caused by de- fects in the tumor suppressor gene NF1 (MIM*613113). Mosaicism has been Until recently, the molecular diagnosis of hereditary breast and ovarian described to have important clinical implications in a large number of diffe- cancer (HBOC) was mostly based on BRCA1/2 testing. Next generation rent diseases; therefore, it also plays an important role in some cases of NF1. sequencing and the recent discovery of new genes involved in HBOC pro- During the last 5 years, we have analysed the NF1 gene in more than 150 pa- gressively permitted the transfer of genomic capture targeting multiple can- tients using different techniques and approaches, including Sanger sequen- didate genes from research to diagnosis. However, the implication for the cing at mRNA level, NextGeneDX® (a post-PCR NGS methodology developed management of patients and their families has not been extensively studied. and validated by IMEGEN), and MLPA (Multiplex-Ligation Probe Amplifica- We studied 583 consecutive patients originated from Burgundy (France) tion) at DNA level. fulfilling the criteria for BRCA testing using a next generation sequencing We have identified the disease-causing mutation in more than 60% of our 25-gene panel including 20 candidate predisposition genes for breast and/ studied cohorts and detected all types of truncated germinal mutations: or ovarian cancer. A pathogenic BRCA1/2 mutation was found in 51 pati- nonsense, splicing-site, and small and large deletions/duplications. Besi- ents (9%). Besides, we found 37 pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutations des, NGS technologies enable the detection of disease-causing variations in in 10 different high to low-risk genes in 34 patients (6%). The most fre- mosaic. We describe the presence of mEoSsHaicGis m20 in1 d6if f|e BreAntR tCissEuLeOs aNndA c,e Sll PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 293ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index quently mutated genes were CHEK2 (n=12; 2 %), ATM (n=9; 1.5 %), and elucidating unclear phenotypes, to raising new questions about whether to PALB2 (n=4; 0.6%). Three double-hits and four mutations in MMR genes report incidental findings and whether predictive testing versus full testing were also found. Most of mutations were consistent with the spectrum of is always sufficient. cancers observed in the patient and/or family (89%). The analysis of clinical 
P12 .166 actionability performed among the mutation-positive individuals other than Molecular diagnosis of inherited colorectal cancer using NGS panel BRCA revealed that additional disease specific screening and/or prevention S. Baert-Desurmont, F. Charbonnier, S. Coutant, M. Vezain, R. Lanos, J. Bou, E. measurers beyond those based on personal and family history alone have Bouvignies, S. Fourneaux, S. Manase, S. Vasseur, G. Bougeard, J. Mauillon, I. Tournier, T. been recommended in most of cases (84%). In conclusion, multigene panel Frebourg; testing is a powerful tool for identifying high to low-risk HBOC susceptibility Department of Genetics Rouen University Hospital and Inserm U1079, Rouen University, genes. The penetrance and spectrum of cancer associated to these other ge- Normandy Centre for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France. nes remain sometimes undefined, and further collaborative work is needed to address this question. We have developed and optimized a massive parallel sequencing strategy 
P12 .164 for the diagnosis of inherited forms of colorectal cancer (CRC). This strat- Targeted next generation sequencing identifies a novel mutation in egy is based on (1) a panel of 10 genes involved in Mendelian forms of CRC FANCA gene (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PM
S2 , APC, MUTYH, STK11, SMAD4, BMPR1, PTEN), M. Dimishkovska1, S. A. Kocheva2, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1; 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D. Efremov”, (2) a quick capture of exonic and intronic sequences using Sureselect Agi- Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, lent QXT, (3) sequencing on MiSeq and NextSeq 500 Illumina platforms, (4) Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. double bioinformatics pipelines including CASAVA (Illumina) and BWA- GATK (Broad Institute) softwares for alignment and variant calling, Ala- mut Batch (Interactive BioSoftware) for annotation, completed by CANOE Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal recessive or X-linked disorder cha- software for the rearrangement detection, (5) automatically generated racterized by clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Characteristic clinical fea- quality reports and (6) systematic control of the genotypes, using Sanger tures include developmental abnormalities in major organ systems, bone sequencing or QMPSF for the positive cases and Multiplex SnaPshot analysis marrow failure and genomic instability resulting to cancer predisposition. of SNPs for the negative cases. Analysis of 1200 index cases allowed us to Analysis of three unrelated gipsy families in Macedonia had reviled a homozy- identify a deleterious mutation in 18% of the patients and the mutation de- gous deletion of exon 3 in FANCA gene (c.190-256_283+1680del2040dupC) tection rate reached 32% in Lynch syndrome suspected by tumour analyses. as a founder mutation in Macedonian FA patients of Gypsy-like ethnic origin The main advantages of this strategy are the reduction of molecular diagno- (Acta Hematol 2014;132:15-21). sis delay, the correction of the diagnosis in cases of overlapping phenotypes Case report: We report a girl from gipsy minority who was referred to the (MUTYH biallelic mutation mimicking Lynch syndrome) and the detection pediatric clinic at the age of 2,5. The patient had normochromic anemia with of mosaics and cryptic alterations. thrombocytopenia, increased level of fetal hemoglobin (10.4%) and no skel- 
P12 .167 etal or organ systems abnormalities. After a few months the disease pro- Comprehensive identification of genes driven by ERV9-LTRs reveals gressed and the intracranial hemorrhage resulted in death. TNFRSF10B as a re-activatable mediator of testicular cancer cell Due to suspicion of FA, we analyzed the proband for the known founder death mutation (deletion c.190-256_283+1680del2040dupC) but we detected the U. Beyer1,2, S. K. Kroenung1, A. Leha3, L. Walter4, M. Dobbelstein1; deletion in a heterozygous state. In order to clarify the diagnosis, a targeted 1University Goettingen, GZMB, Department of Molecular Oncology, Goettingen, Germany, resequencing was performed using an Illumina kit TruSight One sequencing 2Medical University Hannover, Department of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany, panel. 3University Goettingen, Department of Medical Statistics, Goettingen, Germany, 4German Our filtering approach revealed an undescribed heterozygous mutation Primate Center, Primate Genetics Laboratory, Goettingen, Germany. c.3446_3449dupCCCT (p.Met1151ProfsTer65) in FANCA gene, located in the region of interaction with the protein FAA
P20  important for the functio- nal integrity of the FA pathway. The long terminal repeat (LTR) of human endogenous retrovirus type 9 In conclusion, using targeted NGS we detected a novel mutation in FANCA (ERV9) acts as a germline-specific promoter that induces the expression of gene in a patient with Fanconi anemia from Macedonia with gipsy ethnic a proapoptotic isoform of the tumor suppressor homologue p63, GTAp63, origin. in male germline cells. Testicular cancer cells silence this promoter, but in- hibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) restore GTAp63 expression and 
P12 .165 give rise to apoptosis’. We show here that numerous additional transcripts Multiple gene panel testing unravels rare aspects of cancer genetics throughout the genome are driven by related ERV9-LTRs. 3‘ Rapid amplifica- F. Fostira, I. Konstantopoulou, P. Apostolou, I. Konstanta, V. Mollaki, A. Vagena, M. tion of cDNA ends (3 RACE) was combined with next-generation sequen- Papamentzelopoulou, D. Yannoukakos; cing to establish a large set of such mRNAs. HDAC inhibitors induce these Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, INRASTES, NCSR ‚Demokritos‘, Athens, Greece. ERV9-LTR-driven genes but not the LTRs from other ERVs. In particular, a transcript encoding the death receptor DR5 originates from an ERV9-LTR inserted upstream of the protein coding regions of the TNFRSF10B gene, Next-generation sequencing (NGS) and more specifically, customized gene and it shows an expression pattern similar to GTAp63. When treating te- panels, have replaced conventional Sanger sequencing and became the gold sticular cancer cells with HDAC inhibitors as well as the death ligand TNF- standard for hereditary cancer diagnostics. Through this technology, we re- related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), rapid cell death was observed, port a number of interesting findings, which would have been missed by which depended on TNFRSF10B expression. HDAC inhibitors also cooperate other methods. with cisplatin (cDDP) to promote apoptosis in testicular cancer cells. ERV9- Case 1. A female with early onset breast cancer was found to be a double LTRs not only drive a large set of human transcripts, but a subset of them heterozygote for loss-of-function mutations in both PTEN and PALB2 genes. acts in a proapoptotic manner. We propose that this avoids the survival of Case 2. A rare case of T
P53  mosaic event has been detected in a man who damaged germ cells. HDAC inhibition represents a strategy of restoring the was previously diagnosed with four primary cancers. The T
P53  missense expression of a class of ERV9-LTR-mediated genes in testicular cancer cells, mutation, located in the DNA binding domain, has been identified in 9.2% thereby re-enabling tumor suppression. of the total reads. 
P12 .168 Case 3. Family relatives within a family with multiple cases of ovarian cancer Germline mutations in 94 cancer predisposition genes among large were found to carry two different BRCA1 deleterious mutations. epithelial ovarian cancer cohort Case 4. Two sisters diagnosed with early onset breast cancer. One of them R. Janavičius1,2, V. Rudaitis3, N. Archipova1, L. Griškevičius1; carries a PALB2 missense mutation with potential pathogenicity, while the 1Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics Hematology, Oncology and Transfusion other carries a BRCA2 pathogenic mutation. Medicine Center, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2State Research Institute Innovative Medicine Case 5. In a family with three cases of premenopausal breast cancer, pro- Center, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Dept. of band tested negative, while a MEN1 pathogenic mutation was detected in Oncogynecology, Vilnius, Lithuania. the second member tested. Subsequently, her daughter was diagnosed with neuroendocrine pancreatic cancer and was also found to carry the MEN1 mutation. INTRODUCTION. Recent advances in massive parallel DNA sequencing led to A 2l 9l t 4he above highlight the different aspects inE SgeHneGti c2s 0th1a6t a|r BiseA tRhrCoEugLhO NtAhe, SgePnAerIaNti o|n W anWd aWpp.lEicSatHioGn .oOf vRarGious cancer predisposition genes (CPG) the evolution of NGS technologies, from explaining missing heritability and panels, improving the stratification of genetic cancer subtypes for betterABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index management and targeted therapy. To determine the utility of multigene te- Amplification. Results: The patient was 49 years old male at the time of the sting approach we assessed the frequency of pathogenic variants in 94 pan- primary tumor diagnosis and a heavy smoker (≥20 cigarettes/day).Treat- CPGs in a large epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cohort from a homogenous ment of primary tumor was radiochemotherapy and surgery for SPT. SPT population of Lithuania. presented more aberrations than primary tumor. However, primary tumor METHODS. Patients with EOC (n=586) w/wo family history (FH) were re- and SPT shared several genomic imbalances, namely at 17 and 19 chro- cruited through single hospital center (VUHSK HOTC) and germline DNA mosomes. Copy number alterations in genes related with radioresistance was sequenced and analysed using Illumina Miseq multigene panels of 94 and worse prognosis were identified. WT1, CHFR and GATA5 methylated in CPGs, including BRCA1 and BRCA2. tumor and macroscopically tumor free tissue of SPT were detected. Three RESULTS. Deleterious (class IV/V) mutations were identified in 35,6% all months after SPT diagnosis the patient presented a tumor in larynx. Con- EOC patients. Of these, 29,4% had mutations in BRCA1 (26,5%) and BRCA2 clusions: Genomic and epigenetic profile of tumors in different anatomic (2,9%) genes, whereas 6,3% harboured mutations in other CPG, including subsites seems to be different, even in the same patient exposed to the same RAD51C, BRI
P1 , ATM, STK11, MUTYH, MLH1, MSH6, T
P53 , CHEK2, WRN, risk factors. The molecular signatures seem to be pivotal to help in the early FANC. In patients w/o FH pathogenic BRCA1/2 mutations were found in detection of SPT, to predict tumor behavior and response to therapy. 
P12 .171 18,3% and 4,2% harboured mutations in other genes. EOC patients with pa- Ovarian carcinomas and hereditary cancer syndromes thogenic CPG mutations were diagnosed at an earlier age (p<0,001). L. Libera1, I. W. Carnevali2, L. Cimetti2, N. Sahnane1, T. Rossi3, G. Formenti3, A. CONCLUSION. The heritable component of EOC due to mutations in other Chiaravalli2, D. Furlan1, C. Riva1, M. G. Tibiletti2; genes than BRCA1/2 genes is less prevalent and not affected by FH. Clinical 1University of Insubria, Varese, Italy, 2Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy, 3Ospedale del utility for newer genes remains to be established. Ponte, Varese, Italy. 
P12 .169 Introduction: About 23% of ovarian carcinomas (OC) are related to here- Analysis of germline HAB
P2  G534E variant in Spanish families with ditary conditions, mainly Hereditary Breast Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) and Nonmedullary Thyroid Cancer Lynch syndrome (LS). The identification of germline mutation represents M. Ruiz-Ferrer1,2, R. M. Fernández1,2, E. Navarro3,2, G. Antiñolo1,2, S. Borrego1,2; a fundamental step in the management of these patients and their relatives. 1Department of Genetics, Reproduction and Fetal Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine Patients: 126 women affected by OC referred to our Genetic Counseling Ser- of Seville (IBIS), University Hospital Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville, Seville, Spain, 2Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), vice for a suspected inherited cancer syndrome. 110/126 patients under- Seville, Spain, 3Department of Endocrinology, Institute of Biomedicine of Seville (IBIS), went BRCA1/2 or MMR germline genetic test based on their family history University Hospital Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville, Seville, Spain. and/or somatic analyses for MMR defects. Results: Somatic MMR analysis was performed on 45 OC and 14 of these re- sulted MMR defective. Six of 14 patients revealed MMR pathogenetic germ- Nonmedullary thyroid cancer (NMTC) comprises thyroid cancers of follicu- line variants, 5 showed variants of uncertain significance (VUS) and 3 had lar cell oriHgiAnB aPn2d accounts for more than 95% of all thyroid cancer cases. sporadic cancers. In the remaining 96 patients with OC, the germline BRCA Recently, using NGS technologies and further functional studies, the G534E test was performed and a pathogenetic variant of BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes variant in gene has been implicated in familial NMTC. However, the was identified in 43 women. The global detection rate (DR) of hereditary role of this variant has generated the latter scientific comments due to the syndromes was 45% (49/110). Mutated and wildtype patients had the same higher reported frequencies in public database. Subsequently, several co- age of OC onset (50.2ys). Interestingly, the mean age of OC onset in LS pa- horts of patients from different ethnical origin have been evaluated with dif- tients was lower than that of HBOC patients (45ys vs 51.6ys). Regard to hi- ferent results reported. Therefore, the added collaborative effort of testing stological types of OC, in both LS and HBOC patients, endometrioid, serous, this variant in NMTC families has been requested to further clarify its role. clear cells and mixed carcinomas and carcinosarcomas were observed sug- In this sense, we have evaluated the G534E variant in 14 Spanish families gesting that in these syndromes is not involved an exclusive OC histological with NMTC (13 papillary thyroid cancer, PTC; and 1 follicular thyroid cancer, type. FTC), including 30 affected and 46 unaffected individuals. As a result, we Conclusions: The OC is a sentinel cancer for inherited cancer syndromes only found two heterozygous variant carriers, both in the same famHilyA, BbPu2t identification independently to histological type and age of onset. clearly showing no segregation between PTC and the G534E variant. Specifi- 
P12 .172 cally, there was one PTC patient in this family who does not carry the A Hot-spot of In-frame Duplications Activates the Oncoprotein AKT1 variant and one of the identified carrier was an unaffected individual. In ad- in Juvenile Granulosa Cell Tumors dition, we examined this variant in 267 Spanish controls exomas available A. Todeschini1, L. Bessière1, A. Auguste1, S. Sarnacki2, D. Flatters3, B. Legois1, A. Zider1, S. in the context of the Medical Genome Project. AmHoAnBgP 2th em, 6 individuals Caburet1, C. Sultan4, N. Kalfa4, L. Galmiche2, R. A. Veitia1; (2.24%) were heterozygous for the variant (MAF = 0.0112). According to 1Institut Jacques Monod/CNRS/Université Paris Diderot-Paris VII, PARIS, France, this, our results suggest that the G534E variant in might not be asso- 2Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades/Université Paris Descartes-Paris V, PARIS, France, ciated with familial NMTC in the Spanish population. 3INSERM UMR973/Université Paris Diderot-Paris VII, PARIS, France, 4University Hospital Funded by PI1301560 (ISCIII) and CTS-7447 (Autonomous Government of of Montpellier/Hôpital Lapeyronie, MONTPELLIER, France. Andalucia). 
P12 .170 Ovarian granulosa cell tumors are the most common sex-cord stromal tu- Oral squamous cell carcinoma: can the genes predict a second mors and have juvenile (JGCTs) and adult forms. The molecular basis of JG- primary tumor? CTs is poorly understood although mutations in the GNAS gene have been I. M. Carreira1,2, I. P. Ribeiro1,2, F. Marques2,3,4, F. Caramelo5, A. Santos1, M. J. Julião6, I. P. reported but only in 30% of the analyzed JGCTs. We have searched for alte- Baptista2,3, J. B. Melo1,2; rations in other proteins involved in ovarian mitogenic signaling. This led us 1Cytogenetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2CIMAGO - Center of Investigation on Environment Genetics and Oncobiology, Coimbra, to detect in-frame duplications within the oncogene AKT1 in >60% of the Portugal, 3Department of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, JGCTs studied and point mutations affecting highly conserved residues in Portugal, 4Stomatology Unit, Coimbra Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, EPE, tumors without duplications. Subcellular localization analyses of the muta- Coimbra, Austria, 5Laboratory of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, IBILI - Faculty of ted proteins and functional explorations using Western-blot and luciferase Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Department of Pathology, Coimbra assays showed that AKT1 variants bearing the duplications located at the Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal. plasma membrane and were hyperactive. To gain insights into the effects of these mutations and the existence of potential co-driver alterations, we per- formed transcriptome of four JGCTs. RNA-Seq data analyses showed that the Introduction: Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patients are at elevated duplications were the sole lesions common to the four tumors suggesting risk of second primary tumors (SPT) with significant reduction of 5-year a causative role. They also pinpointed a series of differentially expressed survival. For OSCC management the identification of molecular markers genes, involved in cytokine and hormone signaling and cell division-related with predictive value of relapse risk development and of response to the processes. Our results suggested that most of the transcriptomic dysregula- treatment is pivotal. Material and Methods: We identified the genomic and tion might be mediated by a limited set of transcription factors perturbed epigenetic profile of a primary tongue tumor and of a SPT in the floor of by AKT1 activation. Finally, we show that commercially available AKT inhi- the mouth of the same patient, diagnosed four years and eight months later. bitors can modulate the in vitro activity of various mutated forms. Our study Primary tumor, SPT and macroscopically tumor free tissue from SPT were incriminates somatic AKT1 mutations as a major event in the pathogenesis analyzed. This study was conducted using array-Comparative Genomic Hy- bridization and Methylation-Specific E MS uH ltiG pl e2 x0 
L1  ig6 a t| io B nA -dR epC enE dL eO ntN PA ro, b S e PAoINf JG |C WTsW anWd p.rEoSviHdeG t.hOerRapGeutic leads for a targeted treatment. 295ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .173 Exploring the non-randomness of somatic mutations in cancer genomes type of pancreatic cancer is an aggressive disease with dismal prognosis M. D. Stobbe1,2, D. Kedra1,2, M. Oliva1,2,3, E. Raineri1,2, I. G. Gut1,2, Pan-Cancer Analysis of mainly because it is generally discovered very late and it is resistant to che- Whole Genomes study of theInternational Cancer Genome Consortium; motherapy. Aside from the role as a major inhibitor neurotransmitter in the 1CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and brain, GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) has emerged as a stem and cancer cell Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, signaling molecule in different tissues. Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), Spain, 3University of Chicago Department of Medicine & Institute for Genomics and the biosynthetic enzyme for GABA, exists in two forms- GAD65 and GAD67 Systems Biology, Chicago, IL, United States. that are usually co-expressed in various ratios in the GABAergic cells but differ in subcellular localization, kinetics and cofactor binding. Materials and Methods: The RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry assays were Mutation rates in tumors are higher than basal mutation rates in unaffected used to access the gene and protein expression in three PDAC cell lines, tissues. However, given the sheer size of the human genome it is still impro- Panc1, MiaPaCa2 and HPAF II. bable that identical mutations are recurrent by chance. To explore this hy- Results: Our results show that, in contrast to healthy exocrine pancreas pothesized non-randomness of somatic mutations we used a pilot dataset of PDAC cell lines express the GAD isoforms, GABA receptors and accumulate 2049 cancer genomes from the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes pro- GABA. Specific activation of GABA receptors significantly increased the pro- ject of the International Cancer Genome Consortium, for which the somatic liferation rate of these cells. Finally, following the treatment with the chemo- mutation calls were available from one of the pipelines used in this project. therapeutic agent retinoic acid we detected altered expression of GAD65/ We first normalized the mutation calls to make them comparable across GAD67 genes, as well as cancer stem cell transcription factor, SOX2. samples and applied the filters provided by the pipeline. To reduce false Conclusion: The identification of molecules and proteins involved in deve- positives, we removed all calls found in Ki.aev.iar or dbSNP, two variant data- lopment and progression of PDAC is critical to develop novel active drugs. bases. This left us with ~31 million unique Somatic Single-base Mutations Our data provide new insights into the role of GABA in pancreas as a modu- (SSMs) of which ~43.000 are recurrent, present in 3 or more tumours, lator of cellular proliferation and/or differentiation during tumorigenic cell and ~2 million unique Somatic Insertion/deletion Mutations (SIMs) of transformations. This work was partially supported by the Ministry of Edu- which ~130.000 are recurrent. We selected the top 10 ranking recurrent cation, Science and Technological Development, Republic of Serbia (Grant SSMs, SIMs and 2bp deletions, which define 30 sets of samples, to identify No. 173051) genomic and phenotypic events tih.aa.t co-occur with the selected recurrent mutation. 
P12 .176 Multiple sets of samples share, , more mutations between them than Expression of survivin and its splice variants in pediatric acute randomly selected samples without the specific mutation. Nearly all sets lymphoblastic leukemia contain samples from different cancer types suggesting relevant pan-cancer E. Eren-Keles1, H. G. Karabulut2, H. F. Cakmaklı3, B. Adaklı-Aksoy3, S. K. Kose4, H. commonalities. In one such case with samples from colon, stomach and ute- Dıncaslan3, L. G. Yavuz3, M. Ertem3, A. Tukun2; 1Ankara University Institute of Biotechnology, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara University rine cancer, the processes behind the non-randomness of the mutations may School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Ankara University be the DNA damage repair pathways that are often defective in these three School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Ankara, Turkey, cancers. 4Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Ankara, Turkey. 
P12 .174 The pancreatic master genes expression in Panc1 cells stimulated with TGFβ1 Introduction: Survivin (BIR
C5 ) is a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis L. Kondratyeva1, A. Sveshnikova1,2, I. Chernov1, E. Kopancev1, E. Sverdlov1,3; protein family and involved in inhibition of apoptosis and regulation of cell 1M.M. Shemyakin and Yu.A. Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry of the Russian division. High expression of survivin mRNA has been shown in several hu- Academy of Science, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Lomonosov Moscow State University, man cancers including hematological malignancies. However, expression Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Molecular Genetics Russian Academy of level of survivin in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and its Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. prognostic value has not been well studied. Materials and Methods: 41 pediatric B-precursor ALL patients and six healthy donors were included in this study. Expression of survivin and its Introduction: One of the most important events of cancer progression is an splice variants including ΔEx3, 2B, 3B and 2α was investigated by real-time epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Activation of EMT program is rea- PCR both at first diagnosis and in remission periods of patients divided into lized by mean growth factors, for instance, TGFβ1. The goal of this project high (n=16) and standard risk (n=25) groups according to age, white blood was expression level analysis of genes of master factors that manage develo- cell count and genetic risk factors. In addition, survivin variant(s) that may ping pancreas in cell line Panc1 stimulated with TGFβ1 affect the response to the treatment was also investigated. Materials and Methods: To perform this study we cultivated Panc1 cells du- Results: Expression levels of survivin and survivin-ΔEx3 were found to be ring 120 hours with TGFβ1. Changes in the cells were analyzed by Western higher in patient group than controls, and survivin-3B was found at in- blot test and qRT-PCR for the 4 genes marked EMT and the 13 master factors creased levels in high risk group both at first diagnosis and remission pe- genes. riods. The ratio of survivin-2α/3B expression was also higher at diagnosis Result: Stimulation of Panc1 with TGFβ1 has resulted in changing ceSllN eApIi1- than remission period. theliaSlN tAoI 2mesenchymal morphology, increasing level of SNAIL and decre- Conclusion: Our results suggest that survivin and survivin-ΔEx3 may be a asiCnDg Hle1vel ofK RET-c8adherin. Besides the relative expression levels of risk factor for childhood ALL. On the other hand, survivin-3B can be used in and genes increased 6- and 25-fold, reSsOpXe9ctively, eFxOpXrAe2ssion levels risk classification and as a therapeutic target. Survivin-2α/3B and survivin- GofA TA4 and decreased 25- and 15-foPldT,F r1eAspPecDtXiv1elyH. NFoFr1 btheN EseUlRecOtGed3 ΔEx3/WT may also be taken into consideration in risk classification. master genes suppression of expression levelG ATA6 twHiEce
S1 , NKX6 5-foNlRd5 aAn2d This project was supported by the Scientific and Technological Research RBPJL 4-foOldN wECaUs Tr1evealed. Expression of , , , Council of Turkey (TUBITAK, Project No. 114
S535 ). genes was not detected, expression level of , , .1, , and has not changed. 
P12 .177 Conclusion: Visual observation during 120 hours and changing profiles of Microdeletion 19p13.3 including STK11 gene in a patient with Peutz- protein and genes marked EMT after incubation withS OfaXc9toFrO pXrAov2e thatG aAdTdAi4- Jeghers syndrome and dysmorphic features tion of TGFβ1 in the cell medium induce EMT process. Among the 13 selec- C. Machado, P. Dias, J. Dupont, R. Silveira-Santos, S. Serafim, A. Sousa; ted genes of master factor of pancreas development , and Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria, genes changed their expression levels. Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisboa, This study was supported by Russian Science Foundation grant, project № Portugal. 14-50-00131. 
P12 .175 Introduction: Peutz-Jeghers (PJS) is an autosomal dominant cancer predis- Regulation of GAD expression in human pancreatic cancer cell lines position syndrome characterized by gastrointestinal hamartomatous po- M. L. Svirtlih1,2, D. Drakulic1, Z. Katarova2, M. Mojsin1, Z. Mate2, M. Stevanovic1, G. Szabo2; 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, lyposis and mucocutaneous pigmentation. Germline point mutations and Belgrade, Serbia, 2Division of Medical Gene Technology, Institute of Experimental partial/whole exon deletions in STK11 can be identified in about 70% and Medicine, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. 30% of patients with PJS, respectively. Only a few carriers of large genomic deletions at 19p13.3 encompassing STK11 have been previously reported. Case presentation: A 31 year-old woman was referred for genetic evaluation I2n9tr6oduction: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoE mS aH (G PD 2 A0 C)1 , 6 m | o sB t A coR mC mE oL nO N fA or, dS yP sA mI oN rp h| iW smW . FaW m. iE lyS hH isG to. rO y wR aG s unremarkable. She had normal intel-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index lect. In her late teens, a jejunal villous polyp and pseudopolyps of the ileus nologies). and cecum had been removed. She had also been noticed to have lip pigmen- Results: Using the first LR-PCR kit we detected a new pathogenic variant: tation. However, sequencing of STK11 found no mutation. On observation, 97bp deletion in I01-
E02  boundary (c.24-12_109del) that was confirmed she presented thick eyebrows, long down-slanting palpebral fissures, ocular in independent experiments and both strands. This mutation could not be proptosis, high nasal bridge, hanging columella, black-pigmented spots on detected using the second LR-PCR kit. Moreover, the analysis of a second the lips and a sandal gap. case showed a missense variant in 
E02 :c.137G>T;p.(Ser46Ile) detected by Results: MLPA using DNA extracted from peripheral blood revealed a pro- the second, but not with the first LR-PCR kit. This variant could not be con- bable total deletion of one copy of STK11: c.(?_-1100)_(*3276_?); array-CGH firmed in both strands and was considered as an artifact. (NimbleGen CGX 135K, Perkin Elmer) confirmed the presence of a clinically Conclusions: LR-PCR can be used to amplify the PM
S2  gene and avoid pseu- significant interstitial deletion (410.30kb) within 19p13.3. The deletion was dogene interference previously to sequence (Sanger or NGS) although a de- de novo and involved 13 OMIM genes, including STK11. tailed validation analysis is needed to provide a clinically useful analysis of Conclusion: PJS features in our patient are a consequence of STK11 haplo- PM
S2 . insufficiency. Dysmorphisms common to our patient and similar reported cases in the literature support the notion that genes in the neighborhood 
P12 .180 of STK11 are responsible for a clinically recognizable phenotype. This case Germline POLD1 mutation can mimic Lynch syndrome strengthens the need to screen for large deletions in patients presenting M. Castillejo1, A. Castillejo1, E. Hernández-Illán1, I. Tena2, J. Soto1; with PJS together with dysmorphic and/or other atypical clinical features. 1Hospital Universitario Elche, Elche, Spain, 2Hospital Provincial Castellón, Castellón, Spain. 
P12 .178 Whole-genome microarray analysis to establish genetic profiles of pilocytic astrocytomas Introduction: Lynch syndrome (LS) is caused by pathogenic germline vari- J. N. Sanmann1, A. T. Calleroz2, J. M. Stevens1, M. Nelson1, P. A. Althof1, D. L. Pickering1, N. ants in one of the mismatch repair (MMR) genes and patients have a high Lu1, C. Lettieri3, L. J. Starr4, D. Perry5; risk of developing colorectal cancer and other tumors. Microsatellite insta- 1Human Genetics Laboratory, Munroe-Meyer Institute at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States, 2Department of Pathology and Microbiology, bility (MSI) and loss of MMR protein expression are the molecular hallmarks University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States, 3Department of of LS tumors. Recently, it has been suggested that mutations in POLE and Pediatrics Hematology/Oncology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, POLD1 genes might explain part of the suspected LS cases without mutati- NE, United States, 4Department of Genetic Medicine, Munroe-Meyer Institute at the ons in MMR genes. University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States, 5Department of Materials/Methods: We analyzed germline mutations at POLE (exon 13) and Pathology, Children‘s Hospital & Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States. POLD1 (exon 11) genes in 327 unexplained suspected LS cases. From these, 158 tumors had normal expression and 165 tumors had loss of expression of MMR proteins. Analysis of MLH1 somatic mutations in tumor was perfor- Introduction: Pilocytic astrocytomas, the most common pediatric brain med in one case of interest. tumor, are low-grade gliomas. Although distinct clinical features exist, the Results: We found three mutated individuals among cases with normal MMR histopathological diagnosis of pilocytic astrocytoma can be challeBnRgiAnFg be- protein expression (1.9%). Two cases had POLD1_Leu474Pro mutation and cause of the wide morphologic spectrum and histopathological overlap with one case had POLE_Leu424Val mutation. These three cases fulfilled Amster- high grade malignancies. A MAPK pathway aberration involving has dam II criteria. been reported in pilocytic astrocytomas, but nearly one-third lack the pre- Another individual with the POLD1_Leu474Pro mutation was found among sence of a unique, detectable genetic hallmark. This study aimed to mole- cases with loss of MMR protein expression (0.6%). This patient was dia- cularly characterize a cohort of pilocytic astrocytomas for identification of gnosed of colorectal cancer at age 51 with no family history of cancer. His additional genetic signatures that may provide additional information to tumor showed loss of MLH1 expression without MLH1 promoter methyla- assist in making the correct pathologic diagnosis. tion and wild-type for BRAF_V600E mutation. Germline analysis of MLH1 Methods: DNA was extracted from archived paraffin-embedded tissue from did not show any pathogenic alteration. Tumor analysis of MLH1 showed 18 pediatric pilocytic astrocytomas. Microarray was performed using the a homozygous/hemizygous nonsense pathogenic variant [(c.1279C>T; Affymetrix OncoScan® FFPE Assay according to standard protocol (San- p.(Glu427*)] suggesting somatic inactivation of MLH1 as a consequence of ta Clara, CA) for identifiBcRatAiFon of clinically-relevant copy number variants POLD1 deficiency. (CNVs) and regions oKf IcAoAp1y5-n49eutral BloRsAs Fof heterozygosity (CN-LOH). BRAF Conclusion: Mutations at POLD1 can induce tumorigenesis via MSI-pathway Results: CNVs involving were identified in 13/18 (72%) of cases: gain mimicking Lynch syndrome. encompassing both and loci (n=12) and deletion in (n=1). Whole chromosome gains were the next frequent CNV noted, with 
P12 .181 recurrent involvement of chromosomes 5 and 6 (n=2). Additional, less fre- Combined mismatch repair and POLE/POLD1 defects explain quent CNVs and CN-LOH were present throughout the cohort. unresolved suspected Lynch Syndrome cancers Conclusions: Microarray analysis is a cBoRsAt-Feffective tool for the identification A. M. L. Jansen1,2, T. van Wezel1, B. E. W. M. van den Akker1, M. Ventayol Garcia1, D. Ruano1, C. M. J. Tops3, A. Wagner4, T. G. W. Letteboer5, E. B. Gómez-García6, P. Devilee7, J. T. of the hallmark genetic aberrations reported in pilocytic astrocytomas, in- Wijnen2,3, F. J. Hes3, H. Morreau1; cluding deletions and duplications of . Additionally, the whole-genome 1Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, platform allows for characterization of additional neoplastic markers that 2Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, may have diagnostic and prognostic implications. 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, This research was supported by the Gladys Pearson Research Fellowship in 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Pediatric Cancer and Genetics Grant. Netherlands, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
P12 .179 Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, Analytical challenges in the study of PM
S2  for Lynch syndrome Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical genetic diagnosis. Long range PCR matters CenterDepartment of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, V. M. Barberá, M. I. Castillejo, A. Castillejo, J. L. Soto; Netherlands. Hospital Universitario Elche, Elche, Spain. Introduction: Many suspected Lynch Syndrome (sLS) patients who lack mis- Introduction: Genetic tests for Lynch Syndrome are well standardized and match repair (MMR) germline gene variants and MLH1 or MSH2 hyperme- broadly used, although there remain some specific difficulties that need to thylation are currently explained by somatic MMR gene variants or, occasio- be addressed to reach an optimal diagnosis. The analysis of PM
S2  gene is nally, by germline POLE variants. especially complex because of the high number and homology with sever- Materials and Methods: To further investigate unexplained sLS patients,we al pseudogenes. We report the problem raised by differences in sensibility analyzed leukocyte- and tumor DNA of a cohort of 62 sLS patients using and specificity to detect genetic variants depending on polymerases enzyme gene panel sequencing including the POLE, POLD1 and MMR genes. blends and master mixes used for long range PCRs (LR-PCR). Results: Forty tumors showed either one, two or more somatic MMR vari- Materials and Methods: Two cases with suspicious of Lynch Syndrome ants predicted to affect function. Nine sLS-tumors showed an ultramutated were tested for mutations in PM
S2  using two different commercial LR-PCR phenotype and were found to carry germline- (n=2) or somatic variants kits in parallel (LongRange_PCR_kit, QIAGEN and Expand_LonRange_dNT- (n=7) in the POLE/POLD1 exonuclease domain (EDM). Six of these POLE/ Pack, Roche). The amplicons generated by LR-PCR contained the exons 1-5 POLD1-EDM mutated tumors also carried somatic MMR variants. Four of (9.964bp), exons 11-12 (8812bp) and E e Sxo Hn Gs 1 23- 01 15 6(9 
|8  0 B4 Abp R) C. N Ee Lxt O, w Ne A p ,e r S- PAtIhNes |e W tumWoWrs .sEhoSwHeGd l.oOwR oGr high microsatellite instability. 297 formed nested PCR by the same master mix (AmpliTaq Gold 360, Life Tech- Conclusions: Our findings suggest that faulty proofreading may result inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .185 HOXB13 gene exon 1-2 mutations among patients with prostate loss of MMR and thereby in microsatellite instability. While literature main- cancer ly addresses POLE/POLD1 variant in microsatellite stable tumors, somatic D. Alptekin1, M. A. Erkoç1, F. Gökalp2, M. İzmirli3, Y. Bayazıt2, N. S. Ilgaz1, N. Satar2, H. Ü. POLE/POLD1 variants in sLS patients are likely to be overlooked. Our results Lüleyap1; further emphasize the importance of POLE/POLD1 germline and somatic 1Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, Dept. of Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey, screening in unexplained MSI-H and MMR-deficient tumors. This work was 2Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, Dept. of Urology, Adana, Turkey, 3Mustafa Kemal University, Medical Faculty, Dept. of Medical Biology, Hatay, Turkey. supported by the Dutch Cancer Society under study number U
L2012 -5542. 
P12 .182 Promoter methylation profiling of head and neck squamous cell Introduction: Prostate cancer susceptibility gene is located on chromosome carcinoma 17q21-22 which is reported to be associated with Homeobox (HOX) gene S. Stangler Herodez1, B. Zagradisnik1, B. Cizmarevic2, N. Kokalj Vokac1,3; family. HOX genes’ proteins resulting from transcription of this gene is as- 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, UKC Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Department of sociated with prostate cancer which plays important role in regulation of Otorhinolaryngology and Maxillofacial Surgery, UKC Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, Androgen receptors. One of the most important members of HOX family is 3University of Maribor, Faculty of Medicine, Maribor, Slovenia. HOXB13. G84E codon mutation of HOXB13 is reported to be associated with prostate cancer. This study aimed to investigate relationship between pro- state cancer and HOXB13 exon 1-2 mutations. Introduction Silencing of tumor suppressor genes by DNA promoter hyper- Materials and Methods: In this study, 64 prostate cancer patients are invol- methylation is an early event in carcinogenesis and a potential target for ved. After DNA isolation, sequence analysis is performed with Big Dye Cycle personalized cancer treatment. In head and neck squamous cell carcinoma sequencing PCR technique. HOXB13 exon 1-2 are amplified and sequence (HNSCC) limited knowledge is available about the role of promoter hyper- analysis is performed with ABI PRISM® 3100 Genetic Analyzer. methylation in cancer progression. Results: We couldn’t determine any G84E mutation. However, 44 normal Materials and methods In present work we have investigated DNA methyla- homozygote(CC), 16 heterozygote(CT) and 4 mutant homozygote(TT) geno- tion of 24 different tumor suppressor genes in 62 patients with various sta- types have been found in 366 base position of the coding region of HOXB13 ges of HNSCC (34 oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and 28 oropharyn- gene. In addition, 63 normal homozygote and 1 mutant heterozygote(CT) geal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC)) with methylation specific multiplex genotypes have been found in 411 position of coding region. Also, 45 normal ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA). We analyzed genomic homozygote(TT), 12 heterozygote(TC) and 7 mutant(CC) genotypes have DNA extracted from homogenized fresh-frozen HNSCC tissue specimens. been found. There was no mutation in exon 2. Results Promoter hypermethylation (≥ 2 genes) was observed in 48 of the Conclusions: Previously described 366 and 513 base mutations have been 62 cases (77%). HNSCC showed frequent promoter hypermethylation in thought as a polymorphism because of no amino acid substitution in pro- ATM (67%), TIM
P3  (67%), RARB (65%), DAPK1 (55%), CDH13 (55%), APC tein of HOXB13. Due to this reason, there is no association between these (36%) and IGSF4 (36%). Total number of hypermethylated genes in OSCCs mutations and prostate cancer. However, it has been thought that there is an did not differ statistically from the number of total hypermethylated genes 
P12 .186 association between 411 base mutations and prostate cancer. in OPSCCs (P=0.7866). Promoter hypermethylation in OSCC didn`t reveal The prognostic importance of the MGMT and RARβ gene statistically significant differences between the early and advanced tumor hypermethylation in Primary Glioblastoma stage (P=0.5081). Similarly OPSCC early onset cases didn`t differ from ad- R. Kalkan1, E. I. Atli2, M. Özdemir3, H. E. Aydın3, A. Arslantaş3, S. Artan3; vanced stage cancers (P=0.6911). 1Near East University, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Trakya University, Turkey, Turkey, 3Eskisehir Conclusion Promoter methylation profiling of HNSCC using MS-MLPA iden- Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey. tified ATM, TIM
P3 , RARB, DAPK1, CDH13, APC and IGSF4 as frequent epige- netic events. Observed findings permit the identification of the nature of the tumor but they don´t allow the differentiation according the tumor stage. Background: We screened RARβ and MGMT methylation in 40 primary Validation of these findings in larger HNSCC units would support these ge- glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) sample. We used MS-HRM for evaluation of nes as relevant biomarkers for cancer management. methylation levels in primary GBM samples. This study indicates a potential prognostic value for GBM treatment planning. 
P12 .183 Results: MGMT methylation was detected in 13 of the 40 patients (32,5%) Functional analysis of RAD51B and RAD23B SNPs using Circular and the overall survival time is 19 months for methylated MGMT patients, it Chromosome Conformation Capture (4C) in human prostate cell lines. is 15 months for unmethylated MGMT patients. MGMT methylation did not C. Cieza-Borrella1, S. Stephens1, Q. Karlsson1, R. Eeles1,2, Z. Kote-Jarai1; significantly associate (p >0,05) with overall survival time MGMT-promoter 1The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2The Royal Marsden Hospital methylation did not correlatewith overall survival (OS; p >0,05). NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. RARB methylation was detected in 24 of the 40 patients (60%). The over- all survival time of the patients with methylated RARβ was 19 months, and nonmethylated RARB was 15 months. The statistical analysis shows that INTRODUCTION: Prostate Cancer (PrCa) is the most frequently diagnosed the patients who received both chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatment cancer among men in developed countries. Genome-wide association stu- combined had a survival time of 25 months. The patients who received only dies (GWAS) have identified over 100 common, low penetrance PrCa sus- radiotherapy or had no treatment protocol had a survival time between 15- ceptibility variants, some near or within RAD51B and RAD23B genes. Our 20 months, which demonstrates a significant difference (P<0.05). Statistical aim is to better understand associations between these variants and PrCa difference was observed between the survival times of the patients recei- risk, analysing their interactions with the whole genome, by Circular Chro- ving both radiotherapy and chemotherapy treatment and the cases with no mosome Conformation Capture (4C). applied treatment protocol. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Genomic interactions of 10 single nucleotide Conclusion: In summary, our results demonstrated that the positive correla- polymorphisms (SNPs), selected from previous GWAS and fine mapping tion between RARβ methylation status and radio/chemotherapy treatment. studies, were investigated in five human prostate epithelial cell lines (LN- Furthermore MGMT promoter methylation had no prognostic value and lo- CaP, DuCaP, P
C3 , PNT1a and RWPE-1) presenting diverse phenotypes and wer frequency in primary glioblastomas. genotypes. 4C assay design was carried out using 4C Primer Designer for 4C Acknowledgement viewpoints program. Libraries were run on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 (RAPID This study was supported by grands from Eskişehir Osmangazi chemistry). Bioinformatics analysis was performed using the program 4C- University,Eskişehir, Turkey project number was 201011034. ker. RESULTS: Preliminary results show numerous interactions between ana- 
P12 .188 lysed SNPs and the rest of the genome. Of particular interest; a significant cis Comprehensive Analyses of the Variants of the Oncogene, FAT10 in association was observed, in all three adenocarcinoma cell lines, between Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) patients rs7141529 and rs767127 (both RAD51B SNPs) with FUT8. Interaction bet- C. G. Lee1,2,3, C. C. T. Sim2, J. Yu1,2, S. S. Theng1,2, S. S. Chong2; ween rs767127 and the RAD51B promoter region was also detected. In ad- 1National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University of Singapore, dition rs767127 also presented cis interactions with FOS, YY1 and EVL. We Singapore, Singapore, 3Duke-NUS, Singapore, Singapore. will also present data on the RAD23B SNPs as analysis is currently ongoing. CONCLUSION: 4C analysis showed interactions in adenocarcinoma prosta- te cell lines between rs7141529 and rs767127 and various regions of high Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) is a deadly disease due its late presenta- interest due to their implications in cancer development. Further analysis, tion and limited therapeutic options. Our laboratory previously reported using Chromosome Conformation Capture (3C), will be conducted to vali- FAT10 as an oncogene that is highly up-regulated in HCC. d2a9te8 results. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONFAA,T 
S10 P AgeInNe i|s W 4,3W14W b.pE lSoHngG lo.OcaRteGd on chromosome 6. Since FAT10 is anABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results: oncogene, and mutations/polymorphisms can influence susceptibility to Relative gene amplification was detected as follows: FGFR1 12.3%, cancer, we hypothesized that mutations/polymorphisms within the FAT10 MET 15.1%, DCUN1D1 38.4% and BC
L9  43.8%. KRAS was found mutated in gene will modulate the expression / function of the FAT10 protein and be 2 cases, whereas no EGFR mutations or ALK rearrangements were detected. associated with differential risk for the development of HCC and/or diffe- IDni sacdudsistiioonn, :D CUN1D1 and BC
L9  were correlated with low tumor differen- rences in clinical outcome. tiation. A subset of cases 22% displayed co-amplification of two genes. The architecture of polymorphisms in the FAT10 gene is noteworthy. For The percentages of gene amplification of suggested new drug- such a small gene like FAT10 with an open reading frame of ~500 bp, it has gable target genes FGFR1, MET, DCUN1D1 and BC
L9  are in accordance with ~9 single-nucleotide polymorphisms within its coding region of which 8 recent findings. DCUN1D1 and BC
L9  relative amplification emerged as pos- were non-synonymous and 4 were also non-conservative changes. This ob- sible markers of low tumor differentiation. Interestingly, a high percentage servation suggests that many of these polymorphisms can potentially affect of the samples showed co-amplification of at least 2 genes. function and perhaps even modulate its tumorigenic properties. Interestin- 
P12 .191 gly, the haplotype of polymorphisms in the different ethnic population as High complexity libraries and targeted NGS panels to access well as between healthy individuals and HCC patients are also different sug- sequencing information of limiting samples gesting that variability of the polymorphisms in the different ethnic groups M. Hymes, C. Schumacher, S. Sandhu, L. Kurihara, S. Chupreta, J. Irish, J. Laliberte, J. may account for variability in susceptibility to cancer development. The po- Lenhart, J. RoseFigura, T. Harkins, V. Makarov; lymorphisms within the coding region had been recapitulated in cells and Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. characterized. This work is supported by grants from National Cancer Centre (NCC), Natio- nal Medical Research Council (NMRC) (NMRC/1306/2011) and the Ministry Targeted sequencing by hybridization capture provides a cost effective me- of Education Academic Research Fund (MOE AcRF) Tier 1 FRC (T1-2015 Apr thod for performing Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) on selected regions -05). of the genome. While formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples 
P12 .189 are utilized in targeted sequencing, the amount and quality of their DNA Functional characterization of DNA variants from exons 17 and 18 of is typically compromised. Library preparations that maximize complexity the BRCA2 gene and coverage uniformity across the genome are especially valuable for these E. Fraile-Bethencourt1, B. Díez-Gómez1, V. Velásquez-Zapata2, A. Acedo3, D. Sanz4, C. limiting samples, which would otherwise produce high duplicate rates and Hernández-Moro5, G. Marcos6, M. Infante1, M. Durán1, E. Velasco1; poor coverage metrics when pursuing the deep sequencing required to call 1Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (CSIC/UVa), Valladolid, Spain, 2University of somatic variations. Here we present a library preparation method to enab- Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia, 3AC-GEN Reading Life SL, Valladolid, Spain, 4University le high quality libraries for target enrichment, utilizing a variety of sample College Cork, Cork, Ireland, 5 EuroTarget, Centro integral de oncología Clara Campal., types. Madrid, Spain, 6Hospital Universitario Río Hortega, Valladolid, Spain. For hybridization capture, libraries were constructed from 1-100 ng of Co- riell HapMap samples, clinical FFPE, circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and Horizon Discovery reference DNA using a novel library preparation method. A large fraction of pathogenic BRCA2 variants impairs mRNA splicing in Hybridization capture was performed using commercially available panels hereditary breast/ovarian cancer. Missense, synonymous or in frame-de- from three different vendors. letion/insertion variants are usually classified as variants of uncertain si- A Pan-Cancer Panel yielded <3% duplicates and ≥40X coverage on 10 ng gnificance. The best method to identify splicing aberrations is based on the and 100 ng samples of Coriell DNA, while maintaining 30X coverage at 1 ng study of patient RNA, but that is often difficult to obtain. Minigene-based inputs. Additionally, kidney samples that underwent formalin fixation for 6, technology is an alternative approach to test candidate splicing variants wi- 24, and 48 hours were compared to fresh frozen. While fresh frozen samples thout the need of patient samples. To study this process we constructed a performed equivalently to Coriell DNA samples, formalin fixed samples de- large minigene in the pSAD plasmid with exons 14 to 20 (MGBR2_ex14-20) monstrated <8% duplicates at 10 ng and 100 ng, and <45% duplicates and to keep the genomic context. Here, we focus on exons 17 y 18 because of ≥22X coverage at 1 ng, illustrating the effects of fixation on DNA quality. So- the atypical GC donor in exon 17. The intronic GT dinucleotide is the most matic variant calling down to 1% allele frequency was evaluated at various conserved element of the donor splice signal. However, in a small fraction DNA quantities with reference samples. of the donor sites (<1%), GT is replaced by GC that are rather located in alternatively spliced introns. A total of 226 variants were analysed with NN- 
P12 .192 Splice and HSF so that 48 of them were selected to assay. They were intro- Next generation sequencing of patients with familial papillary thyroid duced into MGBR2_ex14-20 by site-directed mutagenesis. Minigenes were carcinoma and their relatives transfected into HeLa and MCF7 cells to examine their transcripts. We found D. N. Nikolova1, Z. Hammoudeh1, L. Balabanski2, S. Ivanov2, R. Vazharova2, S. Weidner3, D. Toncheva1,2; that 22 variants (45.8%) produced abnormal transcripts. Moreover, micro- 1Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genomic Laboratory, SBALGAR “Malinov”, Sofia, deletion assays showed that the 3’ region of exon 17 and the 5’ of exon 18 Bulgaria, 3Bern University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland. were essential for exon recognition and might contain splicing enhancer sequences. Actually, five reported variants mapping in these intervals dis- rupted splicing. Introduction: The incidence of thyroid cancer is steadily growing worldwi- Acknowledgements: Projects FIS PI13/01749 (ISCIII),BIO/VA34/15 (Junta de. It develops and progresses through accumulation of genetic alterations Castilla-León); EF-B is supported by a predoctoral fellowship (University of the most common being point mutations in BRAF and RAS genes and RET/ Valladolid/Banco Santander). PTC rearrangements, all of which activate the MAPK pathway. We used NGS 
P12 .190 technology for analysis of potentially pathologic mutations predisposing to Relative gene amplification analysis of FGFR1, MET, DCUN1D1 and the development of familial papillary thyroid carcinoma (FPTC) in affected BC
L9  gene in squamous cell carcinomas of the lung families. A. A. Psaraki, I. Chatziandreou, I. Mourkioti, P. Korkolopoulou, E. Patsouris, A. A. Saetta; Materials and Methods: DNA from peripheral blood was isolated from 23 National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical school, Department of individuals (11 patients with FPTC, 2 patients with other thyroid disorders Pathology, Athens, Greece. and 10 unaffected relatives). We used TruSight Cancer sequencing panel (Il- Background: lumina) targeting 94 genes and 284 SNPs. Results: In our study we selected 44 missense variants, four of which are The discovery of new biomarkers and therapeutic targets is of pathogenic оr potentially pathogenic. In our first family we determined great importance for the clinical benefit of NSCLC patients. Since gene am- the variant FANCD2_c.1137G>T associated with Fanconi anemia. In the plification is regarded as an important oncogenic target in lung Squamous second family we proved three variants associated with Fanconi anemia: Cell Carcinoma, we performed relative amplification analysis of FGFR1, MET, FANCA_p.Ser1088Phe, FANCD2_c.1137G>T and SLX4_p.Pro245Leu. In the DCUN1D1and BC
L9  genes in lung squamous cell carcinomas, and searched third family we defined the same Fanconi anemia variants FANCA_p.Ser- fMora tceorriraelsla tainonds Mweitthh oKdRsA: S mutations and clinicopathological characteri- 1088Phe, FANCD2_c.1137G>T and the variant HOXB13_p.Gly84Glu predis- stics. posing to prostate and colorectal cancer. In the fourth family again the same DNA was isolated from 73 lung Squamous Cell HOXB13_p.Gly84Glu was carried. Carcinoma FFPE tissues. Real time- PCR using GAPDH as a reference gene Conclusion: Mutations in three of the genes (FANCA, FANCD2, and SLX4) was performed and Relative gene amplification was calculated using the belong to Fanconi anemia complementation group and cause cytogenetic normalized ratio. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS v21 stati- instability, hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents, increased chro- stical package. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAmINos |o WmaWl bWrea.kEaSgHe, Gan.dO dReGfective DNA repair. Mutations in the fourth2 g9en9eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index HOXB13 predispose to carcinomas. The results suggest a possible role of nesis and less response to radiotherapy. these mutations in causing genetic predisposition to familial papillary thy- Grant: BRECT roid carcinoma. 
P12 .195 
P12 .193 Mutational biases drive elevated rates of substitution at regulatory Mutations in MYO1F cause familial non-medullary thyroid cancer sites across cancer types (FNMTC) V. B. Kaiser, M. S. Taylor, C. A. Semple; C. Diquigiovanni1, C. Bergamini2, C. Evangelisti3, A. Costanzini2, F. Isidori1, H. IGMM, MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Anbunathan4, A. Bowcock4, R. Casadio5, G. Babbi5, K. J. Rhoden1, G. Lenaz2, R. Fato2, M. Seri1, G. Romeo1, E. Bonora1; 1Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, St. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University Disruption of gene regulation is known to play major roles in carcinogenesis of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University and tumour progression. Here, we comprehensively characterize the muta- of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial tional profiles of diverse transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) across College, London, United Kingdom, 5Biocomputing Group, University of Bologna, Bologna, 1,574 completely sequenced cancer genomes encompassing 11 tumour ty- Italy. pes. We assess the relative rates and impact of the mutational burden at the binding sites of 81 transcription factors (TFs), by comparing the abundance and patterns of single base substitutions within putatively functional bin- Familial Non-Medullary Thyroid Cancer (FNMTC) accounts for 5-7% of all ding sites to control sites with matched sequence composition. There is a NMTC. Since these patients develop more aggressive tumours with worse strong (1.43-fold) and significant excess of mutations at functional binding outcomes compared to the sporadic counterparts, the identification of the sites across TFs, and the mutations that accumulate in cancers are typically susceptibility genes is crucial for treatment and surveillance. more disruptive than variants tolerated in extant human populations at the Whole exome sequencing in a multigenerational family affected by FNMTC same sites. CTCF binding sites suffer an exceptionally high mutational load with oncocytic features, revealed a novel heterozygous mutation in MYO1F in cancer (3.31-fold excess) relative to control sites, and we demonstrate gene, encoding for an unconventional myosin and mapping to chromosome for the first time that this effect in seen in essentially all cancer types with 19p13.2, where our group previously identified a predisposing locus. Cell sufficient data. The sub-set of CTCF sites involved in higher order chroma- lines stably expressing mutant MYO1F showed more mitochondria, an al- tin structures has the highest mutational burden, suggesting a widespread tered mitochondrial network and increased levels of endogenous and ex- breakdown of chromatin organization. However, we find no evidence for tracellular ROS, compared to cells overexpressing the wild-type protein or selection driving these distinctive patterns of mutation. The mutational load the empty vector. The mutation also conferred a significant increase in col- at CTCF-binding sites is substantially determined by replication timing and ony formation, invasion and anchorage-independent growth, along with an the mutational signature of the tumor in question, suggesting that selec- over-activation of ERK1/2 pathway. These results suggest that the MYO1F tively neutral processes underlie the unusual mutation patterns. Pervasive variant is the mutation underlying the linkage locus previously mapped at hyper-mutation within transcription factor binding sites rewires the regu- chromosome 19p13.2. latory landscape of the cancer genome, but it is dominated by mutational 192 independent FNMTC patients were screened to identify additio- processes rather than selection. nal predisposing variants in MYO1F. We identified a rare silent change 
P12 .196 (rs184748543G>A) altering an Exonic Sequence Enhancer (ESE) in one Contribution of misreading Serine tRNAs to tumor growth in vivo patient and his affected sister. In vitro transcription analysis using a mini- M. R. Santos1,2,3, P. M. Pereira1,2,3, S. Varanda1,2,3, J. Carvalho2,3, M. Azevedo2, D. D. Mateus2, gene containing-plasmid showed that the rare A allele determines an exon N. Mendes2,3, P. Oliveira2,3, M. T. Pinto2,3, R. Bordeira-Carriço2,3, F. Carneiro2,3,4, M. A. S. skipping, leading to an in-frame deletion of 43 amino acids, which alters the Santos1, C. Oliveira2,3,4; ATP-binding domain in MYO1F. 1Department of Medical Sciences and Institute of Biomedicine – iBiMED, University of These results suggest that rare variants in MYO1F may predispose to FN- Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal, 2Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto, MTC susceptibility. Portugal, 4Dept. Pathology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, This work was supported by AIRC project IG2015-17069 to M.S. and GR Portugal. 2012 project “DIANE” to E.B. 
P12 .194 Novel germline T
P53  mutations in the Swedish constitutional T
P53  Introduction: Upregulation of protein synthesis, deregulation of tRNA ex- cohort pression and amino acid starvation are common features of cancer. The oc- P. Kharaziha1,2, C. Larsson1, E. Tham3,4, S. Bajalica-Lagercrantz1,2; currence of these events raises the hypothesis that translational fidelity is 1Department of Oncology-Pathology, Cancer Center Karolinska (CCK), Karolinska compromised in tumors(1,2). However, the relevance of tRNA misreading Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, in cancer is still unknown. To clarify the role of tRNA misreading in cancer Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Clinical Oncology, Karolinska University development, we expressed misreading tRNAs in a near-normal cell line and Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Clinical Genetics,Karolinska University Hospital, studied UPR and cancer-associated signaling pathways. Stockholm, Sweden. Materials and Methods: NIH3T3 cell line was stably transfected with pIRE
S2 -DsRED plasmids containing the tRNASer(WT), tRNAs that misincor- porate Serine(Ser) at Alanine(Ala)-GCU or Leucine(Leu)-CUU sites and also Introduction: Individuals with a constitutional T
P53  mutation have a high an empty plasmid. Cell lines were injected in mice and their tumorigenic po- risk of cancer in childhood and/or early adulthood, but show a large pheno- tential was evaluated. tRNA expression both in cell lines and in tumors was typic variation. In some families, pediatric tumors are more frequent while determined by SNaPshot sequencing. Alterations in UPR and cancer-related in others only breast cancer is seen. The underlying cause for this variation pathways were accessed by western blot. is unknown. However, this question is of utmost importance for which sur- Results and Conclusions: We report an unexpected role for misreading veillance should be offered to mutation carriers. It is therefore a large need tRNAs in tumor growth. Our data show that expression of misreading tRNAs for further molecular characterization of the genomic landscape with regard produce tumors with similar growth rate to K-ras-induced tumors. Remark- to both the T
P53 -mutations, as well as of genetic modulating factors, in or- ably, expression of misreading tRNAs increases in vivo, suggesting advan- der to understand the genotype-phenotype correlation. tageous features of this phenotype. Our results also showed that Akt and Materials and Methods: We have generated cDNA expression constructs for UPR pathways are activated in a microenvironment-dependent manner. Ac- all nine novel germline T
P53  mutants. cumulating evidence has demonstrated that UPR activation and decrease in Results: In the Swedish cohort of 32 families, we found 25 different mutati- translation fidelity are required for cancer cells to maintain malignancy and ons in the T
P53  gene. Nine have not been reported previously as germline acquire therapy resistance, suggesting that compromising translation fidel- mutations according to the HGMD or IARC databases. Five of these have not ity may select adaptative mutations. Our results support the hypothesis that even been reported as somatic mutations in the IARC or cosmic databases mistranslation phenotypes have a role in tumor growth, worth to explore and are thus truly novel. Transfection in p53 null H1299 cells have demon- further. strated a wide range of activities among the constructs in terms of induction Grant References: FCT_Fellowships:[SFRH/BPD/26611/2006- of apoptosis in response to 12 G irradiation, as well as variable impact on PMP;SFRH/BPD/89764/2012-PO;SFRH/BPD/86543/2012- the cell cycle regulation. JC;SFRH/BD/91020/2012-MS;SFRH/BD/76417/2011-ASV] Conclusions: We showed that all novel mutations were express stably in cell lines and decrease spontaneous apoptosis and have a poorer response to t3h0er0apy which indicate that affected individualE hSaHs hGig h2e0r 1ri6sk | o Bf tAumRoCrEigLeO- NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P13  Basic mechanisms in molecular and 
P13 .03 Genetic studies reveal five new mutations in the CP gene in patients cytogenetics affected by autosomal recessive aceruloplasminemia A. Barqué1, A. Negro1, N. Wood2, E. Jové-Buxeda3, J. Sanchez-Delgado4, B. Burnyte5, N. 
P13 .01 Baena-Díez6, J. Limon7, F. Fuster1, J. Aranda1, M. Sanchez1; Interstitial 10q21.1-q23.31 duplication due to a meiotic 1Diagnostics in Iron Metabolism Diseases (D•IRON), Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research recombination of a paternal balanced complex rearrangement: Institute (IJC), Badalona, Spain, 2National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, cytogenetic and molecular fine characterization London, United Kingdom, 3Internal Medicine Department, University Hospital Parc V. Orlando1,2, V. Alesi1, C. Surace1, D. Pompili1, F. Restaldi1,2, M. Dentici3, M. Digilio3, A. Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 4Hepatology and Digestive Department, University Hospital Novelli1; Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 5Center for Medical Genetics, Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, “Bambino Gesù” Children’s Hospital, Roma, Italy, Vilnius, Lithuania, 6Genetic Department, University Hospital Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 2Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 3Medical 7Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland. Genetics, “Bambino Gesù” Children’s Hospital, Roma, Italy. Aceruloplasminemia is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disease with an Chromosome structural rearrangements, such as translocations, inversions adult onset characterized by iron-refractory anemia, retinal degeneration, and insertions, are aberrations involving one or more chromosomes and are diabetes mellitus and various neurological symptoms (including ataxia, relatively common in human population. They are defined as “balanced” if involuntary movements, parkinsonism, depression and cognitive dysfunc- they do not lead to a gain or a loss of genetic material and “unbalanced” tion) due toC Piron accumulation in the brain and viscera. It is caused by the when they are associated with duplications or deletions at breakpoints or absence of ceruloplasmin ferroxidase activity due to mutations in the ceru- as a consequence of malsegregation during cell division. Rearrangements loplasmin ( ) gene. associated with more than two breakpoints are rare and they have a higher Diagnosis is based on the absence of serum ceruloplasmin and some com- probability of a pathological outcome, because of gene disruption or of a not bination of low serum copper concentration, low serum iron concentrati- correct segregation pattern. on, high serum ferritin concentration as well as hepatic iron overload. The We describe a complex rearrangement involving chromosomes 7 and 10 diagnosis is strongly supported by characteristic MRI findings of abnormal with 4 different breakpoints in an asymptomatic man and in his son, the low intensities reflecting iron accumulation on the brain and liver. Genetic latter presenting with developmental delay, speech delay, growth retarda- testing can confirm the diagnosis. tion, microcephaly, hypospadias and dysmorphic features. The child inhe- Treatment is based on intravenous and oral iron chelators, which have been rited both the paternal derivatives but the rearranged chromosome 10 also associated with improvement in diabetes and neurological symptoms. Com- harboured an interstitial duplication due to a recombination event. During bined intravenous desferrioxamine and fresh-frozen human plasma (FFP) is paternal meiosis, two different crossing-over occurred upstream and down- effective in decreasing iron content in the liver. Antioxidants such as vitamin stream the 10q21.1q23.31 region, between the derivative 10 chromosome E and oral administration of zinc may prevent tissue damage. and the normal chromosome 10 homologous, bringing back a copy of the Here we will discuss the clinical and genetic aspects of 6 new cases of ace- missing portion in its original position. As a consequence the child harbou- ruloplasminemia, (including two young case <40 years old) presenting 5 red a 32.4 Mb duplication of chromosome 10, characterized by array-CGH. previously not described mutations (one missense, three frameshifts and The involved region completely overlaps the critical 10q22.3q23.3 region, one intronic mutation). whose duplication is described in association with microcephaly, develop- Acknowledgements: Work supported by grant SAF2015-70412-R from Spa- mental delay, speech delay, growth retardation and dysmorphic features. nish Secretary of Research, Development and Innovation (MINECO), 2014 SGR225 (GRE) Generalitat de Catalunya and economical support from ADIS- 
P13 .02 CON and APU Patient Associations, from Fundació Internacional Josep Car- The malsegregation of a cryptic paternal chromosomal reras and from la Obra Social “la Caixa” Spain to M.S. rearrangement results in two 5q noncontiguous microduplications: evidences of a reciprocal phenotype of the 5q31.3 deletion syndrome. 
P13 .04 S. Loddo1, V. Alesi1, M. G. Giuffrida2, M. T. Liambo1, M. Grispo1, L. Bernardini2, M. C. Evidence of high pathogenicity of a de novo mutation in polycystin-1 Digilio3, A. Novelli1; gene 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, „Bambino Gesù“ Children‘s Hospital, Rome, Italy, J. F. Rocha, R. Pinto Leite, M. Martins, M. Fructuoso, T. Morgado; 2Mendel Laboratory, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, Rome and San Centro Hospitalar de Tras-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, „Bambino Gesù“ Children‘s Hospital, Rome, Italy. Introduction: Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) is the main inherited cause of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD). Mutations The great majority of apparently balanced translocation are associated with in polycystin-1 gene are responsible for 85% of the cases. The variant normal phenotype, although a small percentage of carriers shows abnormal c.7837_7839del (p.Leu2613del) is an in-frame deletion of three nucleotides, phenotypes. One of the mechanisms proposed to explain this phenomenon resulting in the deletion of one amino acid in polycystin-1. It was already is the presence of a cryptic complex chromosomal rearrangement (CCR). described in Human Gene Mutation Database but its pathogenicity was so CCRs are structural anomalies involving at least three chromosomes or far undetermined. three breakpoints. The use of FISH assays and DNA microarray technologies Cases Presentation: we describe an ADPKD family with several members for the characterization of CCRs has allowed the identification of cryptic im- affected by a de novo genetic mutation. CKD was diagnosed in the mo- balances at breakpoints sites. ther at 38y, who started hemodialysis at 41y. The first son presents CKD We report a girl, carrier of an apparently balanced translocation t(3;11) at 33y. The second son had CKD since 24y, having started hemodialysis at inherited from her healthy father, showing psychomotor delay, dysmor- 28y. A niece had the diagnosis at 13y without Renal Failure yet. The variant phic features, microcephaly, hypertrichosis, hypotonia, seizures and pre- c.7837_7839del (p.Leu2613del) was found in all patients. The mutation was cocious puberty. Array-CGH analysis highlighted the duplication of two not found in a daughter who did not present disease criteria. Awaiting gene- not contiguous regions of the long arm of a chromosome 5, extended 6 Mb tic study are sixteen relatives with ADPKD (6 started dialysis early). (5q31.1q31.3) and 3,2 Mb (5q34) respectively. FISH assay, also performed Conclusion: The mutation variant c.7837_7839del in the polycystin-1 gene on paternal chromosomes, revealed a more complex rearrangement invol- was the only one found in four affected family members (three in first de- ving chromosomes 3, 5 and 11. The child inherited the derivative chromo- gree) and was absent in a relative without the disease, confirming its pa- somes 3 and 11 and the normal chromosome 5, therefore showing the two thogenicity. Many cases developed early severe CKD, in favor of a mutati- duplicated regions of 5q as consequence of malsegregation of the paternal on with high pathogenicity. The early and severe manifestations of ADPKD balanced CCR. make relatives seek reliable prenatal diagnosis. Therefore, every new case of Of note, 5q31.1q31.3 duplication overlapped the critical region of 5q31.3 a rare genetic mutation should be reported in order to obtain a more preci- microdeletion syndrome characterized by hypotonia, seizures, developmen- se genotype/phenotype correlation, improving risk evaluation and genetic tal delay and facial dysmorphisms. Our patient shared many of these fea- counseling. tures, suggesting the existence of a distinct phenotype associated with the reciprocal duplication of the 5q31.3 microdeletion syndrome. ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 301ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P13 .05 Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, Second Assocation of FAS promoter gene polymorphism in alopecia areata University of Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 4Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation, Azienda E. Ensari1, O. Ates1, G. Kalkan2; Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 5Division of Nephrology, Department of 1Gaziosmanpasa University,Medical Faculty,Department of Medical Biology, Tokat, Medicine DIMED, Laboratory of Histomorphology and Molecular Biology of the Kidney, Turkey, 2Yıldırım Beyazıt University,Medical Faculty, Department of Dermatology,, University of Padova, Siena, Italy. Ankara, Turkey. Alport syndrome (ATS) is a clinically heterogeneous progressive nephropa- Introduction: Alopecia areata (AA) is a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease thy, characterized by extreme phenotypic and genetic variability. Monoge- characterized non-scarring, patchy loss of hair in the scalp and elsewhere. nic inheritance model is well known and different patterns of inheritance Onset of AA may occur at any age. Incidence is equally distributed across have been previously recognized ranging from autosomal to X-linked mo- races and genders. It’s etiopathogenesis is exactly uncertain yet. AA has a dels. We have recently reported digenic inheritance for the disease. Here, multifactorial etiology that both several genes and environmental factors we go further and we describe a new series of cases with more complex come together with a different weight in triggering the pathology. Fas cell mechanism of inheritance for ATS unmasked by the increased use of high surface death receptor (FAS), a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) throughput sequencing which keeps unveiling unexpected combinations of receptor super-family, is a transmembrane receptor involved in apoptotic si- pathogenic mutations lying either on the same allele or on different genes. gnal transmission in many cell types and play essential roles in many human Families with X-linked inheritance and unusual severity in females harbor autoimmune diseases. The aim of this study was to evaluate the possible two pathogenic mutations on the same CO
L4 A5 allele. Families with appa- association between the 1377 G>A promoter polymorphism in the FAS gene rent dominant pattern of inheritance are rather due to a digenic transmissi- and risk of AA. on of two causative mutations inherited in cis and lying in the two collagen Materials and methods: The study group included 200 patients with AA and 4 genes linked on chromosome 2 (CO
L4 A3/CO
L4 A4). Moreover, two distinct 165 healty volunteers. Genotyping for the FAS-1377 G>A polymorphism was mutations on the same two genes, inherited in trans, are responsible for ATS performed by Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment Length Po- following an apparent autosomal recessive mode of inheritance and inter- lymorphisms (PCR-RLFP) method. mediate severity. A more complex inheritance is shown when an autosomal Results: A statistically significant difference was observed between patients mutation is combined with an X-linked mutation. Overall, these results re- and controls according to genotype and alleles frequencies of FAS gene 1377 veal that ATS transmission pattern overcomes the Mendelian inheritance, G>A polymorphism (p = 0.007 and p = 0.000, OR 1.98, 95 % CI 1.35-2.92, which can thus easily trick the clinical geneticist. This finding leads to recon- respectively). sider the recurrence risk and opens new perspectives in the management of Conclusion: According to our findings, the FAS-1377 G>A polymorphism is genetic and prenatal counseling for ATS. associated with AA. The presence of the A allele is thougt to protective to AA. 
P13 .08 This word was supported by Gaziosmanpasa University, Unit Of Scientific MALAT1: a long non-coding RNA involved in alternative splicing Research Projects regulation and potentially implicated in multiple sclerosis E. M. Paraboschi1, G. Cardamone2, V. Rimoldi2,3, D. Gemmati4, M. Spreafico5, S. Duga2,3, G. 
P13 .06 Soldà2,3, R. Asselta2,3; Identification and molecular characterization of new variants 1Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina of SERPINA1 gene in Spanish patients with Alpha1- Antitrypsin Traslazionale, Milano, Italy, 2Humanitas University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Deficiency Rozzano, Italy, 3Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Italy, 4University of N. Matamala1, D. Retana1, T. Fernandez1, A. Muñoz-Callejas1, B. Lara2, R. Sáez3, S. Ferrara, Center Haemostasis & Thrombosis, Department of Medical Sciences, Ferrara, Castillo4, M. Molina5, A. Texido6, E. Lopez del amo7, G. Tirado8, J. Lopez-Campos9, I. Italy, 5Azienda Ospedaliera della Provincia di Lecco, Alessandro Manzoni Hospital, Blanco10, B. Martinez-Delgado1; Department of Transfusion Medicine and Hematology, Lecco, Italy. 1Institute of Health Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, 2Royal Exeter & Devon Hospital, Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom, 3Hospital Donostia, San Sebastián, Spain, 4Hospital Clínico de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 5Bellvitge University Hospital-IDIBELL, Hospitalet Introduction: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune neurodegenerative De Llobregat, Spain, 6Hospital Universitary Sant Joan de Reus, Tarragona, Spain, disease, characterized by chronic inflammation, demyelination, and axonal 7Hospital La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain, 8Hospital Cádiz, Cádiz, Spain, 9Hospital Virgen damage. Accumulating evidence suggests the existence of pathogenic links del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 10Alpha1-Antitrypsin Deficiency Spanish Registry (REDAAT), between MS and abnormalities in alternative splicing (AS). Among splicing Spanish Society of Pneumology (SEPAR), Barcelona, Spain. regulators, besides hnRNPs and SR proteins, long noncoding RNAs (lncR- SERPI- NAs) are emerging as critical players in pre-mRNA AS. Here, we aimed at NA1 exploring the role of MALAT1, an abundant lncRNA reported to influence AS Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is caused by mutations in the through its interaction with pre-mRNA splicing factors. gene predisposing to early onset emphysema aSnEdR PliIvNeAr 1cirrhosis. The Materials and Methods: The expression levels of several splicing regulators, most common mutations known to cause AATD are the deficient Z (Glu- as well as the AS pattern of specific MS-related genes, were evaluated in 342Lys) and S (Glu264Val) variants. Nevertheless, SE RgPeInNeA i1s very HEK293, HeLa, and SH-SY5Y cells after MALAT1 overexpression or downre- polymorphic, and more than one hundred genetic variants have been descri- gulation. Gene expression analysis was performed by real-time RT-PCR and bed. We aimed to identify and characterize new variants of gene RNAseq analysis. in patients with decreased levels of serum AAT that cannot be explained by Results: Upon MALAT1 modulation, expression levels of splicing regulato- theS EgeRnPoINtyAp1e after analysis of Z and S alleles. We selected eight patients who ry genes, such as HNRNPF and CELF1, were significantly dysregulated in a fulfilled these criteria and performed sequence analysis of all coding exons cell-specific manner. Furthermore, we demonstrated that MALAT1 overex- of by Sanger sequencing. We found seven previously unidentifieidn pression/silencing influence also the AS pattern of I
L7 R and PRKCA genes, mvitirsosense variants, four of them located in exon 2, two in exon 3 and one in previously associated with MS susceptibility and characterized by the pres- exon 4. Molecular characterization of these variants was performed by ence of a SNP acting on splicing. Intriguingly, we also detected a significant expression of mutant proteins generated after directed mutagenesis. upregulation (1.4-fold) of MALAT1 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of We evaluated by western blot analysis the expression of monomeric AAT MS patients respect to controls (P<0.05). protein and the formation of polymers. In addition, protein aggregates were Conclusion: In this work, we provide evidence of a functional link between detected by Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive staining.S FEiRnPaIllNyA, a1n elastase the lncRNA MALAT1, AS regulation and MS-associated AS events, suggesting assay was conducted in order to evaluate the inhibitory activity of the mu- a potential role of MALAT1 in MS pathogenesis. tants. In conclusion, we have identified novel variants of gene that 
P13 .09 can help to explain the discrepancies found between serum AAT levels and Expression Assay of BMPR2 gene in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension genotype. These results suggest that rare variants might be more frequent G. Pousada1, M. Lago1, S. Prado-López1, A. Baloira2, R. Varela-Calviño3, D. Valverde1; than expected, and therefore standardized PCR screening of the S and Z al- 1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Complejo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, leles should be complemented with sequencing of the gene in discordant Spain, 3Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. cases. 
P13 .07 Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (OMIM 178600) is rare disease characte- The coexistence of two causative mutations leads to reconsider Alport rized by pulmonary vascular resistance increase and vascular remodelling. syndrome pattern of inheritance Symptoms include fatigue, shortness of breath and syncope. The most im- C. Fallerini1, M. Baldassari1,2, E. Frullanti1, M. Mencarelli1,2, A. La Manna3, G. Garosi4, D. plicated gene is BMPR2, with a reduced expression in PASMC cells. The aim Del Prete5, A. Pinto1,2, F. Ariani1,2, F. Mari1,2, A. Renieri1,2; was to analyze the BMPR2 gene expression, in different cell cycle phases, in 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Azienda B-Lymphocytes. 302 ESHG 2016 | BARCELON WA e, S seP leA cI tN se | v eW n W paW tie. nE tsS wH iG th. O muR tG ations and eight controls without mu-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tations in BMPR2. B-lymphocytes from patients and controls were aisled Conclusions: The Irish Traveller population number ~40,000, out of a total from peripheral blood by Ficoll method. B cells were immortalized using population of 4.6 million, within the Irish Republic. Our discovery of two Epstein-Barr Virus and grown. Lymphoblastoid Cell line were analyzed by unrelated Irish Traveller families with a 17q12 duplication suggests that flow cytometry and separated based on the cell cycle phase by Sorting. With the genomic architecture at 17q12 in this population may predispose to this patients and controls RNA, we realized a RT-PCR and we analyzed BMPR2 CNV. 
P13 .12 gene expression with TaqMan assay. A comprehensive genome analysis of three constitutional After analysis of BMPR2 gene expression by qPCR, we detected expression chromothripsis rearrangements: a new mechanism for complex for BMPR2 gene in Lymphoblastoid Cell line from controls. The normalized karyotype disorders gene expression results in BMPR2 gene, using GADPH as reference gene, A. Provenzano1, V. Orlandini1, M. Pantaleo2, G. Traficante1, L. Xumerle3, F. di Leva4, G. shows a greater expression levels in G2/M phase, followed by G0/G1 phase Bacci5, S. Stagi6, S. Guarducci2, S. Bargiacchi1, O. Zuffardi7, M. Delledonne3,4, S. Giglio1; and, finally, in S phase. However, sorting cell analysis show changes in ploidy 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical Experimental and Clinical Sciences from patients relative to controls. The results of BMPR2 gene expression in „Mario Serio“, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer patients, will tell us if there are any expression differences between patients Children‘s University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 3Personal Genomics srl, Verona, Italy, and controls. 4Department of Biotchnologies, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 5Ophthalmology Unit, Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 6Department of Health Science, Although the availability of a tissue that express BMPR2 like lung is a pro- University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 7Department of Molecular Medicine, University of blem, the expression analysis of the mutated gene by this technique, allowed Pavia, Pavia, Italy. us to analyzed how mutations in BMPR2 could interfere in the expression levels of this protein. 
P13 .10 WGS contribution to two cases of complex chromosomal Chromothripsis is a novel phenomenon in the structural variation lands- rearrangements suggesting a chromothripsis mechanism cape of cancer genomes. We analyzed the genomes of three patients with N. Chatron1,2, J. Lauer1, P. Rollat Farnier1, A. Labalme1, F. Prieur3, F. Diguet1, M. Till1, R. congenital disease without apparent karyotype anomalies. The rearran- Touraine3, C. Bardel1,4, P. Roy1,4, C. Schluth-Bolard1,2, D. Sanlaville1,2; gements displayed unanticipated complexity resembling chromothripsis. 1HCL, BRON Cedex, France, 2INSERM U1028 CNRS UMR 5292, UCBL, CRNL, GENDEV The array-CGH analysis identified complex chromosomal rearrangements Team, Lyon, France, 3CHU Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France, 4UMR 5558, LBBE, involving chromosome 17 (Case-1), 12 (Case-2) and 1 and 4 (Case-3). Case- Service de Biostatistique et plateforme de séquençage NGS, CNRS, Lyon, France. 1 presented a complex clinical phenotype in which coexisted 3 known dis- orders: Potocki-Lupski syndrome, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and neu- rofibromatosis type 1. Case-2 showed intellectual disabilities with autistic Chromothripsis was first described in 2011 in somatic cells and is pro- traits and a particular stromal corneal dystrophy, at the moment described posed to constitute the basis for complex chromosomal rearrangements only in adult subjects. Case-3 exhibited a complex clinical picture, not im- (CCR) seen in 2-3% of all cancers. These CCR were rarely reported in con- mediately framed with 1p36 deletion syndrome (array-CGH revealed a 3 stitutional field. Here, we report CCR discovered in two patients harboring Mb deletion in 1p36). With whole genome sequencing we investigated the syndromic intellectual disability. The first case is a young boy with growth genetic architecture of these constitutional complex chromosomal rearran- retardation, moderate intellectual disability, delayed speech, oral dyspraxia, gements (CCRs),copy number profiling, and breakpoint-junctions proving hair ichthyosis, thin nails and facial dysmorphism. Karyotyping showed a that the rearrangements (deletions/duplications/inversions) identified in ring 21 chromosome with 8 CNVs: 3 losses of 1.2 to 7.4 Mb and 5 gains of our cases were not clustered on a single chromosome region, but on the 162 kb to 2.8 Mb revealed by array GGH (aCGH) and confirmed by FISH. whole length of the chromosomes. These findings provide additional infor- To reach basepair resolution of these anomalies, paired-end whole genome mation suggesting that chromosome shattering and nonhomologous repair sequencing (WGS) (2x100bp) was performed on a NextSeq500 (Illumina). may be a common mechanism underlying chromothripsis rearrangements WGS confirmed all CNVs previously identified and pointed out three addi- associated with developmental malformations. tional small CNVs (2 losses, 1 gain) and the presence of 4 inversions for a 
P13 .14 total of 23 chromosomal breakpoints. The second patient is an adult with Short read paired end and long range mate pair genome sequencing mild intellectual disability, language delay and cleft palate carrier on the characterization of complex and chromothriptic chromosomal karyotype of a double chromosome 3 inversion (46,XX, inv(3)(p13; p22), aberrations inv(3)(p12; q26.3)) without pathogenic imbalance identified using aCGH. D. Nilsson1, J. Eisfelt1, M. Pettersson1, F. Vezzi2, S. Lundin3, V. Wirta3, M. Käller3, M. WGS revealed a more complex rearrangement with 12 breakpoints. The dis- Nordenskjöld1, E. Syk Lundberg1, A. Lindstrand1; 1Karolinska institutet, Solna, Sweden, 2SciLifeLab, Department of Biochemistry and ruption of FOX
P1  gene can explain Patient 2‘s phenotype. Overall, while Pa- Biophysics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden, 3SciLifeLab, KTH Royal Institute of tient 1‘s phenotype is due to a large copy number change (losses and gains), Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. the second case shows the importance of breakpoints‘ characterization of balanced chromosomal rearrangement and the potential underestimation of CCRs incidence 
P13 .11 Complex chromosomal rearrangements, including chromothripsis, are Does the genomic architecture amongst Irish Travellers predispose to emerging as important phenomena in both somatic and constitutional di- chromosome 17q12 microduplication? sease. Whole genome sequencing technologies capable of base pair level S. A. Lynch, J. McDaid, D. R. Betts, E. Crushell, J. P. Casey; resolution of chromosomal fusion events, rearrangements and copy num- National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin 12, Ireland. ber changes now allow us to understand complex aberrations in fine detail. We present results from five complex cases using a combination of Illumina Nextera mate pair sequencing and PCR-free paired end (PE) sequencing. Certain regions of the human genome are predisposed to non-allelic homo- Two are cases of intrachromosomal chromothripsis affecting chromosome 1 logous recombination (NAHR) resulting in copy-number-variants (CNVs). and chromosome 21 respectively. The chromothriptic chromosome 21 was Ethnic differences have been observed with some CNVs. We previously re- identified in a patient with heart anomalies and dysmorphic features, de- ported a consanguineous Irish Traveller family with PCD and laterality due ceased at 5 mo. Molecular cytogenetic characterization with customized ar- to homozygous mutations in CCD
C103  (17q21.31). The mother (patient-A) ray comparative hybridization (CGH) and fluorescence in situ hybridization and affected children had a co-existing chromosome 17q12 duplication. The (FISH) had previously identified four deletions and five duplications. Whole 17q12 duplication and CCD
C103  mutation are in cis, ~6Mb apart. Patient- genome sequencing elucidated break and fusion events at basepair resolu- A’s husband (her first cousin) does not carry the 17q12 duplication indica- tion. BioNano Genomics IRYS nano-channel single molecule mapping was ting that a) this was a recent evolutionary CNV event either in patient-A or applied for corroboration. CNVs were estimated in excellent concordance her mother (husband’s maternal aunt) or b) there has been a recent recom- with CGH using low pass short read coverage data, but at higher resoluti- bination event. on, corroborating uncertain single probe signals. Discordant read pair data We now report a second Irish Traveller family with a 17q12 duplicati- from low pass mate pair sequencing was sufficient to give a clear overall pic- on, identical to the first. This child (who has autism) also has a de novo ture, improving over FISH reactions in all five cases. The added full coverage neurexin-1 deletion (2q13.1). The families are not related and come from paired-end sequence data improves fine detail of complex rearrangements different geographical areas. Further analysis revealed that family-2 do not in fusion points. SNVs further add information with runs of autozygosity carry the CCD
C103  mutation suggesting that a) the duplication arose as an in deletions, and fractional allele ratios as expected from duplications. In independent de novo event in family 2 or b) recombination has separated summary, genome sequencing technologies elucidate even highly complex the CCD
C103  mutation from the duplication in previous generations. chromosome rearrangements, reducing analysis time, labour and increasing A review of 17q12 duplications identified within our centre revealed only resolution over hybridisation based methods. three other cases, all in non-Traveller EfaSmHiliGes .2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 303ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P13 .15 
P13 .17 Whole genome, mate-pair sequencing reveals additional cryptic Conserved non-coding elements and Topologically Associated breakpoints in a family with a complex chromosomal rearrangement Domains, a correlation story C. Aristidou1,2, M. Mehrjouy3, M. Bak3, N. Tommerup3, C. Sismani1,2; B. Ambroise, J. C. Fischer, L. E. Hunt, G. Elgar; 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom. Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The recent development of genome wide chromosome conformation cap- University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. ture (Hi-C) has permitted the study of chromatin interactions within the nucleus. The resulting interactions maps show that that genomes can be divided into large local chromatin domains termed Topologically Associated Accurate characterization of complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCRs) Domains (TADs). Within TADs, the genome appears to be organized to favo- in non-affected individuals is crucial as their presence may result in repro- ur strong internal chromatin interactions rather than external interactions ductive failure, recurrent miscarriages or children with malformations. with neighbouring TADs. It has also been suggested that TADs might help Here, we present a family, initially referred 10 years ago, where the non- to de-lineate basic genomic functions such as gene regulation. Interestingly, affected father and daughter were found, using FISH and karyotyping, to be TADs also appear to be conserved across species and cell types. carriers of a balanced three-way translocation [t(6;7;10)(q16.2;q34;q26.1), Comparative genomics has revealed the existence of conserved non-coding de novo in the father]. The family suffered from two stillbirths, one miscar- elements (CNEs) in vertebrates. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that the- riage, and has a son with severe intellectual disability. se non-coding units are cis-regulatory elements associated with key deve- In the present study, the family was revisited using whole-genome mate- lopmental genes. pair sequencing (MPS) and Sanger sequencing to further characterize the Using CNEs clusters extracted from the CONDOR database, we investigated CCR in the father and daughter. whether CNEs and TADs were spatially correlated in the human genome. MPS allowed accurate reconstruction of all derivative chromosomes in- We looked at different parameters such as absolute and relative distances, volved in the translocation. Interestingly, it revealed an additional cryptic overlap of the regions and correlation of the boundaries. In addition, we translocation breakpoint on der(6) (1.37Mb proximal to the 1st breakpoint) performed 10,000 simulations to measure the statistical robustness of our rendering the rearrangement even more complex. The interstitial segment analysis. created was translocated onto der(10) proximal to the translocated seg- Preliminary results show a strong correlation between the boundaries of ment from chromosome 7. CNE clusters and TADs. This indicates that CNES are not randomly distribut- SIM1, GRIK2, CNTNA
P2 , and PTPRE genes were disrupted at the break- ed across the genome but are organized with respect to the TAD architectu- points. As some of these genes have been proposed as candidate dominant re. Furthermore, this reinforces the role of CNES as potential cis-regulatory genes for developmental delay, clarifying the consequences of the disrupti- modules of genes. on at the protein level will provide important information about the func- 
P13 .18 tion of the genes. A case of potential human chimerism detected by the concomitant In conclusion, MPS proved highly successful in identifying additional com- presence of both derivative chromosomes from the same plexity, not detectable by FISH, in two non-affected complex translocation translocation. carriers. We propose that such CCRs should be studied with NGS in combi- M. E. Mansilla1,2, F. García-Santiago1,2, M. A. Mori1,2, S. García-Miñaur1,2, J. Nevado1,2, L. nation with other methods to aid in correct prenatal, preimplantation gene- Fernández1,2, B. Fernández1,2, M. I. Gómez1,2, P. Lapunzina1,2; 1INGEMM, IdiPaz. Hospital Universitario la Paz., Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER. Instituto de tic diagnosis and counselling in couples with reproductive problems. Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. 
P13 .16 Complex deletion of 18q revealed by array CGH - the significance of high resolution analysis method in patients with known abnormal A complex genetic diagnosis of a 2-year-old girl with growth delay, conge- karyotype nital renal anomalies, and developmental delay was revealed by combined M. Czakó, K. Hadzsiev, A. Szabó, A. Lőcsei-Fekete, B. Melegh; a-CGH and FISH studies. The reported girl was born single to healthy non- University of Pécs, Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary. consanguineous parents. Methods and results: oligonucleotide-based microarray analysis was per- formed on genomic DNA (KaryoArray®, Bluegnome, Illumina). A mosaicism Introduction: Inverted duplications with terminal deletions have been de- of a 8,84 Mb terminal deletion on 10q26 and a 511 Kb terminal duplication scribed with different chromosomes involved. Since the widespread use on 18q initially suggested an unbalanced derivative chromosome 10. Sub- of array CGH increasing number of publications revealed the possible me- telomeric 10q (Vysis) and subtelomeric 18q (Kreatech) FISH probes were chanisms of its development as non-allelic homologous recombination or applied to establish mosaicism degree, resulting in a major cell line (171 nonhomologous end joining resulting in a dicentric chromosome, in which metaphases) with the derivative chromosome 10 (one signal for subtelome- a breakage-fusion-bridge cycle and telomere formation lead to this type of ric 10q region and three signals for subtelomeric 18q region) and a minor rearrangement. In the vast majority of the known cases the duplicated re- one (8 metaphases) with the derivative chromosome 18 (three signals for gion is larger than the deleted segment. In the patient presented here the subtelomeric 10q region and one signal subtelomeric for 18q region). No situation is exactly the opposite. metaphases with the balanced translocation was detected. Parents´ karyo- Methods: Routine cytogenetic investigation was indicated in a 5 year old type and FISH studies were normal. child because of muscle hypotonia, clubfoot, genital hypoplasia, minor ano- Conclusions: The mosaicism observed by a-CGH is the result of the dosage malies and delayed development. The deletion of terminal 18q detected by compensation between the two chromosome derivative. The FISH thecni- karyotyping (450 bands), however, didn’t provide sufficient explanation for ques are essential for the full characterization of genomic rearrangements. the severity of the symptoms, therefore array CGH analysis using Agilent We discuss the possible genetic mechanism involving the ocurrence of at Sureprint 8x60K oligo-array (ISCA v.2) was performed. two independent events: germinal mosaicism and human chimerism in a Results: Array CGH detected a 2,166 Mb duplication affecting single pregnancy after an initial twin dizygotic conception 18q21.31q21.32 and a 21,5 Mb contiguous deletion of 18q21.32q23. In pos- session of the results the more complex clinical features compared to “pure” 
P13 .19 deletion 18q syndrome could be explained, allowing for a more thorough Highly restricted Down syndrome critical region identified on human genotype-phenotype analysis. chromosome 21 Conclusions: The application of high-resolution molecular cytogenetic ana- M. C. Pelleri1, E. Cicchini1, C. Locatelli2, L. Vitale1, M. Caracausi1, A. Piovesan1, A. Rocca2, G. Poletti2, M. Seri3, P. Strippoli1, G. Cocchi4; lysis methods is of great importance even in cases where the karyotyping 1Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (DIMES), Unit of detects abnormalities which correlation with the clinical picture is clear. In Histology, Embryology, Bologna, Italy, 2Neonatology Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, order to understand the formation of chromosomal rearrangements better, Bologna, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Department the use of array CGH analysis providing copy number data for the regions of Medical and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, adjacent to the breakpoints is recommended. 4Neonatology Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. Introduction: A „Down Syndrome critical region“ (DSCR) sufficient to induce the most constant phenotypes of Down syndrome (DS) had been identified by studying partial (segmental) trisomy 21 (PT21) as an interval of 0.6-8.3 304 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG Mb within human chromosome 21 (Hsa21), although its existence was laterABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index questioned. zed when available. Our results indicate that more than 25% of variants of Materials and Methods: We propose an innovative, systematic reanalysis of unknown significance in these genes have an impact on RNA splicing, an all described PT21 cases (from 1973 to 2015). In particular, we build an information that contributed to the clinical classification of several of these integrated, comparative map from 126 cases with or without DS fulfilling variants. Moreover, our targeted studies on “model-exons”, including MLH1 stringent cytogenetic and clinical criteria. The map allowed to define or ex- exon 10 and BRCA2 exon 7, revealed an unexpected large number of vari- clude as candidates for DS fine Hsa21 sequence intervals, also integrating ants altering potential exonic splicing regulatory elements (ESR), an effect duplication copy number variants (CNVs) data. that could not be predicted by commonly used bioinformatics approaches. Results: A highly restricted DSCR (HR-DSCR) of only 34 kb on distal 21q22.13 We then evaluated the predictive power of three newly developed ESR-dedi- has been identified as the minimal region whose duplication is shared by all cated algorithms. Our results pinpointed the good sensibility and specificity DS subjects and is absent in all non-DS subjects. Also being spared by any of two of these methods both at identifying ESR mutations and at predicting duplication CNV in healthy subjects, HR-DSCR represents a strong candi- their severity. This study highlights the potential of in silico approaches as date for the typical DS features, the intellectual disability and some facial filtering tools for prioritizing variants for functional analyses, a strategy that phenotypes. HR-DSCR contains no known gene and has homology only to may help identifying pathogenic variants among the plethora of nucleotide the chimpanzee genome. Conclusion: Our results strongly support the view changes detected by exome sequencing. Our findings have implications for that a single main critical region for DS actually exists, that it appears to be all genetic disorders. much smaller than previously suspected and that it could contain currently 
P13 .22 undescribed genes whose identification should become a priority for under- Detection of genomic alterations using high-throughput technology in standing the fundamental genotype-phenotype relationships in DS and in Brazilian patients with hearing loss searching for highly relevant targets for a cure of DS. P. L. Jacob1, S. M. Da Silva Costa1, G. O. L. Rodrigues2, J. A. Yunes2, A. M. Castilho3, E. L. 
P13 .20 Sartorato1; 1Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering First report of MEFV duplication in FMF patient Center (CBMEG) - University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil, 2Children‘s Hematological G. Sarrabay1, D. Mechin1, B. Dumont1, M. Andre2, I. Touitou1; Investigations Center Dr. Domingos Boldrini, Campinas, Brazil, 3Otorhinolaryngology 1UMAI laboratoire de génétique, Montpellier, France, 2Médecine Interne CHU Clermont Department, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil. Ferrand, Clermont Ferrand, France. Hearing loss is one of the most common sensory disorders in humans. The Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a rare monogenic disease and the identification of genetic variants associated with deafness can contribute prototype of autoinflammatory disorders. It is caused by mutations in the to a better understanding of the molecular basis and the pathophysiologi- MEFV gene and is autosomal recessively inherited. Most mutations are mis- cal mechanisms involved in the different phenotypes of hereditary hearing sense substitutions, small deletions are quite rare, and only three nonsense loss. Moreover, it can provide an accurate diagnosis, development of specific mutations have been described. Large rearrangements have been searched treatments and genetic counseling for patients and families. The applicati- for in the frame of a collaborative project including 216 patients but were on of new high-throughput technologies, such as CytoScan HD Array, allows not identified. an optimization of genetic diagnosis and a comprehensive investigation of We report here a 21 years-old woman who presented with classical FMF hereditary hearing loss. The main goal of the present study was to elucidate phenotype: recurrent fever, arthralgia, and abdominal pain with vomiting. the genetic etiology in a cohort of Brazilian patients heterozygous for GJB2 Attacks lasted three days and biological inflammation was documented with gene mutation with hearing loss using the CytoScan HD Array Microarray. elevated C-reactive protein. Her father is Armenian and her mother Malaga- Genomic DNA from 14 patients with hearing loss was evaluated by CytoScan sy, and both are asymptomatic. HD Array (Affymetrix). We found 68 genomic changes. The most significant We identified a well-known severe mutation: p.Met694Val, and a controver- changes were observed on chromosome 13 (13q12.11), near the GJB6 gene sial variant: p.Glu148Gln. Parental testing confirmed that the variants were (Connexin 30). It was observed a loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in three re- non-allelic. Sanger sequencing displayed unbalanced ratio of the mutated gions. The first interval have 419,27kb of size, where are located the genes and wild type alleles. Mosaicism was excluded because all polymorphisms PSPCI, ZMYMS, ZMYM2, GJA3; in an intronic region there is an interval with were found at the same 1:2 ratio. DNA contamination was ruled out through 179,84kb of size, and other interval with 348,69kb which includes the ge- microsatellite analysis. We thus suspected a gene micro-rearrangement. nes CRY
L1 , IFT88, MIR 4499. To date, we are mapping the flaking regions Quantitative polymerase chain reaction and deep-sequencing revealed a he- of these intervals in order to study the segregation of these changes in the terozygous duplication of the entire wild MEFV gene inherited from the mo- other family members. These quantitative changes may play a role in the ther. Two close surrounding genes (NAA60 and OR1F1) were not duplicated development of hereditary hearing loss. demonstrating that this rearrangement was confined to the MEFV region. We report here the first MEFV duplication in a FMF patient who subsequent- 
P13 .23 ly expressed 1/3 dose of p.Met694Val. Interestingly, the “dilution”of the pa- Functional analysis of an Aγ-globin gene promoter variant (HBG1: g.- thological variants did not moderate the patient’s phenotype. 225_-222delAGCA) underlines its role in increasing fetal hemoglobin levels under erythropoietic stress 
P13 .21 J. D. Vasiljevic1, M. M. Ugrin1, M. M. Stojiljkovic1, B. Zukic1, K. Klaassen1, T. Katsila2, L. Functional assays and bioinformatics predictions reveal a high Dokmanovic3, D. Janic3, G. P. Patrinos2, S. Pavlovic1; contribution of splicing mutations in the most frequent forms of 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, hereditary cancer Belgrade, Serbia, 2Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras School of Health O. Soukarieh1,2, P. Gaildrat1,2, G. Castelain1,2, S. Krieger1,2,3, S. Baert-Desurmont1,2,4, D. Sciences, Patras, Greece, 3Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Di Giacomo1,2, J. Abdat1,2, H. Tubeuf1,2, A. Killian1,2, J. Thery1,2, C. Bonnet1,2, S. Aklil1,2, A. Children’s Hospital, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. Drouet1,2, M. Vezain1,2, M. Hamieh1,2, E. Rouleau5, I. Tournier1,2, S. Caputo5, C. Houdayer5,6, T. Frébourg1,2,4, M. Tosi1,2, A. Martins1,2, in collaboration with the French Oncogenetics Network; 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin is a condition characterized by Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Normandy Centre for Medical Genomics and Personalized persistent γ-globin gene expression and synthHeBsGis1 of higHhB lGe2vels of fetal he- Medicine, Rouen, France, 3Department of Clinical Biology and Oncology, François moglobin (HbF; α2γ2H)B dGu2ring adult life. It is usually caused by promoter va- Baclesse Cancer Centre, Caen, France, 4Department of Genetics, University Hospital, riants affecting the human fetal globin genes ( and ). Some of the- Rouen, France, 5Genetics Department, Curie Institute, Paris, France, 6University Paris se variants, such as : g.-158C>T, exert their effect only under coHndBiGti1- Descartes, Paris, France. ons of eHrByGth1ropoietic stress, typical for β-thalassemia patients. We analyzed a previously reported deletion residing in the promoter region of the gene ( : g.-225_-222delAHGBCGA1), both in normal conditions and under The identification of a causal mutation is essential for molecular diagno- conditions of erythropoietic stress. Our results indicate that this deletion sis and clinical management of hereditary cancers. However, even if high- is responsible for decreased gene expression. Specifically, this deleti- throughput DNA sequencing has greatly improved the detection of nucleoti- on was shown to result in drastically reduced reporter gene expression in de changes, the biological interpretation of most variants remains challen- K562 cells, compared to the wild-type sequence but only under conditions ging. Here, we report the development and outcome of minigene assays oHfB eGr1ythropoietic stress, mimicked by introduction of erythropoietin into allowing the identification of splicing mutations in any gene of interest. We the cell culture. Also, electrophoretic mobility shift analysis showed that the analyzed in this system more than 600 variants identified in genes implica- : g.-225_-2H2B2Gd1el AGCA deletion creates additional transcriptional fac- ted in Lynch syndrome or in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndro- tors’ binding sites, which, we propose, bind a transcriptional repressor, thus me, notably MLH1, MSH2, BRCA1 andE BSRHCAG2 .2 
P0 a1tie6n t| RBNAAR wCaEs LalOsoN aAna,l yS-PA dIN ec r| e W asiW ng W th. eE SHG. gO enR e G promoter activity. These results are consi3 st0 en5 tABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index in silico 
P13 .27 Differential effects of LINE-1 methylation level on chromosome with analysis, which indicated that tHhiBs Gd1eletion creates a binding segregation during pre- and postnatal human ontogenesis site for GATA1, known to be a repressor of the γ-globin gene expression. S. A. Vasilyev1,2, E. N. Tolmacheva1, A. V. Agab3, A. A. Kashevarova1,2, E. A. Sazhenova1, R. These data confirm the regulatory role of the : g.-225_-222 region that R. Savchenko2, T. V. Nikitina1, I. N. Lebedev1,2,3; exerts its effect under conditions of erythropoietic stress characteristic for 1Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Tomsk β-thalassemia patients. State University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Acknowledgments: This study has been funded by the MoESTD, Republic of Serbia (grant no. III 41004) and by a European Commission grant (RD- CONNECT; F
P7 -305444). Introduction: Aneuploidy can lead to changes in epigenetic landscape and, 
P13 .24 vice versa, epigenetic errors can cause aneuploidy. In this study, a relation- Identification of binding partners of the LPAR6 protein involved in ship between the level of DNA methylation and aneuploidy was analyzed in hypotrichosis human cells during pre- and postnatal stages of ontogenesis. M. T. Romano1, S. M. Pasternack-Ziach1, B. Basmanav1, S. Kittanakom2, A. M. Materials and Methods: Retrotransposon LINE-1 methylation was assessed Oprisoreanu3, N. Ishorst1, A. Linneborn1, S. Schoch3, I. Stagljar2, R. C. Betz1; by pyrosequencing in extraembryonic mesoderm and trophoblast of 17 full 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of and 35 mosaic trisomic miscarriages, 21 induced abortions and lymphocy- Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Institute of Neuropathology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. tes of 24 healthy individuals. Spontaneous chromosome loss rate (SCLR) was analyzed in vitro by micronucleus test with FISH in extraembryonic fibroblasts and adult lymphocytes. Introduction: Hypotrichosis simplex (HS) is a genetically heterogeneous Results: LINE-1 methylation index was similar among pure trisomics (most- hair loss disorder characterized by progressive hair loss. Mutations in more ly of meiotic origin) and induced abortions (50-53%), but it was higher (55- than 10 genes have been identified for HS, including the LPAR6 gene enco- 56%, p=0.003) in miscarriages with mosaicism. Perhaps, this result from ding for the human lysophosphatidic acid receptor 6 (LPAR6). This protein incomplete epigenetic genome reprogramming at preimplantation stage belongs to the same signaling network of lipase H (LIPH), which is also a and may be accompanied by hypermethylation of checkpoint genes leading causative gene for HS. Considering the importance of this pathway in the de- to aneuploidy. In adult lymphocytes, significantly higher LINE-1 methylation termination of proper hair growth, we speculated that more genes related to index (75%) was observed. the same pathway could be a cause of HS. Therefore, our goal was to identify SCLR did not differ significantly between groups of embryos with different new interactors of LPAR6. LINE-1 methylation index. However, SCLR was lower in adult lymphocytes Materials and methods: Membrane yeast two hybrid (MYTH) assay and bait- (2.6±1.3‰) than in fibroblasts of trisomic (5.5±5.8‰, p=0.03) and indu- dependency test were performed to spot putative binding partners (BPs) ced (3.7±3.0‰, p=0.09) abortions. One can suggest that this results from of this receptor. The results revealed 72 putative interactors from the skin/ centromere conformation abnormalities due to genome hypomethylation in hair follicle library. The last step was to further assess the interaction by per- extraembryonic tissues. forming pull-down assay, to discard false positive results and, at the same Conclusions: LINE-1 hypomethylation in extraembryonic mesoderm is asso- time, confirm the interaction between LPAR6 and the candidate proteins. ciated with mitotic SCLR in comrapison with adult lymphocytes. In contrast, Results: Using this methodology, five true BPs have already been confirmed, LINE-1 hypermethylation can lead to mosaicism in early embryo develop- including the U11/U12 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein 35 kDa protein ment. (SNRN
P35 ), the 40S ribosomal protein 
S28  (RP
S28 ), the emopamil-binding This study was supported by the grant of RFBR №14-04-01003 and Presi- protein (EBP), the transcription factor AP-1 (JUN) and the lymphocyte anti- dent of RF Fellowship №3647.2015.4. gen 6 complex locus D (LY6D). 
P13 .29 Conclusions: We were able to identify some of the BPs of LPAR6. Many more Systematic investigation of a potential role of microRNAs in the putative interactors have been already been cloned and await to be studied. pathogenesis of male pattern baldness L. M. Hochfeld1,2, T. Anhalt1,2, A. Hofmann3, N. Fricker1,2, M. M. Nöthen1,2, S. Heilmann- 
P13 .25 Heimbach1,2; Mechanistic Insight into Formation of Chromosomal Insertions 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of P. Stankiewicz1,2, S. Gu1, P. Szafranski1, Z. H. C. Akdemir1, B. Yuan1, M. A. Magrina3, C. A. Genomics, Life&Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Bacino1,2, S. L. Lalani1,2, A. M. Breman1,2, J. L. Smith1,2, A. Patel1,2, S. W. Cheung1,2, C. M. B. Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. Carvalho1, W. Bi1,2, J. R. Lupski1,4,5; 1Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Baylor Miraca Genetics Laboratories, Houston, TX, United States, 3Instituto Hermes Pardini S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil, 4Department of Pediatrics, Baylor Male pattern baldness (MPB) is characterised by an androgen-dependent College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5Human Genome Sequencing Center, loss of hair from the frontal and vertex area of the scalp which does not Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. affect hair follicles (HFs) of the occipital scalp area. So far, the biological mechanisms that underlie these paradox differences in androgen-sensiti- vity between HF-subpopulations remain elusive. As microRNAs have been Chromosomal insertions are genomic rearrangements with a chromoso- demonstrated to be differentially expressed in androgen-dependent vs. me segment inserted into a non-homologous chromosome or a different androgen-independent tissues and have already been implicated in hair region on the same chromosome. Insertions, usually revealed through G- biology, we hypothesised, that microRNAs may contribute to the differences banded chromosome or FISH analyses, constitute ~2% of nonrecurrent in androgen-sensitivity between HF-subpopulations during MPB-pathoge- copy-number gains. Very little is known about the molecular mechanisms nesis. We therefore performed microRNA-profiling and differential expres- of their formation. Recently, microhomologies at the insertion sites were sion analysis in HFs from the frontal and occipital scalp of 25 healthy male found in a few cases, suggesting a replicative mechanism of formation. We donors. A total of 42 microRNAs showed significant differences in gene-ex- identified 16 individuals with complex insertions among 56,000 individuals pression between frontal and occipital HFs. To identify potential target ge- tested at Baylor Miraca Genetics Laboratories using FISH and clinical array nes and biological pathways of theses microRNAs, we searched miRWalk2.0 comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). Custom high-density aCGH was for validated and predicted target genes. Expression of 104 validated and performed on 10 individuals with available DNA, and breakpoint junctions 956 predicted target genes in human HF was confirmed using an in-house were fine-mapped at nucleotide resolution by long-range PCR and DNA se- data set on HF mRNA expression. The subsequent Ingenuity pathway-based quencing in six individuals. We observed microhomologies and templated analysis revealed an enrichment of HF-expressed target genes in mTOR- insertions at the breakpoint junctions, resembling the signatures found in and AKT-signalling, which have been implicated in cell proliferation and HF- CGRs and chromoanasynthesis involving two or three chromosomes ge- homeostasis and androgen- and IL-1-signalling, the latter being described nerated through replication-based mechanism(s) such as FoSTeS/MMBIR. to influence androgen-regulated gene expression in dermal papilla cells. In addition, using custom high-density aCGH, we studied 11 families with In summary, our data render a role of microRNAs in MPB-development via unbalanced simple insertions in children, inherited from a parent, carrier the control of HF-sensitivity to androgens likely. Additional studies are now of an apparently balanced insertion detected by FISH. We found that three warranted to elucidate the exact molecular mechanisms and to evaluate mi- parents had additional small CNVs at one or both sides of the inserting frag- croRNAs as potential new drug targets for MPB therapy. ments. Moreover, in one family, we identified an additional submicroscopic reciprocal insertion. In conclusion, we propose that significant fraction of both complex insertions generated through chromoanasynthesis involving two or more chromosomes and apparently balanced simple insertions are c3a0us6ed by DNA replication with template switcE hS inH g eG rr 2 or0 s.16 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P13 .30 Profound developmental delay, congenital heart disease, epilepsy, AT
P7 A hearing impairment and dysmorphisms in a one-year-old girl caused identify functionally important amino acid residues, but it is necessary to be by a novel heterozygous de novo missense variant in MED13L cautious. BAyT Pin7vAe stigation the molecular effect of 36 missense mu- I. M. Bader1, C. Rauscher2, W. Sperl2, O. Rittinger1, T. B. Haack3,4, R. Kovács-Nagy3, T. tations identified in phenotypic different MD patients, weA fToPu7nAd that 7 out Meitinger3,4; of the 36 missense mutations affect splicing, leading to absence of 1Clinical Genetics Unit; Children’s Hospital; Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, protein product due to nonsense mediated decay of the transcript Austria, Salzburg, Austria, 2Children’s Hospital; Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, or to truncated forms of the ATPase due to exon skipping. Three of the mu- Austria, Salzburg, Austria, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität tations affects nucleotides located at the 3´end of exon 10, 12 and 15 re- München, Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, spectively and lead to skipping of exon 10, 12 and 15 probably as a result of Neuherberg, Germany. poor 3´donor splice site recognition. Four missense mutations, two located MED13L in the middle of exon 8 and two in the middle exon 21 lead to skipping of exon 8 and exon 21 respectively probably due to effects on exonic splicing Heterozygous variants are reported to cause a spectrum of pheno- silencers (ESS) or exonic splicing enhancers (ESE), as these mutations lead types ranging from isolated coMngEeDn1it3aLl heart disease to a syndromic form of to increased ESS/ESE values. The exon skipping lead in some cases to in intellectual disability (ID) described recently (Adegbola et al. 2015). frame transcript and in other cases to premature termination codon due to While missense mutations in have early been assoMciaEtDe1d3 wLith the frameshift. Normal amount of transcript was observed if the exon skipping cyanotic form of non-syndromic congenital heart diseases including dextro- preserves the reading frame or if the premature termination codon was lo- looped transposition of the great arteries (MIM#608880), a haplo- cated close to the last exon, exon 23. insufficiency syndrome has recently been described in two patients with moderate ID, conotruncal heart defects, facial abnormalities and hypotonia 
P13 .34 (Asadollahi et al. 2013). Ten further patients with severe syndromic ID, de- Identification of type-1 NF1 deletion breakpoints mediated by a novel lay in motor and speech development but without cardiac phenotypes have mutational mechanism, palindrome-induced NAHR been reported, mainly associatMedE Dw1it3hL dosage changes A. Summerer1, M. Hillmer1, V. Mautner2, D. Cooper3, L. Messiaen4, H. Kehrer-Sawatzki1; (van Healst et al., 2015, Adegbola et al. 2015). One report exists about a ho- 1Insitute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Department of mozygous missense variant in in a patient with mild ID (Najmabadi Neurology, University Hospital Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, et al. 2011). 4Medical Genomics Laboratory, Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Here we present the phenotype of a one-year-old girl with coarctation of Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States. the aorta, profMouEnDd1 3dLevelopmental delay, epilepsy, hearing impairment and with additional dysmorphisms that fit into the syndromic spectrum found dine npoavtioents with haploinsufficiency.MED13L Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) occurs with an incidence of 1 in 3000. In Whole exome sequencing and molecular karyotyping revealed a novel 5% of all patients with NF1, the cause of the disease is a large deletion en- heterozygous missense mutation in as the likely cause of the compassing the NF1 gene and its flanking regions. The majority of these condition in this girl. large NF1 deletions are type-1, encompassing 1.4-Mb with breakpoints lo- The accumulation of clinical signMs EaDn1d3 sLymptoms, dysmorphisms as well as cated in the low-copy repeats NF1-REPa and NF1-REPc which exhibit high the severity of the profound developmental delay rises the hypothesis that sequence homology over a 50-kb region. Previous studies have indicated the novel missense mutation in in this girl could exert a dominant that non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) constitutes the major negative effect. mutational mechanism underlying type-1 NF1 deletions. In the present stu- 
P13 .31 dy, we analysed 118 patients with type-1 deletions by MLPA. In 99 (84%) of Identification of genes that escape X-inactivation the 118 deletions, the breakpoints were located within the NAHR hotspots M. Rask-Andersen1,2, Å. Johansson2; PR
S1  and PR
S2 , separated by 20-kb. However, 19 deletions did not exhibit 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Uppsala University, department of Immunology, breakpoints located within PR
S1  or PR
S2 , and the aim of this study was to genetics and pathology, Uppsala, Sweden. identify and characterize these breakpoints. To this end, we performed high- resolution array CGH and analysed overlapping long-range PCR-products using paralog-specific primers. Our results indicate that many of these type- Introduction: Cells of females contain two copies of the X chromosome. To 1 deletions not mediated by NAHR within the known NAHR hotspots exhibit avoid high expression of X-linked genes, due to gene dosage effects, one of breakpoints close to or within long palindromic sequences capable of for- the X-chromosomes are silenced by a mechanism called X-inactivation. This ming hairpin or cruciform structures. These findings imply a novel mutatio- mechanism is associated with specific histone modifications and hyperme- nal mechanism, termed palindrome-induced NAHR, which is triggered by a thylation along the inactivated chromosome. However, a number of genes secondary structure-induced DNA double strand break (DSB). By contrast, escape silencing by an unknown mechanism. In this study we utilize epi- type-1 NF1 deletions with breakpoints located within the NAHR hotspots genome wide DNA methylation data to identify genes that escape X-inacti- are likely to be regulated by PRDM9 which binds to specific DNA sequence vation and to contrast our findings with available public DNA methylation motifs and initiates recombination by recruiting the DSB-machinery. datasets from different tissues. 
P13 .35 Methods: The study included 732 participants (389 female and 341 male). Non-coding variant in a remote and putative enhancer in the cis- DNA methylation in blood samples was assayed using the Infinium Human- regulatory domain of FOX
L2  found in a multigenerational Polynesian methylation450 BeadChip which includes 11232 probes on the X-chromo- family with BPES some. Escape from X-inactivation was defined as probes with an average H. Verdin1, A. Shelling2, D. Markie3, A. L. Vincent4,5, E. De Baere1; methylation below 15% in both males and females; and non-overlapping 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of methylation ranges. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Results: A total of, 579 CpG probes associated with 160 unique genes dis- Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, 3Pathology Department, Dunedin School of Medicine, played DNA methylation patterns that were consistent with X-inactivation Otago University, Dunedin, New Zealand, 4Department of Ophthalmology, New Zealand escape. This pattern was particularly enriched on the short arm of chromo- National Eye Centre, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The University of Auckland, some X, which is consistent with previous publications. The X-chromosome Auckland, New Zealand, 5Eye Department, Greenlane Clinical Centre, Auckland District contains 827 genes and escape from X-inactivation was detected for appro- Health Board, Auckland, New Zealand. ximately 19% of these genes. FOX
L2  Conclusion: DNA methylation data can be utilized to identify and study regi- cis FOX
L2  ons of the X-chromosome that escape inactivation. Further studies may re- Introduction: Both coding loss-of-function mutations of and remote veal how X-inactivation and escape is related to complex traits and diseases, -regulatory deletions of the region lead to the rare, autosomal do- as well as X-inactivation dynamics related to age. minant disorder blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), associating an eyelid malformation with premature ovarian insufficiency. Despite extensive ge- 
P13 .32 netic studies, the molecular cause remains unexplained in 12% of typical Missense mutations leading to exon skipping in AT
P7 A BPES patients. L. B. Moeller; PFOatXieLn2ts and Methods: The goalF oOfX tLh2is study was toc iusnravel the molecu- Kennedy Center, Rigshospitalet, Glostrup, Denmark. lar cause in a multigenerational Polynesian family in which linkage to AT
P7 A (LOD of 3.8) was shown. and its entire -regulatory domain (chr3:138652808-139067278;GRCh37) was enriched using HaloPlex follo- Menkes disease (MD) is caused by mutations in , encoding a copper- wed by next-generation sequencing in five individuals. Data-analysis was transporting P-type ATPase. MissenseE mSuHtaGti o2n0s 1ha6v e| bBeAenR wCiEdeLlOy uNseAd, tSo PApINer f|o WrmWed Wusi.nEgS CHLCGb.iOo.RG 307ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results: We identified a heterozygous non-coding variant, Common clinical features as a typical craniofacial dysmorphism, respira- Chr3(GRCh37):g.138954755G>A, in a non-conserved sequence, predicted tion failure and intellectual disability are present in all three patients and to function as an enhancicser by Epigenome Roadmap and Ensembl. In addi- phenotype-genotype is discussed. tion, this predicFteOdX Le2nhancer is located in the shortest region of overlap of 
P13 .38 previously delineated -regulatory deletions. An interaction of this frag- Splicing analysis of exonic OCRL mutations causing Lowe syndrome or ment with the promoter has been demonstrated using Chromoso- Dent-2 disease me Conformation Capture (3C) in human granulosa-like tumor KGN cells L. Suarez-Artiles, E. Ramos-Trujillo, E. Cordoba-Lanus, F. Claverie-Martin; (D’haene et al. PLoFS OGXeLn2etics 2009). Unidad de Investigacion, Hospital Nuestra Señora de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Conclusions: This is the first report of a non-coding variant in a putative Spain. novel enchisancer of leading to BPES. Our study adds to the increasing SnHumHber oPfA MXe6ndelian developmental disorders caused by subtle genetic de- fects of -regulatory elements, such as the ZRS and SIMO elements in the Mutations in the OCRL gene are associated with both Lowe syndrome and and regions respectively. Dent-2 disease. Patients with Lowe syndrome present congenital cataracts, This work is supported by the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO). H.V. is mental disabilities and a renal proximal tubulopathy, whereas patients with a postdoctoral fellow and E.D.B. is a senior clinical investigator of the FWO. Dent-2 disease exhibit similar proximal tubule dysfunction but only mild, 
P13 .36 or no additional clinical defects. It is not yet understood why some OCRL Functional analyses of mutations in the mTOR regulator NPR
L3  which mutations cause the phenotype of Lowe syndrome, while others develop the are responsible for focal epilepsy and cortical dysplasia milder phenotype of Dent-2 disease. Our goal was to gain new insights into M. Eggert, D. Buschmann, S. Müller, O. K. Steinlein; the consequences of OCRL exonic mutations on pre-mRNA splicing. Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. Thirteen missense mutations and one synonymous mutation located main- ly in poorly defined exons and potentially affecting splicing regulatory ele- ments or splice sites were selected. Their effects on splicing were studied Recently, mutations in the GATOR1 complex subunit gene NPR
L3  were using bioinformatics tools and a minigene assay. Specific mutations were described as new genetic cause for focal epilepsy and cortical dysplasia. introduced by site-directed mutagenesis, and the RNA was analysed by RT- NPR
L3  together with NPR
L2  and DEPD
C5  constitute the GATOR1 complex, PCR and DNA sequencing. an important inhibitor of the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex We found that three presumed missense mutations caused alterations in 1(mTOR
C1 ). Yet, not much is known about the cellular function of these pre-mRNA splicing. Mutation p.W247C generated a splicing silencer and three GATOR1 proteins. As to mTOR
C1 , it is known that this enzyme com- disrupted a splicing enhancer resulting in skipping of exon 9, while muta- plex plays a key role in cellular energy homeostasis, autophagy, as well as in tions p.A861T and p.A861P abolished a donor splice site and resulted in cell growth and cell cycle pathways. Activation of mTOR
C1  leads to activati- skipping of exon 23. on of two important translation regulatory enzymes, 4-EPB and 
S6 K. In conclusion, these results highlight the importance to evaluate the effects So far, no functional study has been conducted to investigate the mecha- of missense mutations at the mRNA level in Lowe syndrome. Our findings nisms underlying NPR
L3  mutations in focal epilepsy. Therefore, we perfor- also allowed the detection of previously unpredicted splicing regulatory ele- med in vitro mutagenesis experiments to investigate the impact of NPR
L3  ments in OCRL exon 9. mutations published by us and others on the mTOR
C1  pathway. The ELISA This work was supported by grant PI14/00760, co-financed by Instituto de results indicate that the protein interaction between NPR
L3  harboring a Salud Carlos III (Spain) and the European Regional Development Fund “A mutation and DEPD
C5  is not affected. Our western blot analyses revealed way to build Europe”. phosphorylated 4-EPB and 
S6 K, even under amino acid deprivation con- 
P13 .39 dition, indicating loss of function of the mTOR
C1  inhibitor GATOR1 due to Propranolol exerts its effects through cell cycle and proliferation mutated NPR
L3 . These results indicate that mutations in NPR
L3  lead to loss genes on cancer cells of mTOR
C1 inhibition. It is therefore likely that NPR
L3  is essential for a func- F. I. Sahin1, O. D. Iseri2, Y. K. Terzi1, F. Sarialioglu3; tional GATOR1 complex. 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Institute of Transplantation and Gene Sciences, Ankara, 
P13 .37 Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatric Oncology, Three cases with partial 14q trisomy detected in abnormal karyotype Ankara, Turkey. and more precisely identified by SNP array V. Becvarova1, V. Curtisova2, P. Capkova2, V. Hurkova3, M. Magner4, R. Mihalova4, J. Horacek1, M. Trkova1; 1GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital, Olomouc, Czech Republic, Introduction: Utilization of beta adrenergic receptor antagonists in several 3Prediko, Zlin, Czech Republic, 4University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. cancer types have been reported in the recent years. Mechanisms under- lying drug effects are being investigated. In a previous study, we demon- strated that propranolol, atenolol and ICI118,551 inhibited cell growth and Introduction: Chromosome 14 is often involved in chromosomal rearrange- migration in vitro in three different cell lines. In the current study, we ai- ments. Partial trisomy of the distal segment can come from intrachromoso- med to investigate the effects of propranolol on metastatic breast carcinoma mal or interchromosomal rearragements in parental karyotypes or de novo (MCF7) and colon carcinoma (HT29) cell lines. formation. Determination of the unidentified extra material is usually per- Materials and Methods: We detected beta adrenergic receptor expression formed by array analyses. Until recently, a few 14q duplication cases were in the two cell lines and then analyzed RNA expression levels of 86 diffe- reported. Most common clinical features are low birth weight, intellectual rent genes playing role in cell cycle and proliferation as well as apoptotic disability, hypotonia, microcephaly, dysmorphia, respiration failure, hyper- pathways. telorism. However, no specific critical genes in this region are known yet. Results: We noticed that, exposure of both cell lines to propranolol for 24-72 Reporting patients with similar aberrant chromosomes 14 will be helpful hours resulted in cell death regardless of beta adrenergic receptor expres- in order to characterize typical clinical genotype - phenotype correlation. sion levels. Material and Methods: Chromosomal aberrations were detected by stan- Conclusions: Thus, for the first time in the literature, we concluded that pro- dard karyotyping. Array analysis was performed by Illumina HumanCytoS- pranolol exerts its effect by inhibiting or activating the expression of multip- NP 12v2.1; GRCh37/hg19. We report 3 patients of different ages (7 years, le genes involved in cell proliferation and death. 4 months, 22 years) and with different range of duplicated chromosomal This study has been approved by Baskent University Institutional Review segments. Board (Project No: DA15/09) and supported by Baskent University Re- Results: Patient 1 - boy 7 years old; arr[hg19] 14q32.1 search Fund. 1q32.33(91,474,831-107,282,437)x3 dn, patient 2 - girl 4 months; arr[hg19] 14q31.1q32.33(83,208,737-107,282,437)x3 dn, patient 3 - woman, 22 years old; arr 12p13.33p13.32(1-5,168,849)x1,14q31. 3q32.33(86,991,381-107,283,504)x3 - comes from paternal balanced translocation. Phenotypes of all 3 patients were similar. Conclusions: In three detected partial 14q trisomies different number of genes are included: patient 1 - 140 OMIM genes; patient 2 - 153 OMIM ge- nes; patient 3 - 152 OMIM genes (with concurrent partial deletion 12p). A3l0l e8xamined patients share the distal 140 OMEISMH gGen 2es0 r1eg6io |n B (A15R.8C MEbL)O. NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P13 .40 
P13 .43 Altered pre-mRNA splicing due to missense CLDN16 and CLDN19 Analyses of splicing mutations in the SFTPC gene: example of the mutations associated with familial hypomagnesaemia with p.Gln145His mutation hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis C. Delestrain1,2, S. Simon1, A. Aissat1,3, R. Medina3, X. Decrouy1, B. Costes1, R. Epaud1,2, P. A. Perdomo-Ramirez, M. de Armas-Ortiz, E. Ramos-Trujillo, H. Gonzalez-Acosta, F. Fanen1,3; Claverie-Martin; 1INSERM U955, Creteil, France, 2Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Créteil, Service Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Nuestra Señora de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, de Pédiatrie Générale, Creteil, France, 3AP-HP, Hôpital Henrii Mondor, Département de Spain. Génétique, Creteil, France. Familial hypomagnesaemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis Since the first description of interstitial lung disease (ILD) being associated (FHHNC) is an autosomal-recessive renal tubular disorder characterized by with an alteration of the SFTPC gene in 2001, about 50 different mutations excessive urinary losses of magnesium and calcium, bilateral nephrocalci- have been reported. All patients are heterozygous carriers of autosomal do- nosis and progressive chronic renal failure. This rare disease is caused by minant SFTPC mutations and the lung disease caused by different SFTPC mutations in CLDN16 or CLDN19. Patients with mutations in CLDN19 also mutations covers a broad range of phenotypes from neonatal respiratory present severe ocular abnormalities. Most of these mutations are predicted distress syndrome to adult ILD. The wide phenotypic variability is not fully as missense. However, it is known that a large fraction of exonic mutations explained by the genotype and we postulated that splicing defect could ex- can alter pre-mRNA splicing. In this study, we tested presumed missense plain such a discrepancy. mutations in these genes for their effects on splicing. We first study an exonic mutation, c.435 G> C (p.Gln145His) localized in the Bioinformatics tools were used to select mutations with potential effect on well conserved BRICHOS domain of the pro-protein SP-C (proSP-C) and as- splicing. Variants were experimentally tested using minigene assays. Speci- sociated to a fatal neonatal respiratory distress syndrome. In silico analysis fic mutations were generated by site-directed mutagenesis. RNA from cultu- predicted a drastic reduction of the splice donor site at the exon-intron 4 red cells was analyzed by RT-PCR and automatic DNA sequencing. junction’s strength score. Using wild-type and mutant minigenes transfec- Seven CLDN16 mutations; p.
L145 P, p.R149Q, p.R149L, p.
L151 F, p.
L151 W, ted in alveolar type II epithelial cells (A549), we showed a complete exon p.G198D and p.G198A and two CLDN19 mutations; p.G130C and p.G130D skipping due to this mutation. When co-transfection of both wildtype and were analyzed. RT-PCR results showed that p.G198A, p.G198D and p.G130C mutant minigenes was performed, a dominant negative effect on the spli- produced skipping of exons 4 and 2, respectively. We also found that mutati- cing was observed. Exon 4 is in frame and its skipping lead to a truncated ons p.R149L and p.
L151 F resulted in loss of an exon 3 fragment. protein which is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum as shown by confo- Our results indicate that some presumed missense mutations act as splicing cal microscopy. mutations. These nucleotide substitutions represent the first exonic muta- These results indicated that the mutation p.Gln145His (Q145H), previous- tions that induce aberrant mRNAs in FHHNC. These findings strengthen the ly described as a missense mutation, is actually a splicing mutation which significance to evaluate the consequences of missense mutations at the RNA should be referred as c.325_435del (p.Leu109_Gln145del). The absence of level. alternative splicing leading to the skipping of exon 4 fully explained the se- This work was supported by grant PI14/00760, co-financed by Instituto de verity of the phenotype observed. Salud Carlos III (Spain) and the European Regional Development Fund “A 
P13 .44 way to build Europe”. 
P13 .42 A comparative analysis of functionality between a recombinant Whole genome sequencing of spermatocytic tumour (SpT), a rare thermostable reverse transcriptase and a commercial mesophilic testicular tumour at the crossroads between somatic and germline reverse transcriptase using RT-PCR and Real time PCR mutational processes N. Faramarzi Garous, S. Gharavi, Z. Moosavi Nejad, N. Ghorbanmehr, M. Sheikh G. J. Maher1, E. Giannoulatou1,2, Z. Ding1, E. Rajpert-De Meyts3, A. J. M. Gillis4, L. C. J. Hosseini; Dorssers4, A. WG
S5005 , G. McVean6, L. H. Looijenga4, A. O. M. Wilkie1, A. Goriely1; Alzahra University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of. 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, Australia, 3Department of Growth & Reproduction, Copenhagen University Hospital Reverse Transcriptase, is an important enzyme involved in the synthesis (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC - of cDNA from unstable RNA molecules and has applications in transcripto- University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5University of Oxford, me and RNA expression profiles. The efficiency of this enzyme relies on its Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of molecular characteristics, including those that confer thermostability pro- Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. cessivity and error-free reverse transcription capabilities. cDNA production at high temperatures has several advantages like elimination of secondary structures in the RNA molecule and use of RNA with GC-rich regions in tem- Spermatocytic tumour (SpT) is a rare testicular tumour that is clinically di- ptlrattes. stinct from the common classical seminoma. With a median age of onset A bacterial intronic gene codEing for thermostable reverse transcriptase ~55y, it is the only germ cell tumour of postnatal origin and thus represents ( ) has been identified and cloned in pET28a vector and subsequently a useful model to study human germ cell biology and the characteristics of expressed in a suitable host ( .coli B
L21 ). Following induction of the bac- germline mutations. We performed whole genome sequencing on 4 SpTs terial culture and sonication of the cells, the enzyme was purified by Ni+2 (52x coverage) and matched normal tissue (26x). The tumours exhibit ex- columns. tensive aneuploidy (50-99 autosomes/tumour) unusually involving whole The efficacy of the recombinant enzyme was successfully tested in RT and chromosomes, with relative gains of chr9 and chr20 common to all tumours. Nested-PCR reactions at 37, 60, 70, 80 and 90°C for the detection of tr 9:22. Genome-wide, the acquired single nucleotide variant (SNV) load was extre- The capabilities of this enzyme was also compared to the mesophilic M-MLV mely low for these adult-onset tumours (~0.2 per Mb). An average of 6 (2- RT and proved to be more versatile and robust. Specific activity in optimum 9) non-synonymous variants were called per tumour; no SNVs were shared conditionsis compared for Trt and MMLV enzymes by Real time-PCR. The across tumours and no known oncogenic drivers were identified. Strikingly, optimum temperature for Trt activity was 70 °C. A significant increase com- in all cases, mutant allelic ratios were low (<50%) and inversely correlated pared to optimal temperature of MMLV activity (37 °C) is shown. with chromosomal copy-number, suggesting that they represent secondary The Trt protein can carry out reverse transcription at very hot temperatures passenger mutations. Two-thirds of SNVs were transitions, with C>T ac- (cDNA synthesis was detectable at 90°C) and is a novel type of RT that may counting for 51% of all SNVs, most commonly occurring at CpGs; a bias to be exploited for applications where synthesis of cDNA at high temperatures specific trinucleotide contexts was observed. This mutational signature, is preferable to diagnose CML, ALL, AML diseases. which is distinct from other germ cell tumours, is typical of that observed for de novo germline mutations. We propose that in this unique tissue, gene imbalance caused by chromosomal aneuploidy is the oncogenic mechanism 
P13 .45 driving tumourigenesis and results in spermatogonia’s re-entry into mitosis De novo translocation frequency of the recurrent constitutional following failure to complete meiotic divisions. This work is supported by t(11;22)(q24.13;q11.21) in normal somatic tissues H. Kurahashi, T. Kato, M. Suzuki, M. Tsutsumi, T. Ohye, H. Inagaki; the Wellcome Trust 091182 (to AG and AOMW) and 102731 (to AOMW). Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. The t(11;22)(q23.3;q11.2) is one of several recurrent constitutional trans- locations mediated by palindromic AT-rich repeats (PATRRs). Although it is ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 309 likely that the secondary structure triggers the initiation of the translocati-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Conclusions. on formation, precise underlying mechanism remains enigmatic. In this stu- Traditional methods to determine translocation breakpoints, dy, we carried out the t(11;22)-specific PCR for the der(11) or the der(22) such as FISH, Southern blot or long-range PCR, are laborious and with limi- using primers flanking the PATRR11 and PATRR22. To analyze the de novo ted resolution. Our results demonstrate the efficacy of WGS for the precise t(11;22) in the genomic DNA from normal individuals, the PCR was carried identification of translocation breakpoints in non-coding regions. out to detected the t(11;22) at the single cell sensitivity. No translocation 
P13 .48 was detected in the DNA from somatic tissues including stomach, small When genotype does not account for phenotype: the lesson from intestine, colon, spleen and bone marrow. When we use DNAs from testis isodisomic chromosomes or ovary from fetus and adult, only the testicular tissue from adult showed A. La Barbera1, A. Provenzano2, M. Garonzi3, E. Zago4, V. Orlandini2, M. Pantaleo1, the t(11;22)-specific PCR products at a lower frequency than that generally G. Traficante2, M. Vignoli5, G. Bacci6, S. Guarducci1, S. Bargiacchi2, E. Gambineri5, M. observed in normal semen. DNA from eight cancer or leukemia cell lines Delledonne3,4, O. Zuffardi7, S. Giglio1,2; were also negative for the PCR. Our data suggest the hypothesis that non- 1Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Medical replicative mechanism for formation of the recurrent palindrome-mediated Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences ‚Mario translocations. Serio‘, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 3Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 4Personal Genomics srl, Verona, Italy, 5Department of 
P13 .46 „NEUROFARBA,“ Section of Children‘s Health, University of Florence, Anna Meyer Unbalanced de novo X;13 translocation with skewed X chromosome Children‘s Hospital, Florence, Italy, 6Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Neuroscience, inactivation Meyer Children‘s Hospital, Florence, Italy, 7Department of Molecular Medicine, M. Orera1, C. Rodriguez Hernandez1, L. Fernandez Garcia Moya2, M. Mori2, V. Seidel1; University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. 1Hospital Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain. We demonstrated isodisomy for chromosome 1 in two unrelated sub- Introduction: X chromosome inactivation is meant to provide an equal gene jects from non-consanguineous parents, affected by autosomal recessive dosage between males and females. X-autosome translocations are rare syndromes associated with two genes on chromosome 1, type 2 nephro- events. When the translocation yields an unbalanced genomic rearrange- tic syndrome (#600995) and campodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pe- ment, the derivative X chromosome is generally selectively inactivated, avoi- ricarditis (#208250). We detected an homozygous mutation in NPH
S2  ding the effect of the autosomal trisomy. We present a girl with an unbalan- (1q25.2,c.538G>A) in case 1, and in PRG4 (1q31.1,c.2288C>G) in case 2, in- ced X-13 translocation. herited only by the father. SNP-CGH array analysis showed complete homo- Materials and Methods: 4th child of non-consanguineous parents. The mo- zygosity for chromosomes 1 in both cases. This finding is in agreement with ther was treated with thyroid hormone and hydroxychloroquine during the post-zygotic monosomy rescue of the paternal chromosome 1, as a conse- pregnancy. A C- section was performed for fetal distress at 38 weeks, with quence of maternal non-disjunction of chromosomes 1. To exclude recessive birth weight 2580 g, length 49 cm. She presents postaxial polysyndactyly conditions for other genes located on chromosome 1, we performed whole on the left foot, anteriorly placed anus and a sacral dimple. Abdominal USS exome sequencing. We identified variants in FUCA1, DPYD, ABCA4, NPH
P4 , detected a bicornuate uterus. At age 12 months a mild developmental delay PINK1 (case 1) and DDOST, STIL, AT
P7 B, CFH genes (case 2), considered di- was noted. Her overall growth remains between 3rd and 10th centiles. sease-causative by HGMD and never reported in dbSNP and Exac. A detailed Results: Standard karyotype: 46,X,der(X)t(X;13)(p11;q12.1) clinical examination in both patients did not shown any signs of the expec- Chromosome microarray: 13q12.3-q34 duplication (84 Mb) and Xp22.33- ted diseases, excepted for PINK1 that is associated with a late onset disease. Xp11.23 deletion (46 Mb) Our observations further demonstrate that low penetrance and extensive X inactivation studies showed a markedly skewed inactivation pattern. phenotype heterogeneity occur even for genomic variants reported as cau- Parental karyotypes were normal. sative in homozygous state. The analysis of entire exome/genome is a major Conclusions: The mild clinical phenotype of partial trisomy 13 together with challenge to geneticists in order to provide genotype-phenotype correlati- 
P13 .49 the skewed X inactivation pattern in blood suggests that the derivative X ons, especially in prenatal setting. Transcriptome Sequencing and characterization of two Bloom’s chromosome carrying a large segment of chromosome 13 is preferentially syndrome patients inactivated in most tissues. Mild features of partial Xp monosomy are to be M. M. Montenegro, G. M. Novo-Filho, A. M. Nascimento, E. A. Zanardo, A. T. Dias, T. V. M. expected as the deletion affects PAR. M. Moura, C. Milani, F. Madia, D. A. M. Silvestre, C. A. Kim, L. D. Kulikowisk; To our knowledge, this is the first report of a child with almost complete FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil. trisomy 13 originated by a de novo X;13 translocation. 
P13 .47 Introduction: Transcriptome profiling of mRNA could be a powerful ap- Identification of chromosomal translocation breakpoints associated proach to identify new transcripts, fusion genes, gene regulation, mutations with holoprosencephaly using whole-genome sequencing: Suggestion and networks of genes that play a role in diseases. We investigated relevant of a positional effect. J. Klar1,2, H. Ehrencrona3, N. Dahl1,2; genomic markers that could associated to Bloom‘s syndrome (BS), a chro- 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Science for Life mosomal instability disorder caused by mutations in BLM gene.Materials Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Division of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden. and Methods: We performed a deep-sequencing RNA-Seq profiling using Introduction: high throughput sequencing (Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform) of samples de- rived from two patients with BS and three unaffected controls. The raw data Wdee indoevnotified a boy with developmental delay, diplegia and analysis was generated using specialized softwares (CASAVA 1.8.2, Bowtie2, lobar holoprosencephaly (HPE). Karyotyping revealed an apparently balan- EdgeR, Rsubread and DESeq2). Results: The RNA-Seq assay revealed the ced reciprocal chromosomal translocation t(10;12)(q24;p13). Ge- precise location of transcription limits, with resolution of a single nucleoti- nMoamteer-iwalisd ea nadrr aMye athnoadlyss.is (Affymetrix Cytoscan HD) and exome sequencing de and high level of efficiency, showing high genetic complexity. The results did not detect any pathogenic variants. disclosed 399 genes differentially expressed : 216 up regulated in the group We performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) with Bloom syndrome and 183 up regulated in the control group. Unexpec- using Illumina TruSeq (insert size of 350 bp) on a HiSeqX (paired-end and ted most of them were immune system-related genes. Also, we detected lar- 150bp re++ad length). To identify breakpoints we utilized BreakDancerMax, ge number of SNP and IDELS in one of BS patients, highlighting a frameshift a Perl/C package that provides genome-wide detection of structural vari- in the BLM gene. Conclusions: Our results suggested that gene expression ants. Anomalously aligned reads at chromosome 10q24 and chromosome network in BS could interfere in the regulation of the pathways associated 1R2espu1lt3s .were visualized using Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) and confir- with the immunological systems regulation probably caused by disturbance med by Sanger sequencing. of DNA repair mechanisms. Furthermore, the study of the transcriptome At the breakpoint on the chromosome 10 derivative, we identified using RNA-Seq may help to a breakthrough in the pathogenesis of BS.Grants: a deletion of 7 bp and an insertion of 20 bp of unknown origin. Likewise, FAPESP: 09/53105-9 and FINEP-CT INFRA 0160/12 S
P8 . at the breakpoint on the chromosome 12 derivative, we identified a dele- tion FoBf X3W1 4b p folFloGwFe8d by an insertion of 14 bp of unknownE FoCrAigBin4.B B oth bPAreRaPk1p1o ints are situated in intergenic regions, specifically between the ge- nes and on chromosome 10q24 and between and on chromosome 12p13. According to Decipher database, inseFrtGioFn8 and deletions spanning both breakpoint regions are associated with intel- lectual disability and macro/microcephaly. Furthermore, variants in h3a1ve0 been reported in autosomal recessive HPEE .SHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14  New diagnostic approaches, technical aspects & quality control Methods: An image set of affected individuals divided into two cohorts: pre- senting facial dysmorphologies (AFD) (n=20) and without dysmorphology (ANFD) by human experts. These cohorts were compared to unaffected con- 
P14 .002 trols (n=50) using variables and rankings produced by the Facial Dysmor- 
C26 -ceramide is a new and sensitive biomarker for Farber`s disease phology Novel Analysis (FDNA) technology. In both ASD cohorts mutations C. Cozma1, M. I. Iurascu1, S. Eichler1, S. Zielke2, A. Rolfs2, J. Köster1; of 103 genes associated to autism, repeat expansions of FMR1 gene, and in 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Albrecht-Kossel-Institute, University of Rostock, some AFD cases chromosomal abnormalities have been identified. Rostock, Germany. Results: Clear trends were recognizable in the three groups along facial dys- morphology variables and rankings. Although labeled as not showing facial dysmorphology, the ANFD cohort was automatically ranked separately from Farber disease (Farber‘s lipogranulomatosis, ceramidase deficiency), is an the unaffected controls. In addition, two possible clusters of ANFD were re- autosomal recessive, extremely rare disease caused and characterized by a cognized by the technology. The AFD cohort was clearly recognized as sepa- deficient acid ceramidase activity encoded by ASAH1 gene. Low ceramidase rate from the other two cohorts. In the AFD group Fragile X, CHARGE, Silver activity is resulting in accumulation of fatty substances, mainly ceramides. Russell, Cohen, 2q37.3 microdeletion syndrome, and Speech Language Dis- At clinical level, Farber disease is manifesting through hallmark symptoms order 1 were identified. such as: periarticular nodules, lipogranulomas, swollen and painful joints Conclusion: The preliminary results show that deep phenotyping provided and a hoarse voice or a weak cry; in addition to these, also hepatospleno- by a computer-aided facial analysis could be instrumental in the early clini- megaly, rapid neurological deterioration or developmental delay are repor- cal diagnostic of the syndromic ASD forms and could help in the selection ted [1, 5-6]. Seven different Farber types were described, with phenotypes of diagnostic molecular tests. Larger study is needed to assess these trends varying from mild cases with a longer life expectancy to very severe cases, and to allow cross-validation. 
P14 .006 where the patients do not survive past their first year of life. A comparison of two NGS novel targeted panel-sequencing assays for The screening through over 40 different ceramide-like molecule show that patients with autoinflammatory disease only 
C26  is specifically increased in samples from Farber patients. We pre- M. Antolín1, H. Valbuena1, A. Fernández Rodríguez1, A. Outeiral1, A. M. Cordero1, E. sent here a new method of diagnosis of Farber disease by determining the García-Arumí1,2, E. Tizzano1,2; concentration of 
C26  ceramide isoforms using LC/MRM-MS and 
C25  cera- 1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Disease Unit, Hospital Vall mide as internal standard. Moreover, we found that cis-isomer of the 
C26  d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Biomedical Network Research Centre on Rare Diseases ceramide is a specific biomarker for Farber disease, with pathological va- (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. lues in a range of 39.2-150.0 nmol/L blood (normal range 13.6-23.4 nmol/L blood, N=192, healthy individuals). The new biomarker can be determined MEFV MVK, TNFRSF1A NOD2 NLPR3 directly in the dried blood spot extract with low sample consumption, easy The molecular diagnosis of autoinflammatory diseases includes several can- sample preparation, high reproducibility and it presents the possibility of to didate genes such as , , and . NGS offers be used in high throughput screenings. an improvement in time and costs versus Sanger sequencing. We compared 
P14 .004 two di fMfeEreFnVt NGS approachMeVsK for molecular , dTiaNgFnRoSsFis1 Aof these patientNs.OD2 Two different libraNrLyP aRp3proaches were followed. In the first, 8 differe nLtA f rTaagq- Development of a new biomarker method for the diagnosis of MLD ments (14.600 kb), (23.576 kb) (13.358 kb), using tandem mass spectrometry S. Eichler1, C. Cozma1, M. I. Iurascu1, A. Rolfs2; (35.939 kb) and (31.054 kb) were amplified using Takara 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Albrecht-Kossel-Institute, University of Rostock, DNA Polymerase and library preparation was performed using NexteraXT. Rostock, Germany. In the second, a Custom GeneRead DNAseq panel of targeted genes was am- plified (197 amplicons with a mean size of 203 bp) and libraries were prepa- red with NEBNext Ultra DNA kit. In both approaches, libraries were pooled Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is a lysosomal storage disease with and sequenced using paired-end on the MiSeq platform. Sequencing data an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. MLD is caused by a deficiency of were analyzed with the Variant Studio and GeneRead Seq Variant Analysis the enzyme arylsulfatase A (ARSA) and is characterized by enzyme activity software, respectively. The validation of the potential pathogenic variants in leukocytes that is less than 10% of normal controls. However, assay of the was performed by Sanger sequencing. ARSA enzyme activity alone is not sufficient for diagnosis; ARSA pseudode- The Nextera approach requires a high quality of DNA to amplify fragments ficiency, which is characterized by enzyme activity that is 5~20% of normal until 15000 bp. The sequences include the whole intronic regions, but the controls does not cause MLD. Without this enzyme, sulfatides build up in coverage is very heterogeneous. On the other hand, GeneRead protocol is many tissues of the body, eventually destroying the myelin sheath of the ner- fast, it predicts the uncovered regions and the coverage is similar and con- vous system with serious consequences manifested in clinical symptoms e.g. stant between runs. In both procedures, the detected variants were highly weakness, muscle rigidity, developmental delays, convulsions, paralysis, and similar and false positives have not been observed. dementia. A recent study contended sulfatide is not completely responsible Both approaches are useful in the detection of variants associated with the for MLD because it is nontoxic. It has been suggested lysosulfatide plays a pathogenesis of autoinflammatory diseases. In our hands, Generead ap- role because of its cytotoxic properties in vitro. Recently developed enzyme pears faster and more reproducible between runs. replacement therapy and the steep progression of the disease in ARSA pati- 
P14 .007 ents make the development of HTS diagnosis of high importance. A novel mutation in WDR62 gene identified in a Moroccan family with Here we report the development of a new biochemical screening method autosomal recessive primary microcephaly using Next - Generation for ARSA patients using a combination of two techniques: (i.) arylsulphatase Sequencing enzymatic activity and (ii.) quantification of ARSA specific biomarkers (both I. Cherkaoui Jaouad1,2, A. Zrhidri1, W. Jdioui1,2, J. Lyahyai1, L. Raymond3, M. Taoudi3, G. lyso-sulfatide and selected sulfatides). Both assays are using for the analy- Egea3, S. El Mouatassim3, A. Sefiani1,4; sis liquid chromatography coupled with high resolution multiple reaction 1Centre de Génomique Humaine, Faculté de médecine et de Pharmacie, Rabat, Morocco, monitoring mass spectrometry (LC/MRM-MS) and the results were confir- 2Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d‘Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, med by genetic analysis. This screening method has been validated for dried 3Département de Génétique Moléculaire, Laboratoire Biomnis, Lyon, France, 4Institut blood spot (DBS) technology which further simplifies the sample handling, National d‘Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco. processing and analysis. 
P14 .005 Introduction: Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a rare The use of automated facial analysis in the clinical diagnostic of genetically heterogeneous disorder of neurogenic brain development cha- autism spectrum disorders (ASD) racterized by reduced head circumference at birth with no gross anomalies N. A. Varga, P. Balicza, K. Pentelenyi, H. Piko, M. Szegedi, V. Karcagi, M. Molnar; of brain architecture and variable degrees of intellectual impairment. Clini- Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Budapest, Hungary. cal and genetic heterogeneity in monogenetic disorders represents a major diagnostic challenge. Here, we used the whole-exome sequencing as a diagnostic approach for Introduction: Autism can be part of a genetic syndrome associating with establishing a molecular diagnosis in a family with two children with MCPH. dysmorphic features. While there are many studies that described genetic Materials and Methods: Two patients, 11 and 9 years old, born from consan- alterations associated with ASD, none have identified facial phenotypes as- guinous parents, were refered to the department of medical genetics. The sociating to ASD with computer-aided facial analysis. Here we evaluate the diagnosis of MCPH was made, based on reduced head circumference wit- geno/phenotype relation in a limited nEuSmHbGer 2of0 a1ut6is t|i cB iAndRivCidEuLaOls.NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 311 hout brain architecture abnormalities. Whole-exome sequencing was per-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .010 Clinical validity, reproducibility, and utility of NGS panel tests for formed in these patients, their parents and their two healthy sibling. hereditary breast and ovarian cancer: challenges and solutions Results: A homozygous mutation c.1027C>T; p.Gln343Ter in exon 8 of S. Lincoln1, A. Desmond2, A. Kurian3, D. Haussler4, S. Yang1, M. Cline4, S. Aradhya1, J. Ford3, WDR62, a gene already known to be related to MCPH, was identified. Sanger L. Ellisen2, B. Paten4, R. Nussbaum1; sequencing confirmed this mutation in the affected children. This mutation 1Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, was not found in HGMD and 1,000 Genome database. MA, United States, 3Stanford University Medical Center, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 4University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, United States. Conclusions: Our data expanded the spectrum of mutations in WDR62 gene, and give more arguments of the powerful and cost- effective tool of whole exome sequencing for the molecular diagnosis of genetically heterogeneous disorders such MCPH. Exome sequencing allows us to have faster molecular Background: In studies of over 1000 patients [1,2] we recently demonstra- results especially when specific diagnosis needs a longer time to sequence ted that multigene testing can produce clinically valid results, comparable many genes. to traditional tests while expanding patient management impact. Other fin- 
P14 .008 dings included (a) that pathogenicity classifications produced using publi- Development of a next generation sequencing panel for diagnostic cly available resources under recent guidelines [3] were 99.8% similar to and investigation of bleeding disorders those produced by others using a large proprietary database. Also (b) many N. Borràs1,2, L. Ramírez1,2, N. Comes1,2, C. Altisent3, R. Parra1,3, F. Vidal1,2, I. Corrales1,2; pathogenic variants were technically challenging for NGS. Here, we further 1Blood and Tissue Bank, Barcelona, Spain, 2Vall d’Hebron Research Institute, Barcelona, explore these topics in a substantially larger data set. Spain, 3Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. Methods: De-identified panel test results for roughly 20,000 individuals were examined. In addition, data from the ClinVar database, representing another approximately 20,000 patients, were used. The advent of NGS has opened the possibility to design custom protocols Results: Consistent with our prior results, about 4-5% of patients harbor for molecular analysis of several genes in parallel. This approach is particu- mutations in genes other than BRCA1/2. Most of these findings are con- larly valuable in the diagnosis of diseases with similar phenotype although sistent with the patient’s personal/family history and are not incidental. caused by a heterogeneous molecular basis. Taking advantage of this novel About 10% of these mutations are of types known to be challenging for NGS opportunity, we designed and validated a NGS custom panel to simulta- (e.g. single exon CNVs, large indels, complex events, etc.). These require spe- neously analyze the 23 essential genes involved in inherited bleeding dis- cialised algorithms or NGS biochemistries to accurately report. orders. Considering BRCA1/2 variants, interpretations are highly concordant The targeted exon enrichment GeneRead panel (QIAGEN) designed com- (98.5%) between established diagnostic labs in terms of clinical manage- prises a total of 1,285 amplicons (size average 169 bp) covering the 98.7% ment impact. Moreover all of the discordances are in rare variants that ap- of the target genomic regions. Construction of libraries, including patient- pear in few patients. Thus, 99.8% of patients are expected to be concordant, specific indexation, was performed with NEBNext Ultra DNA Library Prep as we observed previously. Kit. Between 24 and 48 libraries were sequenced together in every MiSeq Conclusions: When using appropriate NGS and variant interpretation me- (Illumina) run. To date, we have been diagnosed in this way more than 250 thods, validity and utility of panels tests can be established. patients, suffering both frequent and minor coagulopathies. Putative mu- 1. Desmond, JAMAOncology 2015 tations were identified by GeneRead Variant Calling software and further 2. Lincoln, JMolDiag 2015 validated by Sanger methodology, reaching 100% sensitivity. This versati- 3. Richards, GenetMed 2015 le protocol allows to process together samples from different pathologies, with the consequent simplification of routine procedure and cost reduction. 
P14 .011 Likewise, it has been especially advantageous when clinical diagnosis was Cell-free DNA as a tool for non-invasive cancer detection unclear or controversial due to a borderline phenotype with various candi- A. Montaner1,2, J. González2, L. Armengol1, J. Rodríguez1; date genes. Importantly, this methodology offers invaluable genetic infor- 1qGenomics Laboratories, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 2Bioinformatic Research Group in Epidemiology, Centre de Recerca en Epidemiologia Ambiental (CREAL), Barcelona, mation of all the variants, polymorphisms and causative mutations, from Spain. several hemostatic genes. Analysis and integration of this data could refine the knowledge of genotype-phenotype correlation and improve the foreca- sting of hemorrhagic risk. Introduction: Early detection is key for increasing survival in cancer pati- Grants: FIS PI12/01494, FIS PI15/01643 and RD12/0042/0053. 
P14 .009 ents but it is limited by the sensitivity of current detection methods. In this Novel thermal cycler amplifies the entire BRCA1 gene within 10 context, cell-free DNA (cfDNA), currently used as a non-invasive tool for minutes aneuploidy detection in prenatal screening and graft rejection monitoring, R. Cammaert1, M. Kribbe2, W. H. Deelen2, R. Hofstra2, G. de Vos1; promises to improve early cancer detection. Because cfDNA levels in blood 1Molecular Biology Systems, Goes, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, are very low, sample preparation must be optimized. Here we set up a work- Netherlands. flow for generating high quality libraries from low cfDNA inputs that can be sequenced using next generation sequencing (NGS) platforms. Materials and methods: Blood samples from healthy individuals, pregnant Background: The most commonly used technique in clinical genetics is PCR. women and cancer patients were collected in Streck tubes to avoid genomic PCR is reasonably time consuming. Most labs perform maximal 4 PCR’s per DNA contamination from white blood cells. Plasma was separated by centri- day (including one overnight). Making PCR faster has been accomplished by fugation prior to cfDNA extraction. Multiple cfDNA extraction methods were introducing faster Peltier based equipment and using faster chemistry. Here tested. Library construction was optimized for low cfDNA inputs and samp- we report a novel thermal cycler, which can amplify the complete BRCA1 les were analyzed by qPCR and targeted NGS. gene under 10 minutes, reducing the amplification time from 150 minutes Results: Bead and column-based methods produced similar yields (2.5 - 10 to less than 10 minutes. ng/mL) but the bead-based methods were preferred for being faster and not Methods: Amplification is performed in ultra thin wells (<50 micron) in a requiring the addition of carrier molecules. Using this workflow we were 96-well microplate format. The PCR machine consists of three temperature able to detect fetal cfDNA by qPCR, and to successfully sequence libraries zones for denaturation, annealing and extension. Each zone consists of two constructed from 1ng input DNA. opposite heated blocks. When the tray enters a temperature zone, the heat- Conclusions: We have set up a workflow that allows the analysis of limiting ed blocks are brought together, thus squeezing the wells. The reaction mix amounts of cfDNA through NGS, which can be applied to the detection of reaches the desired temperature instantaneously. biomarkers present in cfDNA in samples from multiple biological origins, Results: 29 fragments, covering all the exons of the BRCA1-gene were ampli- including cancer. fied in under 10 minutes, employing 30 cycles over 3 temperatures. Results were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Moreover, a 102 basepair fragment 
P14 .012 was amplified in less than 2 minutes, employing 30 cycles over 3 tempera- Molecular genetic testing and the future of Clinical Genomics tures. A. Nuzzo1, D. Katic1, M. Dulovits1, G. Rosenauer1, P. Miglinci1, M. Uendemir1, S. Pabinger2, E. Heitzer3, C. Bock4, G. Hoermann5, M. Speicher3, A. Kriegner1; Discussion and conclusion: This technology introduces a microplate com- 1Platomics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Health and Environment Department, Molecular patible PCR format, which can perform most PCR’s in less than 10 minutes. Diagnostics, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria, 3Institute of Human It will allow laboratories to change their logistics (a machine is always avail- Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Vienna, Austria, 4CeMM Research Centre for able shortly), increase their throughput or speed up their process. With this Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria, 5Department technology one machine comfortably performs over 40 PCR’s in an 8-hour of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. working day. 312 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Introduction: Deep sequencing technologies significantly affect the way mo- females) age 21 to 80. dern genetic tests are performed. The availability of genome-wide screening Results: Yield from from clinical volume samples was sufficient for sensitive technologies shifted the paradigm from few) gene investigation strategies to analysis with NLA. Variable but generally extensive damage was detected in a multi genes / complete genome analysis. Nevertheless, clinical application cfDNA from various body fluids. cfDNA in plasma ranged from essentially at are often still focused on the analysis of specific target regions. As a result, least 3 kb long fragments only to a substantial fraction comprising apoptosis a new trend is emerging that exploits the genome-scale approach by “se- DNA fragments. quencing everything”, but analyzing only the regions of interest of specific Conclusions: The findings have implications for cfDNA assays. Consistent diagnostic cases (e.g., diseases). As a consequence, sequencing data that is differences in rates of apoptosis in healthy subjects seem unlikely. A more available, but has not been analyzed, will be reused in the future to answer plausible explanation is time-coordinated pulse release of cfDNA fragments different questions over time. Moreover, an increasing need for decision from apoptotic cells. This pulse would have previously gone undetected support in routine diagnostics with multiple applications will be noticed. using protein markers of cell death with half life of hours in plasma instead Methods: Following this trend, Platomics proposes an analogue approach of minutes for cfDNA. to software solutions designed for genetic data analysis. The computational 
P14 .015 approach can be summarized as: one specific software app for each diagno- Detecting EGFR and related mutations in the cfDNA of lung cancer stic use case. This also marks a paradigmatic shift in software development, patients as it is focused on atomic validated reproducible applications rather than M. Tamm1, K. Oselin2, P. A. Kivistik1, K. Keerma1, R. Roosipuu3, M. Saare1, H. Roomere4, A. omni-comprehensive highly configurable solutions. Therefore, each appli- Metspalu1,5, N. Tõnisson1,4; cation needs to be in line with the specific genetic screening requirements, 1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2North Estonia Medical in terms of ethics, benefits for the patient, and effects on health care costs. Centre, Tallinn, Estonia, 3Dept. of Pathology, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, Conclusions: Genetic-test manufacturers will be enabled to bring their new 4Dept. of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Institute of Molecular and products faster to the market and lowering the barrier-to-entry by shorte- Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. ning the time-to-market path. Furthermore, the new Platomics approach will provide a streamlined way to drive the adoption of new genetic tests in routine diagnostics. Introduction: According to WHO, lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Besides invasive tumor biopsy, molecular diagnostic ana- 
P14 .013 lysis of tumor cell-free DNA is becoming increasingly popular as a method Carrier risk estimation using SNP-based measures of relatedness enabling to capture the whole tumour heterogeneity in almost real-time R. Shraga, M. Gold, A. Manoharan, S. Yarnall; setting. This may have applications in both early diagnostics, as well as the- Recombine, New York, NY, United States. rapeutic monitoring of alterations predictive for drug response. Objectives, materials, methods: Our primary objective was to set up a straightforward platform for the analysis of clinically relevant mutations. Background: Our goal was to evaluate localized genetic relatedness in cli- Our study cohort currently comprises of 58 lung adenocarcinoma patients nically-relevant regions. We focused on DNA surrounding genes related to who have donated blood plasma samples prior to initiation of chemo- or Cystic Fibrosis, Sickle-Cell Anemia, and Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome. targeted therapy. The cohort will be longitudinally monitored and repeated Methods: We created three cohorts by selecting carriers of the disorders blood samples collected upon progression. FFPE tumor samples have been and adding randomized control patients (non-carriers) of the same ethni- available for approximately 50% of the study subjects. We have currently set city. To study the relatedness of each group, we selected single nucleotide up allele-specific fragment analysis workflow for EGFR gene common muta- polymorphisms (SNPs) in the region of the genes implicated in each disease. tions and amplicon-based multiplex next-generation sequencing (NGS) in 5 We created genetic similarity matrices for each cohort using six SNP-based lung cancer-related genes (EGFR, BRAF, HER2, KRAS, PIK3CA). measures of relatedness. We compared average relatedness within the case Results: Our preliminary results show that both approaches detect <1% mu- groups, within the control groups, and between the two groups. This led to tant allele content. The methods will be compared in both cfDNA and FFPE development of an initial carrier risk classifier for Cystic Fibrosis mutation analysis, as well as with the available clinical DNA data. DeltaF508, which modifies the k-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) algorithm to use Perspectives: Our further aim is to collect longitudinal samples and perform our SNP-based relatedness measure instead of Euclidean distance. We te- a larger screen of drug susceptibility and resistance mutations in our study sted the performance of our classifier using repeated random sub-sampling cohort, involving detection of point mutations, copy number analyses and cross-validation. DNA methylation changes. We strongly believe that cfDNA analysis will be- Results: Carriers of all 3 disorders appeared more similar to each other than come a clinical routine in various cancers in the near future. to controls. We found that inter-group relatedness between sets of patients that are carriers of different mutations for the same disease varied wide- 
P14 .016 ly. Using the modified KNN classifier, we randomly sub-sampled our cohort A low cost, comprehensive, ctDNA assay based on targeted into training and testing sets, and found 98% of cases get classified as at risk enrichment of rare alleles and error-reduced sequencing compared to 20% of controls. D. Broemeling1, J. Pel1, M. Wiggin1, A. Marziali1,2; Conclusion: These results indicate it may be feasible to classify carrier risk 1Boreal Genomics, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. when direct observation of a mutation is not possible. This may be useful for improving sensitivity where direct testing is difficult or error prone. 
P14 .014 Identification of circulating tumour DNA in a blood sample (liquid biopsy) Variability in apoptosis patterns in cfDNA in body fluids in healthy can be used to detect and genetically profile tumours in a routine and mi- individuals nimally invasive assay. As certain somatic mutations are specifically asso- B. Gudmundsson1,2,3, H. G. Thormar1,3, O. Hammarlund1, J. Lindblad1, M. L. ciated with cancer, liquid biopsy has the potential to be an exceptionally Sigurdardottir1,3, S. Rafnsdottir1,3, A. Sigurdsson1, B. Thorsteinsdottir1,2, J. J. Jonsson1,2; specific and low-risk screening tool that could stage-shift cancer detection 1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Landspitali - National University Hospital of Iceland, Reyjavik, Iceland, 3Lifeind ehf., Reykjavik, Iceland. to earlier, more curable stages. We present two complementary methods to optimize sensitivity over broad gene regions at low cost. We combine a highly selective enrichment tech- nology to screen hotspot mutations at very high sensitivity, with a high ac- Introduction: Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in plasma is used for fetal sexing, NIPT curacy sequencing technology that can scan large regions of the genome at and Rhesus genotyping. cfDNA also holds promise in detecting acquired so- low cost, albeit with reduced sensitivity. Using the commercially available matic changes in cancer. We used a new technique, Northern Lights Assay OnTarget enrichment technology, activating mutations consisting of SNVs (NLA), to further investigate structure of cfDNA in body fluids in healthy and short indels can be preferentially selected for sequencing over wild- subjects. type sequence. This approach enables highly sensitive detection to 0.01%, Materials and Methods: NLA is based on Two-Dimensional Strandness-De- or below, for up to 1,000 unique variants. pendent Electrophoresis (2D-SDE), a technique of nucleic acid separation Broader coverage of regions without hotspot mutations, as well as detec- based on size, standness, and conformation changes induced by damage. tion of copy number variants and translocations, can then be addressed Each specimen is analyzed in sample pairs of non-digested DNA to detect with a novel library construction process for NGS sequencing that increases single- and double-stranded breaks and MboI-digested DNA to detect va- the accuracy of the workflow by an order of magnitude. Named Proximity- rious other lesions. NLA is run in microgel to improve sensitivity. We tested Sequencing (Pro-Seq), the method duplicates sequence information in each NLA on cfDNA isolated with gentle methods from whole blood, plasma, sa- liva, urine sediment and cell-free urinEe SinH hGea l2th0y1 c6on |t rBolAs R(7C mEaLleOs NanAd ,1 
S3  PAoINrig |in Wal WDNWA s.tEraSnHd,G ac.OhieRvGing sensitivity in the 0.1-0.01% range depen3d1in3gABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .019 Application of CNV Sequencing for whole genome copy number on read depth. variant detection over a two year period The addition of Pro-Seq library construction to OnTarget enrichment enab- P. Roberts1, S. V. Hewitt1, A. Coates1, C. M. Watson1,2, L. Crinnion1,2, D. T. Bonthron2; les low cost, high sensitivity, liquid biopsy tests to be developed, enabling 1Leeds Genetics Lab, St James‘s Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2School of Medicine, St commercialization in applications with limited reimbursement, potentially James‘s Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom. including early cancer detection. 
P14 .017 Introduction: Since January 2014 we have applied CNV Sequencing, a next The difficult interpretation of blood mosaicism in routine diagnostic generation sequencing technology, to assess DNA dosage status either to va- specimens: discordant results between conventional cytogenetic/ lidate array CGH findings, or for poor quality/low volume samples that fail FISH and CGH array the QC status for array CGH. A. Plaja, 08035, T. Vendrell, N. Castells, A. Cueto-González, M. Borregan, F. López- Materials and Methods: The technique uses the Illumina HiSeq 2500 Se- Grondona, L. Martínez-Ribot, Q. Ferrer-i-Carbonell, E. Tizzano; Dept. Clinical and Molecular Genetics. H. Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. quencing platform for whole genome copy number variant detection and relies on a custom-designed computational pipeline for copy number vari- ant calling. Ten samples are run in a multiplex, each analysis being based on Introduction: Low-level somatic mosaics can be associated with severe birth 20-25 million single-end 50-nt reads. defects, but reliable detection remains challenging. We describe three cases Results: From 2014-2016, we have sequenced over 220 diagnostic samp- with discordant cytogenetic/FISH and CGH array results in blood samples. les from difference sources, i.e. blood, tissue from products of conception, Material and methods: amniotic fluid, saliva. A successful result was obtained for 206/224 samp- Patient 1: aged 14 years, shows epileptic encephalopathy and a normal les, with an average resolution per patient of 40 kb, and an analytical sen- 46,XY[15] karyotype. sitivity of ~98% for imbalances ≥40 kb. Higher resolution can be achieved Patient 2: aged 32 years, shows Fallot tetralogy and leukopenia. by sequencing the libraries at higher coverage with relatively minimal cost Patient 3: aged 4 years, shows global developmental delay and karyotype implications. result of 46,XY, del(18)(q21.3)[13]/46,XY[17] Conclusions: CNV Sequencing leads to improved success rates on low vo- All patients were studied with array CGH (Agilent, USA, G4827A CGH ISCA lume/poor quality DNA samples, and presents additional advantages over v2, 8x60K) and Cytogenomics CNV detection software (Agilent, USA). Cy- array CGH via its digital approach to evaluating DNA dosage changes. We are togenetic techniques involved G banding and FISH with BACs R
P11 -81j7 presently evaluating the potential for its introduction in prenatal diagnosis (1p36.22) and R
P11 -81h19 (1q24). where suboptimal DNA quality for array CGH is especially problematic. We Results: Patient 1: CGH-array Cytogenomic software (CS) showed a believe that our method is cost effective, reliable and accurate and that it 1q21.1q32.1 mosaic duplication (hg19: 145415190-206794531). A new potentially overcomes the technical challenges of calling dosage changes by chromosomal study revealed a 46,XY,dup(1)(q21q32.1)[4]/46,XY[331] and whole exome sequencing. FISH analysis revealed two nucleus and one metaphase of 300 showing 3 
P14 .020 signals. Detecting copy number variation by limiting dNTP PCR and high- Patient 2: CGH-array CS showed a 1p36.32p36.13 mosaic deletion (hg19: resolution melting 5159991-17753699) and FISH analysis revealed 23 nucleus of 233 showing L. Zhou1, R. Palais2, C. Wittwer1; only one signal. 1Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt lake City, UT, Patient 3: CGH-array CS did not reveal CNVs in chromosome 18. Visual in- United States, 2Department of Mathematics, Utah Valley University, Orem, UT, United spection of CS plots revealed an 18q21.31q22.2 mosaic deletion (54370433- States. 68956470). Conclusions: CGH-array analysis was able to detect mosaic CNVs of 1.2% (1q21dup) and 9.9% (1p36del), but failed to detect the presence of a 43% Introduction: About 13% of genes in the human genome have variation in 18q21.31q22.2 mosaic deletion. copy number. Copy number alterations (CNAs), somatic changes to chromo- CGH-array analyzes DNA from all nucleated blood cells while cytogenetic/ some structure that result in gain or loss in copies of sections of DNA, are FISH on cultured samples analyzes only T-lymphocytes. Our results high- very common in cancer and associated with particular cancer types. light the importance of applying combined molecular and cytogenetic tech- Materials and Methods: Ratios of reference and copy number variants were niques when there is suspicion of mosaic anomalies. maintained by limiting quantities of dNTPs and allowing PCR to plateau. 
P14 .018 (FIS:P
S09 /00632) Suitable fragments having single melting domains, well-separated Tms, and four cases of CNVs identification using an exome sequencing approach no common homologs were designed using uMelt melting curve prediction P. Maietta1, J. Botet1, M. Peña-Vilabelda1, M. Martinez-Garcia1, D. Martínez Fernández- software. MeltWizard 6 software was used to remove background, equalize Mayoralas2, L. Martorell Sampol3, A. Fernandéz-Perrone2, S. Álvarez de Andrés1; negative derivative melting peaks corresponding to the reference segment, 1NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain, 2Universitary hospital Quirónsalud, Madrid, Spain, 3Universitary children‘s hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain. and identify and quantify samples with different CNV ratios from the ampli- tude of their target melting peaks. Results: CNV ratios far beyond this range, as small as 2: 2.125 (5.88%), were Introduction: For the identification of molecular defects in patients with detectable using the most robust, simplest, and highest resolution method suspected genetic disorders, whole exome sequencing (WES) has now ente- of limiting dNTPs at an optimal 3.25 uM. Duplex PCR of reference and a tar- red in medical practice as a diagnostic approach. Unfortunately, it presents get was used to detect copy number variation in SMN1, SMN2, EGFR, chro- some limitations for CNVs detection, principally due to the unbalanced dis- mosome X, Y, 13, 18, and 21. Blinded test of 50 potential trisomic samples tribution of the exons through the different chromosomes. were concordant to karyotyping. In 7 out of 8 of lung cancer, the copy num- Material and Methods: We performed exome sequencing using the Ion Am- ber of EGFR is higher than normal copy 2. pliSeqTM exome technology (Life Technologies) with Ion ProtonTM and Conclusion: The simple closed-tube method is fast, economical, more ac- Ion
S5 -XLTM. Sequencing reads were analysed using Ion ReporterTM Soft- curate and less susceptible to contamination than other methods. Assays ware, where the overall distribution and depth has been normalized against are easy to design, limiting dNTPs is simple, and the results are stable and a baseline generated with data coming from 10 unrelated males. reliable. Results: Here we present 4 cases with phenotypes associated to 4 different 
P14 .021 disorders, such as epilepsy, spastic paraplegia, psychomotor retardation and CoNVaDING: single exon variation detection in targeted NGS data intellectual disability. Using the score generated by the automatic software, F. van Dijk, L. F. Johansson, E. N. de Boer, K. K. van Dijk-Bos, J. D. Jongbloed, A. H. van der in combination with the clinical information, we were able to prioritize de- Hout, H. Westers, R. J. Sinke, M. A. Swertz, B. Sikkema-Raddatz; letions of different sizes ranging from 5kb on PL
P1  gene to 5Mb on the long Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. arm of chromosome 2. These alterations were posteriorly validated using array CGH technology or MLPA. The criteria used for the identification on those cases will be presented. We have developed a tool for detecting single exon copy number variations Conclusions: WES presents different limitations for the detection of CNV, but (CNVs) in targeted next-generation sequencing data: CoNVaDING (Copy for some regions the data can be used to suggest the presence of regions Number Variation Detection In Next-generation sequencing Gene panels). with aberrant copy changes. The systematic evaluation of this information Existing methods consider all control samples equally informative even could help to accelerate the patient‘s diagnosis. though there are sample to sample variations caused by differences in PCR and capturing efficiency. CoNVaDING selects the control samples showing 314 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONaA c, oSvPerAagINe p|a WtteWrn Wm.oEstS HsimGil.aOr RtoG that of the sample analysed. Data isABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index then normalized, using within the sample all autosomal targets or all tar- tations, including 2 large deletions. For 2 patients, compound heterozygous gets within the same gene. Based on the normalized data, for each target for a CFTR mutation and the intron-9 c.1210-34TG[11-12]T5 allele - asso- the ratio of the normalized average read depth of the sample to that of the ciated with decreased CFTR mRNA levels - the molecular diagnosis was im- controls and a distribution analysis using a Z-score are calculated. Based on plemented by measuring the residual level of wild-type transcript by digital the calculated ratio and distributions a prediction is made for each target RT-PCR on RNA extracted from nasal brushing. to determine whether a CNV is present or not, providing additional sample Conclusions: We demonstrated that whole-gene resequencing combined quality metrics during several stages of the analysis. with digital RT-PCR is a cost-effective and accurate approach for the genetic We compared the performance of CoNVaDING with XHMM and CoNIFER in testing of CF and CF-related disorders. 320 samples captured with two different targeted gene-panels containing Funding: This work was supported by the Italian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, in total 308,574 exons. For all CNV calls made by one of the three methods grant FFC#6/2011 and FFC#5/2015. MLPA was performed. CoNVaDING detected all known CNVs in high quality 
P14 .024 targets, giving 100% sensitivity, at a 99.998% specificity. Thereby outper- Compiling a default list for intellectual disability in different forming XHMM and CoNIFER by exhibiting a higher sensitivity and speci- laboratories in the Netherlands. ficity and by precisely identifying low-quality samples and regions. These M. Kriek1, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp2, K. L. I. van Gassen3, M. A. van Slegtenhorst4, A. P. A. improved quality control metrics enable use in both research and clinical Stegmann5, R. P. Pfundt6, T. Dijkhuizen7, M. Alders8, M. M. Weiss9; diagnostics setting. 1Department of Human and Clinical genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
P14 .022 Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Evaluation of CNV detection from targeted next-generation panel Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, sequencing data in routine diagnostics 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht UMC, Maastricht, Netherlands, A. M. Nissen, M. Locher, C. Rapp, A. Laner, A. Benet-Pages, E. Holinski-Feder; 6Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, MGZ Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany. Netherlands, 77. Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, Copy number variation (CNV) detection from exon-capture NGS data is Netherlands. challenging because of non-uniform capture efficiency of targeted exons or short read lengths. Often CNV detection in routine diagnostics is still per- formed by additional techniques (MLPA, microarray) instead of using NGS Using exome sequencing, the coding genetic material (exons) is examined data for both SNV and CNV. We used a bioinformatics pipeline comprised for genetic variants. In accordance with recent guidelines abnormalities will of ExomeDepth, XHMM and in-house methods to detect exonic CNVs using initially be sought in a dedicated list of genes (default list) with a known read depth data derived from a targeted NGS Panel (Illumina TruSight Can- relationship to the patient’s disease (targeted analysis). Our goal was to get cer). Capture efficiency per exon was assessed with a set of CNV negative an insight of what choices were made regarding the content of the list with patients to identify reliable regions. Additionally, genes with pseudogenes, dedicated genes in different laboratories in the Netherlands. A question- paraloges and repeat regions were excluded from the study design. We pre- naire was send out in 2015 to all (n=7) clinical genetic laboratories in the sent a first evaluation with a set of 86 patients previously tested for SNVs Netherlands after one contact person per laboratory had agreed to partici- (NGS) and CNVs (MLPA). 51 patients presented pathogenic SNVs and 35 pa- pate in this study. Six laboratories returned the questionnaire. It contained tients pathogenic CNVs. We confirmed 15 deletions and two duplications 10 questions regarding the selection of genes for the default list of intellec- with high significance. Another nine deletions and two duplications were tual disability. correctly detected with lower confidence, which affected a smaller number The process of compiling the list is dissimilar on a quite a number of items; of exons compared to the high confidence results. In addition, five incon- there were discrepancies in both the experts involved as the sources used spicuous cases showed contradictory results due to SNVs affecting MLPA- between the laboratories. In addition, the level of evidence for causality e.g. probe binding site. In two cases deletion events of one exon could not be selection criteria for genes, differed slightly between laboratories. Points detected. No additional CNVs were found in patients with pathogenic single of internal discussion included the application of genes present in the heel mutations. This proof-of-concept study demonstrates the feasibility of using prick and whether the DMD- and TTN gene should be added to the list. The a single testing strategy to detect simultaneously SNVs and CNVs for clinical agreements included the frequency of updating the list and the willingness diagnosis. However, this method is only applicable for selected genes and of sharing its content. The combined questionnaire resu(lts will help to set consistent workflow conditions. standards to the sele ction process of genes for default lists and may lead to a national agreement on a minimal list of core genes e.g. genes that are covered completely)for intellectual disability. 
P14 .023 Whole-gene CFTR sequencing combined with digital RT-PCR improves 
P14 .025 genetic diagnosis of cystic fibrosis The 100,000 Genomes Project: Improving DNA quality, it’s in our L. Straniero1,2, G. Soldà3,2, L. Costantino4, M. Seia4, P. Melotti5, C. Colombo6, R. Asselta3,2, S. blood Duga3,2; N. Iley1, V. Davison2,3, Z. Deans1, S. Hill2,3; 1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of 1UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2NHS England, London, Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano-Milano, Italy, United Kingdom, 3Health Education England, London, United Kingdom. 3Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Rozzano-Milano, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 5Cystic Fibrosis Center, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata di Verona, Verona, Italy, 6Cystic Fibrosis Center of Milan, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Whole genome sequencing (WGS) requires the input of genomic DNA of Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. sufficient quantity and quality to ensure a high quality sequencing output. To ensure samples submitted into England’s 100,000 Genomes Project are of appropriate quality to enable accurate WGS, NHS England with UK NE- Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common recessive disorder caused by QAS for Molecular Genetics have developed an external quality assessment >1,900 mutations in the CFTR gene. Despite extensive screening, 1-5% of (EQA) scheme for the extraction of high quality genomic DNA from fresh patients lack a definite molecular diagnosis. Here, we propose an efficient, whole-blood samples. All laboratories providing DNA samples for inclusion sensitive, and cost-effective whole-gene NGS protocol applied to the mole- in the project are required to participate in this EQA scheme. cular screening of CF patients. Since December 2014, laboratories have participated in three practical EQA Methods: We designed a custom Nimblegen SeqCap EZ capture kit targeting runs. In each run, three homogenised donor whole-blood samples of varying the entire 189-kb-long CFTR gene and the coding portions of the SCNN1A, volumes were provided and laboratories instructed to extract DNA from the SCNN1B, and SCNN1G genes, encoding the subunits of the sodium channel whole sample and return it to UK NEQAS for analysis. The quality metrics ENaC, reported to be mutated in CF-like patients. Sequencing was perfor- assessed and scored include DNA sample volume, total DNA mass, 260/280 med on an HiSeq2000 platform, multiplexing up to 18 samples in a sequen- ratio, Illumina Delta Cq assay, Library Preparation and Bioanalyser trace cing lane. using the Trusight Cancer Panel and agarose gel electrophoresis. An overall Results: We analyzed 23 CF patients and one carrier: 4 previously-characte- combined score for genomic DNA quality was generated and laboratories rized patients served as controls; 17 were lacking a complete diagnosis after bench-marked against each other. conventional CFTR screening; 3 were not previously genetically screened. Initial results showed a broad range of DNA extraction methodologies and a We obtained a mean depth >1,150X and 98% coverage of the target region. high variation in DNA quality. Continued participation in EQA runs showed Our approach allowed the identificatiEonS oHf G22 2 p0re1vi6o u|s BlyA-kRnoCwEnL COFTNRA m, uS-PAmINar |k eWd WimpWro.vEeSmHenGt .iOn tRheG quality of DNA extracted. 315ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .029 Multiplex TaqMan Assays for Rare Mutation Analysis Using Digital Participation in DNA extraction EQAs highlighted extraction methodologies PCR used for routine molecular genetics applications were not entirely suitable M. Laig, F. Chan, L. Lac, B. Moy, T. Straub, K. Varma, D. Keys; for WGS. Application of quality metrics, inter-laboratory bench-marking and Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States. continued participation allowed laboratories to identify areas of concern promptly and address them efficiently and effectively. Introduction: Detection of rare mutations for research purposes in tumor 
P14 .027 tissue and cell free DNA (cfDNA) allows for monitoring of tumor progression PepPipe and MethPipe: pipelines for discovery and validation of and regression. cfDNA isolated from plasma combined with a sensitive de- DNA-methylation and antibody profiles to improve hereditary tection method like digital PCR is non-invasive and enables earlier detection autoinflammatory disease diagnosis compared to conventional imaging techniques. A. Weinhaeusel, Manuela Hofner, Walter Pulverer, Stephan Pabinger,Regina Soldo, Peter Hettegger, Ram Vinay Pandev, Lisa Milchram, Ronald Kulovics, Silvia Schönthaler, Building on the TaqMan based Rare Mutation assay set for detection of rare Gabriel Beikircher, Christa Noehammer, Klemens Vierlinger; mutations using digital PCR on the QuantStudio 3D Digital PCR System, we AIT, Vienna, Austria. are now developing multiplex assays for simultaneous detection of several mutations. We selected relevant mutations in the EGFR and KRAS genes for our initial multiplex application: EGFR G719, EGFR exon 19 deletions, and Systemic autoinflammatory diseases (SAID) are highly heterogeneous mo- KRAS G12/G13. These mutations may have implications for potential future nogenic or multifactorial conditions secondary to deregulation of mechanis- targeted therapy. ms controlling the innate immune response. Best known examples are the Methods: Primers and probes of singleplex Rare Mutation Assays were re- hereditary periodic fever-syndromes; however molecular analysis is incon- formulated to generate multiplex assays detecting the EGFR and KRAS mu- clusive in 70-80% of “undefined SAID” patients. Thus there is a great need tations. All multiplex assays were tested on template composed of wild-type to improve correct diagnosis. Within the recently started E-Rare-3 project genomic DNA background mixed with mutant plasmid reflecting each of the “INSAID”, the AIT Molecular Diagnostics group will use their analysis pipe- mutations detected by the multiplex assays. lines MethPipe and PepPipe to perform highly paralleled epigenetic and im- Summary: Initial experimental results were successful and showed excel- munomic profiling of Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) as a model. Here lent signal intensity and clear cluster separation when analyzed with the we will present our two pipelines: QuantStudio 3D AnalysisSuite™ Cloud Software. The EGFR G719 muta- PepPipe: Protein-microarrays presenting about 7400 different human pro- tions (COSM6239, COSM6253, COSM6252) were detected using a 3plex teins from 15284 expression clones and high density peptide arrays are assay, EGFR exon 19 deletions (COSM12383, COSM12422, COSM12678, used for highly efficient auto-antibody profiling. For validation we have COSM6223, COSM6254, COSM6255) were detected using a 6plex assay, and established Luminex-assays enabling high-multiplexed targeted analyses of KRAS G12/G13 mutations are underway. antigenic markes. In parallel immune-qPCRs will be performed for 92 in- Conclusion: Multiplexing assays for three relevant mutation loci proved fea- flammation markers from 1µl serum using Proseek® Multiplex assays. sible and presents an efficient way to assess the presence and the percen- MethPipe: Genome-wide methylation screening is performed via Illumina’s tage of mutations. 850k arrays which can be combined with targeted bisulfite sequencing for 
P14 .030 targeted analysis. Highly paralleled marker validation is then carried out Phenotyping Emanuel Syndrome using computer-aided facial via methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme coupled MSRE-qPCR using dysmorphology analysis of 2D photos Fluidigm’s Biomark system, enabling testing up to 96 samples and 96 assays A. B. Hamid Al-Rikabi1, N. Fleischer2, M. Rinholm3, S. St-Pierre3, I. Schreyer1,4, T. Liehr1; in a single qPCR run. 11. Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University, Institute of Human Genetics, The findings of these experiments will be used to characterize undefined Jena, Germany, 2FDNA, Herzliya, Israel, 3Chromosome 22 Central, Fuquay-Varina, NC, SAID on the epigenetic-, immunomics-, and inflammatory- level of molecu- United States, 4Center for Ambulant Medicine, Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. lar disease pathology and to identify new biomarkers to improve correct disease diagnosis. Funding: EraNet ,,E-Rare-3 JTC 2015” project “INSAID”(FWF grant number While sequencing technology and variant interpretation are continuously I 2742-B26) progressing, the critical process of phenotyping and gathering clinical infor- mation has not changed much. Here the facial dysmorphology novel analy- 
P14 .028 sis (FDNA) technology was used to automatically identify facial phenotypes Novel PCA-based normalization technique for inferring exon level associated with Emanuel Syndrome (ES; OMIM 609029) based on 2D facial copy number photos. ES, also denominated supernumerary der(22)t(11;22) syndrome is M. Gold, R. Shraga, S. Yarnall; Recombine, New York, NY, United States. characterized cytogenetically by a small supernumerary marker chromoso- me (sSMC). Clinical signs include severe mental development delay, micro- cephaly and dysmorphic features. Besides heart defects, cleft lip and pala- Background: Most microarray-based CNV-detection algorithms infer copy te, kidney malformations and anal atresia, etc., can complicate the clinical number by comparing a bead’s intensity for a given sample to a control in- problems. Here 65 facial photos of molecularly diagnosed ES patients were tensity (called an r-ratio). We have developed a novel normalization techni- compared to unaffected controls (n=1000) and to a second control group que to improve exon-level CNV-calling and tested it on the DMD gene. (n=1000) of individuals affected with one of 100 other syndromes with fa- Methods: We used the Illumina Infinium Assay with custom content and cial phenotypes. The mean area under the curve (AUC) comparison between designed unique beads to cover the DMD exons and the fifty nucleotides ES and normal individuals (0.99, STD 0.001) expresses an almost full sepa- surrounding each exon. We applied Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to ration between these two cohorts. A slightly lower mean AUC (0.985, STD the r-ratio for 2671 beads with low minor allele frequency outside of the 0.046) was obtained when comparing between ES and individuals affected DMD gene in an attempt to capture intensity variability due only to technical with other syndromes. Our preliminary results show that computer aided noise. Copy number was determined by comparing a sample’s observed r- facial recognition is able to help in the clinic and could possibly reduce the ratio per exon to the r-ratio predicted for that exon by a regularized linear time patients spent in the diagnostic odyssey. Also it may help to differenti- regression model trained on the principal components of the outside beads. ate ES from other patients with sSMC, especially in countries with no access Results: We ran the algorithms on 1715 female research-consented samples, to more sophisticated genetic approaches apart from banding cytogenetics. using a null-call threshold based on the smoothness of the r-ratio values Inclusion of more facial pictures of ES-patient is welcome and may also con- across exons. We observed 733 normal, 976 NC, and 6 CNV calls for the stan- t Pr 1ib 4u .0te 3 t 1o a higher detection rate. dard r-ratio algorithm and 1698 normal, 15 NC, and 2 CNV calls for the novel Detection method for the 3’EPCAM genomic deletion and its algorithm. frequency in Polish HNPCC patients Discussion: We validated the two PCA-normalized CNV calls using an out- P. Borun1, J. Szczepinska1, M. Siolek2, B. Kozak-Klonowska2, A. Plawski1; side lab. Patterns in the four CNV calls made by the un-normalized algorithm 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of Genetics, Holycross indicate false positive calls, but this was not confirmed. This novel technique Cancer Centre, Kielce, Poland. further normalizes r-ratio data by removing non-biological noise and can be used to improve exon-level copy number detection for screening and dia- gnostic microarray assays. Lynch syndrome is a frequent, autosomal, dominantly-inherited cancer pre- disposition caused by various germline alterations that affect DNA mismatch repair genes, mainly MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PM
S2 . Large rearrangements 316 ESHG 2016 | BARCELONoAf ,t hSeP EAPICNA M| W (EWpitWhel.iEalS CHelGl A.OdhReGsion Molecule) gene, which is localizedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .035 Clinical whole-exome sequencing for the diagnosis of rare disorders on chromosome 2 upstream of the MSH2 gene, have been recently described with multiple congenital anomalies: feedback on 400 consecutive as a genetic cause of the Lynch syndrome occurrence. The rearrangements, tests encompassing mainly 3’ end of the EPCAM gene, lead to mismatch repair J. Thevenon1, S. Nambot1, P. Kuentz1, Y. Duffourd1, S. El Chehadeh-Djebbar2, D. Lehalle1, deficiency in some Lynch syndrome families. N. Jean-Marçais1, A. Masurel-Paulet1, P. Callier1, N. Marle1, A. Mosca-Boidron1, C. Poé1, The aim of the study was to develop cost-effective screening tool for the T. Jouan1, M. Chevarin1, N. Gigot1, A. Bruel1, M. Lefebvre1, J. Saint-Onge1, E. Tisserant1, J. rapid detection of 3‘EPCAM genomic rearrangements, along with its vali- Deleuze3, J. Rivière1, L. Faivre1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1; 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Dijon, France, 2Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, dation, and determination of the 3‘EPCAM mutation status in our group of Strasbourg, France, 3Centre national de génotypage, Evry, France. polish HNPCC patients. We applied C-HRM, a method enabling the detection of 3‘EPCAM rearrangements and simultaneously screening for small muta- tion in two exons of the MLH1 gene containing small mutation hot-spots. The World Health Organization estimates the existence of more than 8.000 With the developed assay, in our group of 250 Lynch syndrome probants, we rare disorders. Each of these disorders is individually rare and affect by de- detected 2 cases of 3‘EPCAM genomic rearrangement and 4 small mutations finition less than 5/10.000 individual, but are collectively frequent with 8% within the studied exons of the MLH1 gene. of the overall population affected. The prevalence of most of rare disorders 
P14 .032 cannot even be estimated and are ascertained through several publication An exome routine genetic diagnoses assay or case reports. Most of the rare disorders are suspected to be Mendelian B. Cogne, P. Boisseau, S. Schmitt, S. Kury, X. Latypova, W. Deb, J. Le Gall, M. Nizon, M. diseases with high genetic and clinical heterogeneity. To enhance the dia- Vincent, T. Besnard, S. Mercier, B. Isidor, S. Bezieau; gnostic yield of our generalist consulting genetic center, we have developed CHU Hotel Dieu, Nantes, France. a clinical proband whole-exome sequencing strategy. This study reports on the clinical and molecular characterization of a cohort of 400 consecutive proband with multiple congenital anomalies who have had exome sequen- Background and aims: As shown by the abundance of publications, exome cing. may be a promising technique to discover genes causing diseases. But, could Whole-exome sequencing was performed in collaboration with the Centre exome be an efficient routine strategy to perform genetic diagnoses? We National de Génotypage. Raw data were analysed on the Computing centre wanted to ask this question in current convergence of some difficult pathol- of the University of Burgundy. Overall, the mean depth of coverage was 90x, ogy presentations and an easy access to exome technology. with 93% of coding regions referenced in RefSeq and sequenced by at least Method: We selected 20 patients affected with greatly heterogeneous ge- 10 reads. Actually, 297 results were returned to the clinician with a diagno- netic pathologies without any obvious gene causing disease or previous un- stic yield of 30% for positive results, 15% of non-conclusive successful targeted genes analyses. Exome sequencing was done for each of results, based on current scientific knowledge. In the first 300 individuals, them. We analysed raw data with an in-house bioinformatic pipeline “phe- 2 secondary findings were reported. Twelve months after returning the re- notype guided” designed (it uses HP terms for the pathology description sults, a prospective re-analysis of 130 exomes identified eight additional which fit or not with Human Phenotype Ontology database), the filter used diagnoses (6%). Pro-active international data-sharing through the Match- was 1000g database. This pipeline generated a set of sequence variations ac- Maker exchange initiative allowed the identification of recurrent implicati- cording to possible mode of inheritance and MIM data. Candidate sequence on of several new disease-causing genes. variations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and family segregations. Results: The first results were encouraging: 11 genes were very likely patho- 
P14 .036 genic (55% of the patients) and 4 others were possibly deleterious (20%). A comparative evaluation of two DNA exome library preparation Discussion and conclusions: These first results allow us to continue this as- methods for ion torrent Proton. say to confirm or not these promising test performances. Nevertheless, im- P. Gampawar1, Y. Saba1, M. Bemelmans2, J. Semmler-Bruckner1, H. Schmidt1; 1Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2University of Applied Sciences. Biomedical provements have to be implemented to this strategy to avoid missdetection Sciences, Graz, Austria. of sequence variations, like the use of a SNP local database, a bioinformatic splice testing for silencing SNP and exon-intron junction nucleotides and an analysis of copy number variations. Aims: 
P14 .034 Whole exome sequencing is a cost effective way to detect common and rare MedExome: An optimized whole exome design for identification of variants. While several studies on library prepTaMration methods for Illumina medically relevant genetic variants platforms are available, data for the Ion ProtToMn sequencer are sparse. Here M. Brockman, H. Rosenbaum, L. Lincoln, D. Burgess, T. Richmond, J. Wendt; we compare the performance of AmpliSeq Exome RDY IC and SureSelect Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, United States. Human All Exon V6 library preparation kits. Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from 4 human blood samples. In total 100 ng Introduction: Whole exome sequencing provides a comprehensive view of of DNA was used for AmpliSeq and 1µg for SureSelect libraries. Template protein coding regions, but the typical depth of sequencing can result in preparation aTnMd loading of the chip was done on Ion Chef Instrument. The regions of low or missing coverage throughout the exome. Mitochondrial Ion Reporter software was used for data analyses. Validation of variants variant calling is also of increasing interest but has been difficult to com- against microarray data (Affymetrix Human_SNPArray6.0 and Illumina Hu- bine with exome enrichment. Here we present performance of MedExome, manExome_v1.1) is in progress. an optimized whole exome sequencing design with the option for including Results: mitochondrial target enrichment in a streamlined workflow. Materials and Methods: 100ng of DNA from samples of varying populations Parameters AmpliSeq SureSelect (Coriell Institute; BioServe) was used in library prep from Kapa BioSystems. DNA input 100ng 1µg Sequence capture with multiple iterations of Roche NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Library preparation 6 hour 2.5 days MedExome with overnight hybridization was used to gather empirical data time Reference BED file AmpliSeqExome V6-BED_Test.4 and optimize capture design performance. Sequencing at 2x101bp was per- .20141113 (60.5Mb) (58.72Mb) formed on Illumina HiSeq 2500 instruments. Total bases 7.2Gb 4.4Gb Results: We used empirical data at multiple stages of development to opti- sequenced/sample mize performance resulting in high uniformity (fold 80 base penalty 1.90- Number of reads/ 40278595 40164626 2.03) and an average of 95.7% of bases with 20X coverage or higher given sample Mean Read length 179bp 130bp 6Gb of raw sequencing. We developed a companion protocol for optional Reads on target >95% >80% enrichment of the mitochondrial genome without sacrificing whole exome Mean coverage 130X 55X Number of variants/ 37694.5 45840.25 coverage. sample Conclusions: We have developed MedExome, a new whole exome sequen- cing design with application for the identification of known and novel me- Conclusion: dically relevant variants with the option of combining mitochondrial and Both methods showed high level of target enrichment and covered large whole exome sequencing. part of targeted region. AmpliSeq needed lower input DNA and shorter li- For Life Science Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures. brary preparation times. It also showed longer read length and higher mean This study was supported by Roche NimbleGen, a part of Roche Sequencing. coverage. SureSelect identified more variants. Validation of variants against All authors are employees of Roche NimbleGen. GWAs and exome chip data is important to identify false positive and nega- ESHG 2016 | BARCELONA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 317 tive calls.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .037 Validation of a ten-gene panel for improved diagnosis of familial MDS/AML ons, particularly in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), an unbiased tool G. Ryan1, P. Page1, S. Akiki1, S. R. C. Cardoso2, T. Vulliamy2, I. Dokal2, J. Fitzgibbon2, Y. to make a diagnosis can be extremely useful. Wallis1; Several hurdles, such as proven soundness and cost-efficacy, need to be ta- 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, ken before a test can be implemented in a routine clinical setting. To our Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of opinion the long turnaround time for WES has been the major barrier. The Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary, University of London, London, United Kingdom. full standard WES procedure sometimes takes over six months in diagnostic labs. We managed to reduce the waiting period from several months to one week through developing a protocol that combines Agilent’s SureSelectXT Cases of familial Myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS)/Acute Myeloid Leuka- workflow with rapid Illumina NextSeq sequencing. The sequencing work- emia (AML) are rare, although the true prevalence is likely to be underesti- flow is seamlessly integrated with our bio-informatics pipeline and in-house mated. The clinical utility of genetic testing is extensive as it aids progno- analysis software, enabling delivery of WES reports based on high quality stication, patient management and identifying at-risk relatives. At least ten exome data within two weeks. We will present our workflow, as well as ex- genes are linked to familial MDS/AML, involved in transcription regulation, amples underscoring the utility of fast-WES for physicians and parents in telomere maintenance and splicing. Our laboratory currently offers Sanger the context of NICU. We believe that fast-WES opens many new possibilities sequencing for RUNX1 for familial platelet disorder with propensity to AML, for the introduction of WES in routine clinical practice. and familial AML with mutated CEBPA. As part of a collaborative LLR fun- ded project with the Barts Cancer Institute to improve testing, diagnosis and 
P14 .041 management of these patients, we have designed and validated a ten-gene Improving access to genetic diagnostic tests familial MDS/AML NGS panel. The panel was designed using Agilent Sure- S. Abbs1, R. Stojnic2, I. Johnson1, J. Aleksic2; 1East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Design software and samples enriched using Agilent SureSelect QXT che- Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2GeneAdviser, Cambridge, United Kingdom. mistry. Libraries were sequenced using the MiSeq and data analysed using Agilent SureCall software. There was >99% coverage for each gene with at least 100x read depth over two runs for each target region. We have detec- The Regional Genetics Laboratory at Cambridge University Hospitals, UK, ted known variants in all ten genes, as well as two novel likely pathogenic has partnered with GeneAdviser to develop an online platform to streamli- mutations in the DDX41 gene, a newly associated familial MDS/AML gene. ne searching, ordering, and paying for clinical exome sequencing and other This panel will subsequently be utilised for characterisation of both retro- genetic tests. spective and prospective cases from Barts and will be available as a new UK Tests can be searched for by gene, by disease, or by test, at www.genead- wide and international service for suspected familial MDS/AML patients to viser.com. The methodology, sequencing coverage by gene, cost, reporting increase diagnoses and aid improved patient management. 
P14 .038 time, and the Laboratory’s experience with each test are displayed. A “re- Clinical utility of MEFV gene analysis in patients with a clinical lated tests” feature is useful to help clinicians identify additional gene se- suspicion of Familial Mediterranean Fever quencing panels that may be appropriate for patients with heterogeneous V. Procopio, I. Loddo, A. Romeo, G. Bianco, C. Liuzzo, G. Conti, L. Rigoli, C. Salpietro; phenotypes, searching over 250 gene panels and almost 5000 genes avai- UOC Genetics and Pediatric Immunology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy. lable via our GEMINI clinical exome sequencing. Through an API interface, whenever new tests are added to the Laboratory’s database they are almost instantly visible online, ensuring that clinicians have access to tests as soon Introduction: Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an auto-inflammatory as they are available. disease characterized by brief recurrent episodes of fever and serositis that Electronic ordering of tests through the GeneAdviser secure platform will result in abdominal, chest, joint and muscular pain. allow seamless integration with the testing Laboratory’s LIMS, improving Materials and methods efficiency in the laboratory and reducing the likelihood of transcription We tested 31 patients and their family members by Reverse Dot Blot ana- errors. All invoicing and payment for tests are handled centrally through lysis. GeneAdviser, meaning that the Laboratory only has to arrange a single peri- Results: All patients with FMF showed both homozygous or heterozygous odic invoice and payment for all transactions, avoiding numerous financial MEFV mutations. Analysis performed on family members allowed us to transactions and transmissions of supporting documentation with individu- identify 36 individuals with heterozygous MEFV mutations. Only 53.8% of al clinicians and institutions. them presented some clinical manifestations attributable to a mild FMF. By making it easier for clinicians to find and order genetic diagnostic tests Conclusions: Mutations identified by Reverse Dot Blot analysis covered for their patients, and by improving efficiency in the laboratory, this plat- about 90% of the mutations, as well as that identified by Sanger sequencing. form will help more patients gain access to the most appropriate and latest According to the literature, a significant subset of person with FMF (25%) tests available. have a heterozygous MEFV pathogenic variant, then the sequencing detec- 
P14 .042 tion rate of cases not diagnosable by Reverse Dot Blot drops to 67.5%. GOSHG2P: web-app and database for diagnostic clinical exome The reason may be due to: analysis 1) Mutation in another gene; R. M. Nyanhete, C. Boustred, T. Cullup, L. Jenkins; 2) Overlapping manifestations with other autoinflammatory diseases that North East Thames Regional Genetics Laboratory, London, United Kingdom. make difficult differential diagnosis. In literature, rare mutations in other genes have been reported in patients carrying only a heterozygous mutation in MEFV gene. Next- generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have enabled diagnostic In heterozygous patients, we consider most useful to perform a six-month genetic laboratories to move from single gene tests to targeted gene panels trial of colchicine therapy to confirm the diagnosis of FMF and, if no benefit, and clinical exomes. The result has been a rapid increase in the number of to analyse other genes responsible for autoinflammatory disease in diffe- genetic variants identified. Legacy approaches to storing and interpreting rential diagnosis with FMF. variants are not scalable and have traditionally used different systems to We propose a flow chart for genetic testing in FMF, which has an inheritance store variants. To address this problem we have developed a database and not well clarified. web application for variant storage and interpretation. 
P14 .039 Great Ormond Street Hospital Genotype to Phenotype (GOSHG2P) is an Enabling exome sequencing in non-genetic clinical practice: fast-WES application that provides clinical scientists with an interface for variant in- as a routine diagnostic test terpretation. All variants identified through our NinG Ss iplicipoeline are stored in C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, A. C. J. Gijsbers1, A. H. B. Bollen1, J. K. Vis1, I. F. A. C. Fokkema1, A. a standard format, with annotations of all refseq transcripts consisting of van Haeringen1, N. den Hollander1, L. Hoefsloot1,2, C. van Asperen1, M. J. V. Hoffer1, G. W. conservation, variation database frequencies and tools for pathoge- E. Santen1; nicity prediction. Variant frequencies across sequencing runs are calculated 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, based on virtual gene panels tested. Virtual gene panels can be created and Netherlands. curated within the application. Run quality metrics and a database of PCR primers for variant confirmation are available. GOSHG2P has the capacity to store patient phenotypes, which will aid the interpretation of sequence Although whole exome sequencing (WES) is increasingly applied in clinical variants. genetics, it is mostly used to replace the gene-by-gene sequencing paradigm GOSHG2P enables clinical scientists to analyse virtual gene panels on our that we were used to. However, several studies have shown that the possible clinical exome that are relevant to the phenotype of a patient or reason for a 3p 1pl 8ications of WES stretch beyond clinical genEetSicHs:G in 2ot0h1er6 c l|in BicAalR siCtuEaLtiO- N rA ef, S rrP aA wIN | uW tW heW di. sE coS vH erG . oO iR ncG e l ith o t y f idental findings. Standardisation of va-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index riant storage enables variants and their interpretation to be exported using PI11/01609, PI13/00285, PI14/00577, ISCIIIRTICC RD12/0036/0008; and VCF format. This provides a good platform for variant sharing with other Generalitat de Catalunya 2009SGR290 clinical laboratories and the wider genetics community for better research 
P14 .045 into rare disorders. OncoVirSeq: Targeted sequencing of viral integration in human 
P14 .043 tumours Comparing Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Fluorescence In Situ S. Leonard1, A. Skowronska2, N. Dyer3, S. Ott3, S. Clokie2, C. Woodman1, C. Tan2, A. Rettino2, Hybridization (FISH) assays in two different invasive breast cancer M. Griffiths2; 1Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences,College of Medical and Dental Sciences, cohorts using 2007 and 2013 American Society of Clinical Oncology/ University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2West Midlands Regional College of American Pathologists (ASCO/CAP) Human Epidermal Genetics Laboratories, Birmingham Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) gene testing guidelines United Kingdom, 3Warwick Systems Biology Centre, University of Warwick, Coventry, T. H. Lim, A. S. T. Lim, Y. Y. S. Yeap, J. K. K. Ho, K. C. H. What, S. L. Tien, P. H. Tan; United Kingdom. Pathology Department, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. High risk human papillomaviruses (HR-HPV) are associated with nearly Introduction: HER2 amplification in breast carcinomas is used as a predic- 100% of cervical cancers, as well as with vulval, anal, penile and oropha- tive marker for trastuzumab treatment. IHC and FISH testing ryngeal cancers. Integration of HR-HPV into the human genome is an early algorithms have been based on 2007 ASCO/CAP guidelines with new scor- event following HPV infection in vivo, however whether integration of the ing criteria updated in 2013. This study assessed the impact of the new virus is capable of driving tumorigenesis remains unclear. guidelines on HER2 testing. To understand the relationship between HR-HPV integration and tumori- Materials and Methods: Retrospective review of 590 invasive genesis, we have developed OncoVirSeq, a highly sensitive sequencing ap- carcinomas with concurrent IHC and FISH results based on 2007 ASCO/CAP proach and analysis pipeline, which specifically identifies viral-human inte- guidelines was performed from July 2011-June 2013. Ratio of HER2 FISH to grant boundaries. We have used Next Generation Sequencing coupled with centromeric 17 signals of <1.8 was negative, 1.8 to 2.2 equivocal, and >2.2 sonication and a hybridization-based enrichment method. amplified. Another subset of 486 carcinomas from January 2014-August To date, we have successfully used this methodology to confirm the alrea- 2015 was evaluated using the updated guidelines, which defined negative dy known HPV integration sites in the HPV positive cell lines SiHa, HeLa as ratio <2.0 with average <4.0 HER2 copies, ratio <2.0 with ≥4.0 to <6.0 and Caski. Furthermore, using a longitudinal model of replication, we have HER2 copies equivocal, ratio ≥2.0 or ratio <2.0 with ≥6.0 HER2 copies am- identified both the early and late integration events which follow transfec- plified. IHC 3+ was revised from uniform intense membrane staining >30% tion of primary keratinocytes with episomal forms of HPV 16 and 18. From invasive tumour cells to >10%. Concordance rates between the assays were this analysis, we have mapped the most common breakpoints in both HPV compared in both sets of data. 16 and 18, as well as those in the human genome. We have also identified Results: Overall concordance rate for FISH and IHC was increased from those integration sites which may be important in driving clonal expansion. 94.9% to 95.5% with 2013 classifications. Positive IHC concordance in- Importantly, we show that some of these HPV integration sites are the same creased from 93.1% to 100% but negative IHC concordance declined as those found in HPV associated tumours. We are currently developing this from 95.8% to 93.8%. Negative FISH cases decreased from 79.2% to 63.8% technology for its use with HPV positive tumours, as we believe it will be a while FISH positive cases significantly increased from 20.2% to 34.4%. useful tool for identifying those viral integration sites important for tumour Equivocal cases also increased from 0.68% to 1.85%. initiation and progression. Conclusions: Improvement in overall concordance rate and This study was supported by Wellcome Trust. positive IHC concordance with updated 2013 ASCO/CAP criteria were ob- served with more patients being classified as HER2 positive. 
P14 .046 Massively parallel next generation sequencing to investigate the cis- 
P14 .044 acting genetic modifiers of instability in Huntington disease Comprehensive genetic testing for hereditary cancer with I2HCP: A. M. Alshammari1, M. Ciosi1, S. Cumming1, G. Hamilton2, K. Nasser1, A. Maxwell1, D. G. Monckton1, The US-Venezuela Collaborative Research Project; custom design to preserve understanding and control over the whole 1Institute of Molecular, cell and system biology,University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United diagnostics workflow Kingdom, 2Glasgow Polyomics, Research Institute of Molecular, Cell & Systems Biology, E. Castellanos1, B. Gel1, I. Rosas1, E. Tornero2, S. Santín1, L. Sumoy1, M. Perucho1, I. University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. Blanco3, M. Pineda2, L. Feliubadaló2, J. Brunet2, G. Capellá2, C. Lázaro2, E. Serra1; 1Institute of Predictive and Personalized Medicine of Cancer (IMPPC), Badalona (Barcelona), Spain, 2Catalan Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain, 3Germans Trias i Pujol Hospital, Badalona (Barcelona), Spain. Introduction: Huntington disease (HD) is anH eTxTtremely variable inherited neurodegenerative disorder caused by an unstable expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat in the huntingtin gene ( ). The traditional method Introduction: We wanted to implement an NGS-based strategy to analyze of diagnosis is limited due to the assumption that the length of the fragment 122 hereditary cancer genes with diagnostics quality. The challenge was to is equal to the repeat number. This may not always be true because there is retain in the diagnostics lab the same understanding and control over all a variable CCG repeat downstream of the CAGs and also atypical intervening workflow steps reached by pre-NGS strategies. sequences. Moreover, the traditional approaches cannot measure somatic Materials and Methods: We developed the I2HCP panel, a custom bait li- mosaicism of the expanded CAG repeat, or detect variants within or flanking brary improved by bait behavior monitoring. We customized sample prepa- the repeats. We have used Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) to quantify ration, tested different NGS platforms and created a clinically-driven custom germline and somatic variants in the HD allele. data analysis pipeline. Materials and Methods: The HD CAG and CCG repeats were amplified from Results: Training (n=24) and validation (n=40) sets focused on hereditary genomic DNA using locus specific primers combined with barcoded Illumi- colorectal cancer, hereditary breast and ovarian cancer and Neurofibroma- na adapters. The PCR products were sequenced using the MiSeq platform tosis, for which tested gene sets were established by a multidisciplinary and genotyped by alignment of reads against custom reference sequences. team based on clinical utility. Yield and QC parameters reached diagnostics Results and Discussion: We used the MiSeq platform to sequence and ge- quality and were maintained after the first 150 samples tested in the routine notype HD alleles and the adjacent CCG repeats from more than 490 DNA diagnostics. I2HCP strategy achieved an accuracy, analytical sensitivity and samples from both HD patients and unaffected individuals. Our data have specificity greater than 99%, matching Eurogentest recommendations. We revealed three atypical allele structures represented in 56 alleles. However, provide examples of how the new workflow improved diagnostic sensitivity, it must be noted that no atypical haplotypes were detected in intermediate solved uncertain clinical diagnoses and allowed the identification of muta- or expanded alleles. We observed the degree of somatic mosaicism for pa- tions in candidate cancer predisposition genes. tients with HD is correlated with CAG repeat size and age at sampling. NGS Conclusions: We developed, validated and implemented and NGS-based is promising diagnostic tool for genotyping HD and potentially replacing diagnostics strategy for hereditary cancer preserving understanding and existing methods. control over the whole process. A global analysis of hereditary cancer genes revealed a complex variation landscape cohabiting with the disease-causing mutation. Work supported by IMPPC; Asociación Española Contra el Cáncer (AECC); Instituto de Salud Carlos III organismoE aSdHscGrit o2 a0l1 M6in |i sBteAriRo dCeE ELcOonNomAí,a Sy PAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG 319 Competitividad and Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) grantsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .047 Study of in-silico predictors to assess the pathogenicity of variants in clinical diagnosis genes. A. del Pozo1,2, K. Ibañez1, J. Silla-Castro1, E. Vallespín3,2, P. Lapunzina4,2; Results: At first, no obvious causative variants were found. However, a ho- 1Bioinformatics Section. Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Madrid, mozygote variant in LEPR
E1  caught our attention. It had a high allele fre- Spain, 2Centro de Investigaciones Biomedicas en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), quency in ESP (92.44%), but no entries in 1000G nor ExAC. Because of the Madrid, Spain, 3Structural and Functional Genomics Section. Institute of Medical and big difference in allele frequencies, ESP was contacted. They confirmed the Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Madrid, Spain, 4Institute of Medical and Molecular allele frequency, but regarded it as a sequencing artifact. The variant was a Genetics (INGEMM), Madrid, Spain. frameshift deletion in the last exon of LEPR
E1  and had not been detected in our lab previously. The variant passed all quality criteria and was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) allows full and simulta- LEPR
E1  encodes prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1 (
P3 H1) which belongs to a family neous study of all mutations present in a set of genes. This advantageous of collagen prolyl hydroxylases required for proper collagen biosynthesis, feature becomes a difficult issue if it is unable to select those variants that folding, and assembly. The variant changes the reading frame for the last may be causally associated with the phenotype under study. 18 amino acids and elongates the protein by 10 amino acids. This region As first-phase of variant filtering, it is usually carried out the analysis of the harbors a KDEL sequence which retains 
P3 H1 in the endoplasmic reticulum. deleterious effect of the variants based on phylogenetic conservation, allele 
P3 H1 will probably not be able to retain its function when this sequence is frequency and in-silico predictions. However, the extensive use of predic- altered, tion tools should be accompanied of criteria that allow for general and good Conclusion: This sequence variant is the probable cause of OI in this patient. practice recommendations to interpret the numerical results in context of Caution must be taken when filtering sequence variants where there is big clinical suspicion of the patient. discrepancy between reported allele frequencies. Results: In this study we have performed a comparative analysis of a suite of prediction tools aiming to: 
P14 .050 a) establish a unified criteria that enables the assignment of cutoffs to each A network-based computational approach for the diagnosis and program and their labelling into some predefined functional categories b) novel gene identification of leukodystrophies and hereditary spastic based on these values, assess their predictive value using a benchmark set paraplegias of variants c) finally, discuss the more suitable strategy of use of in-silico A. Schlüter1,2, M. Ruiz1,2, A. Rodríguez-Palmero3, J. Martínez1,2, C. Redin4, J. Mandel4,5,6, A. prediction programs in terms of the pattern of of inheritance of the disease Macaya7, A. López de Munain8,9,10, C. Casasnovas1,11, A. Pujol1,2,12; 1Neurometabolic Diseases Laboratory, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute or the haploinsufficiency status of the gene under study. (IDIBELL), Hospitalet del Llobregat, Spain, 2Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Materials and Methods: It had selected a set of 11 prediction tools and it Diseases (CIBERER), Isciii, Spain, 3Department of Pediatrics. Hospital Universitari had obtained prediction values in a benchmark set of more than 20,000 Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain, 4Département de Médecine translationnelle variants (missense, nonsense, splicing, small insertions and deletions) ex- et Neurogénétique, IGBMC, CNRS UMR 7104/INSERM U964/Université de Strasbourg, tracted from literature, a filtered version of humpvar from SWISS-PROT and Illkirch, France, 56Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de in-house set of mutations. Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 6Chaire de Génétique Humaine, Collège de France, Grant ref: PI13/1450FIS Illkirch, France, 7Pediatric Neurology Research Group, Vall d’Hebron Research Institute, 
P14 .048 Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 8Hospital Universitario Donostia, Variants effecting inflammatory expression profiles identified by a Neurology Department, San Sebastian, Spain, 9University of the Basque Country (UPV- EHU), Department of Neuroscience, San Sebastian, Spain, 10CIBERNED: Parque científico novel biological pathway approach de Madrid. C/ Faraday 7 -28049, Madrid, Spain, 11Neuromuscular Unit, Neurology R. Attard, K. Cassar, R. Farrugia, S. Bezzina Wettinger; Department, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Hospitalet del Llobregat, Spain, University of Malta, Msida, Malta. 12Catalan Institution of Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. Introduction: The genes involved in the generation of an inflammatory im- Leukodystrophies and Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are neurode- mune response are many. Approaches used to date have not yet unveiled the generative diseases manifesting frequently with similar clinical pictures, variants responsible for the generation of different inflammatory expressi- i.e. chronic progressive spasticity, due to common underlying causes and on profiles. physiopathological mechanisms. Although the genetic basis is partly under- Methods: In this family-based candidate gene approach, families were selec- stood, only a small fraction of cases receives a definitive genetic diagnosis ted from the extreme ends of the phenotype distribution of inflammatory using targeted approaches nowadays. Whole exome sequencing (WES) may expression profiles, as assessed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe am- improve diagnostic yield and identify novel causative genes. To analyze the plification assays on whole blood. Exome sequencing of inflammation-rela- derived data, we have developed a global, network-based computational ted genes was carried out on an Illumina HiSeq4000. SNPs and indels were method designed to prioritize disease genes based on the observation that compared between families with low and high expression profiles. Variants genes causing similar diseases tend to lie close to one another in a network in genes coding for proteins which physically interact, carry out similar/ of protein-protein interactions. This information is integrated with a pheno- overlapping functions and which participate in the same biological pathway typic disease metric based on Human Phenotype Ontologies (HPO), to score were analysed per family. the strength-of-association of proteins with leukodystrophy and HSP phe- Results: Patterns of TLR and inflammatory expression profiles tended to be notypes. Our diagnostic yield from 41 cases analyzed by WES is as follows: i) similar in members of the same family. First-degree relatives share a consi- Positive diagnosis in 17 cases (pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants); ii) derable number of variants in inflammation-related genes, while very few Possible diagnosis in seven cases with variants of unknown significance, of differences were observed between families with low and high inflammato- which four are non-previously related to HSP or leukodystrophies; iii) Three ry expression profiles. While an accumulation of variants were identified in novel candidate genes; iv) 14 Inconclusive cases. Our analysis links HSP and some TLRs, IRAK and MAPK genes, fewer or no variants were observed in leukodystrophy to other neurodegenerative disorders and may facilitate molecules having a more critical role in the TLR signaling pathway including gene discovery and mechanistic understanding of white matter and cortical MyD88, and transcription factors. motor neuron diseases. Conclusions: The similar pattern of inflammatory expression profiles in fa- This study was supported by the ISCiii and ‘Fondo Europeo de Desarrol- milies is possibly due to the presence of inherited factors. Genetic variation lo Regional (FEDER), Unión Europea, una manera de hacer Europa’ (FIS influences the fine-tuning of the inflammatory response, where the overall PI14/00581), ‘La Marató de TV3’ Foundation (20140830-FMTV3), and CI- effect on a pathway is an accumulation of the effects of the variants within BER on Rare Diseases (CIBERER/ER14
P2 A
C759 ). that pathway. 
P14 .051 
P14 .049 Diagnostic workup, outcome and cost for patients with suspected A “sequencing artifact” in LEPR
E1  causes osteogenesis imperfecta Lynch syndrome K. Tveten1, Ø. L. Holla1, E. Bryne2, Ø. L. Busk1; S. Gebre-Medhin, K. Henriksson, H. Ehrencrona, I. M. Holm; 1Telemark Hospital Trust, Skien, Norway, 2Vestfold Hospital Trust, Tønsberg, Norway. Department of clinical genetics, Lund, Sweden. Introduction: A child with clinical osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) was referred Background and aim: We have performed a retrospective analysis of the fa- to genetic testing. Recessive inheritance was presumed. Previous genetic te- mily history of cancer, laboratory results and costs for 372 probands with sting of CO
L1 A1 and CO
L1 A2 was negative. suspected Lynch syndrome (LS), the most common known hereditary CRC Materials and Methods 
E3 x2om0e sequencing was performed and variantE s S wH erG e c 2 al0 le1 d 6 in | a B ll kA nR owC nE OLO I NcAo,n dSiPtiAonI.N T h|e W cluWstWer .oEf SafHfeGcte.Od fRirGst degree relatives (CFDR) with the lar- gest number of LS-associated cancers was identified in each proband’s pe-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index digree. Lowest age at cancer diagnosis (LAD) in each CFDR, including also pressed between gradient purification and swimv-su.p sperm isolation. Regar- any affected second degree relatives, was determined. Results: 368 patients ding the rRNA depletion step, RiboGone provided better cytoplasmic rRNA were investigated with DNA mismatch repair (MMR) functional analyses of removal efficienvcsy. than Ribo-Zero Gold (0.48% 13.1% reads mapping to which 92 patients (25 %) were considered to have an MMR deficient tumor. rRNA), resulting in higher percentage of reads mapping to protein-coding Compared to CFDRs with normal MMR function, CFDRs with MMR defici- genes (75.53% 61.1%). ency had significantly larger numbers of LS tumors as well as lower LAD. Conclusions: The application of an optimized low input RNA-seq procedure A total of 114 patients were subjected to MMR gene mutation screening of to sperm-RNA comparative studies may contribute to a better understan- which 92 had an MMR deficient tumor, 10 had a MMR proficient tumor, the ding of the molecular mechanisms underlying male infertility. remaining 12 having unknown MMR function. Among mutation screened Supported by FIS/FEDER (PI12/00361) patients, 48 (42 %; i.e. 13 % of the entire cohort) had an LS-associated 
P14 .054 mutation. Mutations were found in MSH2 (46 %), followed by MLH1 (31 The role of massively parallel sequencing in the molecular diagnostics %), MSH6 (21 %) and PM
S2  (2 %). Total laboratory costs were 248 482 €. of repeat expansion disorders Conclusion: Our data indicate that, in selected patients, the application of a J. Radvanszky1,2, J. Budis3, F. Duris2, J. Gazdarica4, M. Gabriel4,2, L. Kadasi1,4, T. Szemes4,2; multigene panel covering all major hereditary CRC syndromes as a first line 1Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Centre, investigation would probably be a more rapid and cost effective strategy to Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Computer identify individuals in benefit of targeted cancer surveillance and treatment. Science, Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, 
P14 .052 Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. Characterizing male idiopathic infertile phenotypes based on a panel of 228 genes using Targeted Next Generation Sequencing R. Cocoş1,2, F. Raicu1,3; Introduction: In repeat-expansion disorders (REDs) both normal, as well as 1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2Genome Life Research Center, Bucharest, Romania, 3Francisc I. Rainer Anthropological Research permutation and mutation range repeat numbers are highly variable, posing Institute, Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania. a challenge for molecular diagnostics. In the majority of REDs there is still no single method that would allow identification and sizing of the entire allele range. Therefore, at least two complementing methods are generally Innumerable combinations of genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors required, while sequencing has no special place among them. Using myoto- could explain the causes of male infertility. Recent studies have shown that nic dystrophy (DM) as a model, we developed an STR genotyping algorithm mutations or polymorphisms in new candidate genes are responsible for the that allows massively parallel sequencing (MPS) to be applied, as a first tier majority of idiopathic forms of spermatogenic failure. test, for the exclusion of the presence of REDs associated expansions. Given the recent evolution in the development of Next Generation Sequen- Materials and methods: Following a custom HaloPlex based enrichment, se- cing techniques and the growing number of known and candidate genes quencing was performed on Ion Torrent PGM. Repeat number estimations we designed and developed a targeted sequencing protocol onto Ion Tor- from FASTQ data were performed as follows: motif filtering, annotation of rent PGM platform that captures the exons of 228 genes AmpliSeq panel to the remaining reads with profile Hidden Markov model and final clustering further increase our knowledge on the molecular base of male infertility. the annotated reads into groups corresponding to individual alleles. In our pilot study we tested this panel on DNA samples of 15 out of 100 pati- Results: As second generation sequencing (SGS) has standard amplification ents with idiopathic infertility that presented no Y chromosome microdele- derived limitations, expanded alleles remained un-amplified and un-detec- tions. All samples had 97.85% average of target regions with coverage by at ted, making SGS-based testing un-useful for REDs diagnosis confirmation. least 30 folds. Data were analyzed using a bioinformatics in house pipeline Assessed genotypes of healthy-range alleles were, however, highly concor- based on GATK, Picard and Annovar software for reading alignments, vari- dant with those generated by conventional methods, suggesting that even ant calling, filtering and annotation. SGS allows diagnosis exclusion if two healthy-range alleles are identified. Up to date, all analysed patients had a total of 48 possible causative variants Conclusions: If reliable STR genotyping/annotation tools are exploited in in 37 different genes, excluding common polymorphisms, but increasing the the sequence variant annotation process, inclusion of disease-associated re- number of samples we probably be able to detect more associated variants peat regions into targeted sequencing panels may, at least partially, extend or mutations. the possibilities of MPS based diagnostics into the field of microsatellite ex- Our approach provide a robust and sensitive method to detect novel gene- pansion disorders (financial support: VEGA_2/0115/15). tic variants and can represent a powerful method for investigating affected 
P14 .055 male in order to discover new key molecules that could represent in the Next generation sequencing for the identification of mutations in MDS future the target for personalized drug or gene therapy. This work was sup- patients - A comparison between peripheral blood, CD34+ blood cells ported by the CNCS-UEFISCDI grant PN-II-RU-TE-2014-4-0527. an bone marrow aspirate 
P14 .053 R. Martin, C. Ganster, D. Haase; University Medical Center Göttingen, Clinics of Haematology and Medical Oncology, RNA sequencing analysis of human sperm samples Goettingen, Germany. L. Ramos1, S. Santin1, G. Rech1, L. Bassas2, A. Mata2, L. Sumoy1, S. Larriba3; 1IMPPC, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain, 3IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are clonal stem cell diseases of the bone marrow (BM). Acquired somatic mutations account for MDS formation and Introduction: Spermatozoa contain, besides the haploid genetic material, constitute important markers for diagnosis in up to 90% of MDS cases. Cur- functionally viable transcripts that are delivered into the oocyte during rently BM aspirates are used for molecular genetic analysis of MDS patients. fertilization. The sperm gene expression profile could reflect the fertilizing The aim of this study was to investigate if the high sensitivity of next genera- potential of spermatozoa. However, the assessment of human sperm-RNAs, tion sequencing (NGS) allows reliable genetic diagnostics using peripheral generally characterized by low quantity and high fragmentation, is complex. blood (PB). We aimed to develop a strategy to characterize the human sperm-RNAs by Six patients (3xRCMD , 3xRAEB-2) were included in our pilot study. For RNA-seq technology. all patients genomic DNA was extracted from mononuclear bone marrow Materials and Methods: Two different methods were used to isolate sperma- (BMMC), peripheral blood (PBMC) and immunomagnetically enriched tozoa from semen (discontinuous density-based centrifugation andswim- CD34+ peripheral blood cells (CD34+). Sequencing was performed using up) and three different methods of RNA extraction (Trizol_Thermo Fisher, the TruSight Myeloid Sequencing-Panel and a MiSeq instrument (Illumina). NucleoSpin RNA_Macherey Nagel and miRCURY_Exiqon) were compared. Reads were aligned with BWA (hg19) and further processed using the soft- RNA samples were DNAse treated and removed from contaminants with ware packages Picard, GATK and Annovar. Mutations with an allele frequen- Nucleospin RNA Clean-up XS_Macherey Nagel. SMARTer Stranded RNA-Seq cy ≥5% were included in the analysis. T-cells were used to prove somatic Kit_Clontech was used for library preparation, preceded by a ribosomal RNA origin. RUNX1, SRSF1, U2AF1, ASX
L1  ETV6 (rRNA) depletion step, for which two different procedures (RiboGone_Clon- WeI KiZdFe1ntifieTdE Tso2matTicP 5m3utations in all patients. Overall we found 13 ab- tech and Ribo-Zero Gold_Illumina) were compared. Libraries were sequen- errations in our cohort (3x 3x 2x 1x , 1x , ced in a HiSeq-2500 (2x50 PE). 1x , 1x , 1x ). All mutations were detectable in PB (12xCD34+, Results: All sperm isolation and RNA extraction methods provided compa- 11xPBMC). Eight mutations were present in all tested sample types (BMMC, rable results in terms of library RNA class representation. However, explo- CD34+ and PBMC). Further details including clone sizes and comparisons ratory analysis pointed to a list of 56 pErSotHeiGn- c2o0di1ng6 g |e nBeAs RdiCffeErLenOtiNallAy ,e xS-PAbINetw | eWenW diWffer.EenStH mGat.eOriaRlsG will be demonstrated. Our findings indicate3 t2h1atABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index NGS enables adequate detection of somatic mutations also from PB prepa- servation, unique expression signatures, relative stability, and abundance. rations. We conclude that NGS will improve diagnostics and disease moni- Detection of circulating microRNAs in serum, plasma, and other body fluids toring. Genetic analysis of PB would significantly reduce invasive clinical holds great promise for a non-invasive approach to molecular diagnostic interventions. and therapeutics. However, detection of miRNAs in these clinically relevant Support: José Carreras Leukämie-Stiftung (R14/03) samples has been difficult, often requiring greater sensitivity. A typical stu- dy workflow in translational research involves first identifying differentially 
P14 .056 expressed miRNAs in normal and diseased sample types by profiling many Gene-based variant classifier to assist medical sequencing miRNAs, then screening or validation of a smaller set of relevant miRNAs. K. J. van der Velde, E. N. de Boer, C. C. van Diemen, B. Sikkema, K. M. Abbott, L. Franke, R. H. Sijmons, T. J. de Koning, C. Wijmenga, R. Sinke, M. A. Swertz; We have developed a new method for the detection and quantification of UMC Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. miRNAs that is highly specific and sensitive. The upstream chemistry allows synthesis of miRNA template library that is used in the downstream real- time TaqMan qPCR for miRNA-specific detection. The universality of tem- The widespread application of medical sequencing is seriously hampered plate synthesis simplifies the workflow and provides the flexibility for sca- by the lack of vast, accurate and fully automated interpretation tools. Exi- lable content (miRNA coverage). Whether applied to basic or translational sting variant pathogenicity predictors do not include knowledge from the research, profiling, screening, or validation, this new and robust method al- (public) clinical domain such as known genomic variation and its relation- lows detection and quantification of miRNAs to address the unmet needs in ship to human health. They cannot reliably perform automated interpretati- workflow and sensitivity that exists today with next generation sequencing on for clinical DNA/molecular diagnostics. Here, we address this challenge and other qPCR technologies, especially with clinical samples. Results show and present a novel method that delivers accurate computational variant miRNA-specific detection down to a single cell level providing greater con- classification. We evaluated allele frequencies, putative protein impact and fidence for low copy detection to meet the needs of translational research. estimated deleteriousness for >100,000 variants from ClinVar and ExAC in D 
P1 at 4a . 0fr 5o 9m plasma and serum will be presented. >3,000 genes, resulting in gene-specific calibrations of benign versus pa- Suitability of various tissues for mitochondrial genome testing thogenic variants. Next, we developed an algorithm that utilizes these data S. L. Hume, S. Taylor, L. Vicen, K. Siriwardena, K. Baptista, L. Podemski, P. Lisa, K. to classify any new variant that may be found within these genes, and ran Sprysak, M. Somerville; successful validation on test sets from VariBench and MutationTaster2. The University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. method’s power emerged in a clinical setting, where we found an overall yield of 79% (correlation * coverage) compared to 30-67% of existing tools when applied to 2,359 pre-assessed variants in patients in five different di- As next generation sequencing is able to detect low amounts of mitochon- seases. This high yield is achieved by a large proportion of variants being drial heteroplasmy, we sought to investigate tissue sources that would be located in calibrated genes, demonstrating that human clinical expertise amenable to full mitochondrial genome testing including sequencing and implicitly stored in existing interpreted variant lists can be leveraged to deletion analysis. Our results demonstrate that either first morning urine or accurately and computationally classify new variants in their gene context. buccal swab samples provide high quality DNA suitable for next generation This method can also be used in automated whole-genome interpretation. sequencing. We tested multiple samples from a patient and her mother with We provide an online service to annotate VCF files, and an executable inclu- a complex I deficiency, m.13513G>A (p.Asp393Asn, NADH dehydrogenase). ding source code is downloadable as open source for use in bioinformatic Although this mutation was present at higher levels in urine and buccal pipelines. samples than in blood, it was detectable by NGS in all specimens. Of note, 
P14 .057 this mutation was not detectable in either a urine or buccal sample from the Verification of miRNA expression using nuclease protection and mother. In contrast, deletion analysis by Southern blot is generally not pos- targeted next generation sequencing sible on urine or buccal samples as the DNA obtained is insufficient. Additio- M. M. Reinholz, Q. Liu, M. Schwartz, P. Roche, B. LaFleur; HTG Molecular Diagnostics, Tucson, AZ, United States. nally, long-range PCR testing of the Kearns-Sayre region revealed that urine has low specificity as deletions are frequently detected in normal unaffected control samples. Southern blot analysis using DNA derived from a muscle sample remains the gold standard for mitochondrial testing. We estimate Introduction: miRNAs are short, ~22nt RNA sequences that modulate gene that the sensitivity of Southern blot analysis is 5% for heteroplasmy while transcription and downstream cell behavior. The HTG EdgeSeq miRNA the long-range PCR detects below 5%. In our experience, a long-range PCR Whole Transcriptome Assay (WTA) enables users to measure the expres- of the Kearns-Sayre region must be interpreted with other clinical informa- sion of 2,083 human miRNA transcripts using next generation sequencing. tion (such as CN or BN-PAGE or respiratory enzyme studies) and should not HTG EdgeSeq extraction-free sample preparation chemistry is compatible be used in isolation. Therefore, our current mitochondrial genome test al- with FFPE, cell lines, extracted RNA, and plasma. gorithm involves NGS on urine followed by Southern blot analysis using a Materials and Methods: Two studies were conducted to characterize the muscle sample. performance of the HTG EdgeSeq WTA assay in FFPE and plasma sample 
P14 .060 types. The sample input studies evaluated a range of sample input amounts Functional analysis of variants of uncertain clinical significance in for both plasma and FFPE sample types. Optimal input range was esta- components of the TOR
C1  signaling pathway blished based on sample quality (using process controls) and performance M. Hoogeveen-Westerveld1, M. Hosseinzadeh1, R. Swenker1, R. Ekong2, S. Povey2, N. (technical correlation and detection of low expression). Reproducibility stu- Migone3, G. Mancini1, L. Hoefsloot1, F. Verheijen1, M. Nellist1; dies across technical replicates were also performed for both sample types. 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2University College London, London, United Results: Read depth, defined as the total aligned counts at the sample level, Kingdom, 3University of Turin, Turin, Italy. for FFPE ranged from 524K at the lowest sample input (1.56 mm2/well) to 5 million at the highest sample input (12.5 mm2/well) with no loss of sample quality or expression sensitivity. Thus, for FFPE samples any input The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (TOR
C1 ) is an es- volume over the entire range is acceptable. The recommended sample input sential protein kinase complex that controls cell growth and metabolism. for plasma was established as 12.5 μL/well, this volume resulted in a mini- Mutations in different components of the TOR
C1  signaling pathway are as- mum of 642K reads. Pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients on technical sociated with a broad spectrum of inherited and somatic diseases. replicates ranged from 0.93 to 0.98 for FFPE samples and from 0.82 to 0.98 We have investigated the effects of >300 variants of uncertain clinical si- for plasma. gnificance (VUS) identified in genes encoding components of the TOR
C1  si- Conclusions: The HTG miRNA WTA assay allows for highly reproducible ex- gnaling pathway, on TOR
C1  activity. Our work has provided insight into the pression with low sample input volumes for both plasma and FFPE samples. likely pathogenicity of the tested VUS, the genetic risks in the families segre- gating the tested variants, genotype-phenotype correlations and structure- 
P14 .058 function relationships. Investigating the effects of VUS on TOR
C1  signaling Highly sensitive TaqMan®-based microRNA detection for is a useful adjunct to standard genetic testing and can provide essential in- translational research formation for appropriate clinical management. The tests have been vali- L. Wong, C. Liu, F. Hu, T. Gulham, S. Dong; dated for use in our diagnostic laboratory. We will present an overview of Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States. our work. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules that have been i 3de 2n 2tified as efficacious biomarkers for the cElSasHsifGic a2ti0on1 6o f| tBumAoRrCs EanLdO NA, SPAIN | WWW.ESHG.ORG prediction of outcome for many diseases because of their evolutionary con-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .061 Transition to massively parallel sequencing using a multi-disciplinary team approach - the South Australian experience the diagnosis and intervention of genetic disorders that may otherwise have L. H. Rawlings1, K. Kassahn1, P. Kaub1, K. Friend1, A. Tirimacco1, K. Brion1, E. Douglas1, L. serious clinical consequences. In order to reduce false positives and negati- McIntyre1, D. Lawrence1, J. Geogeghan1,2, H. Scott1,2, C. Barnett3, J. Liebelt3, L. McGregor3, ves, shorten diagnosis time and provide genetic counseling, we are evalua- E. Thompson3, E. Haan4, S. Bain1, J. M. Fletcher1; ting next generation sequencing (NGS) as a second-tier test. 1SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia, 2Centre for Cancer Biology,, Adelaide, Methods: We use dried blood spot samples from positively-identified ne- South Australia, Australia, 3Paediatric and Reproductive Genetics SA Clinical Genetics wborns to prepare NGS libraries. We have developed a panel of 71 genes Service Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia, 4Adult commonly affected in the disorders detected by these programs. A bioinfor- Genetics Unit SA Clinical Genetics Service Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. matics pipeline identifies rare genetic variants that may be disease causing. Following technical validation, we have retrospectively analyzed 109 samp- les to establish the sensitivity and specificity and are prospectively analy- zing positive hits in real time to assess clinical utility and cost-effectiveness. Globally, the implementation of Massively Parallel Sequencing (MPS) has Results: Retrospectively, biallelic mutations were identified in 85.3% of the expanded genetic diagnoses by delivering exponential amounts of data at samples and single allele mutations in 7.3%. Samples in which no mutations reduced labour costs. The Genetics and Molecular Pathology (GMP) Direc- were detected (7.3%) corresponded to hypothyroidism in half of the cases. torate of SA Pathology (South Australia) comprises four laboratories across In samples with previous genetic diagnosis (n=33), 100% concordance was three tertiary hospitals testing both constitutional and somatic variants for found and a second mutation was identified in two samples. In the prospec- a large number of genetic disorders. Traditionally, genetic diagnoses were tive phase, current turnaround time is 9 days. Among15 cystic fibrosis (CF) siloed to specific laboratories, based on clinical condition. MPS applications samples analyzed we have found biallelic mutations in 13% cases, single are relevant to every laboratory across the directorate, therefore its imple- mutations in 53.3% and no mutations in 33.3%. These data are compatible mentation has required a cooperative and consolidating approach. with the high rate of false positives for CF. Multi-gene panels, whole exomes and genome testing present opportunities Conclusion: We have successfully developed an NGS panel that may allow to to explore causative sequence variants for genetic disorders, once achieved bypass or redirect confirmatory tests and provide earlier genetic counseling by time-consuming Sanger sequencing. The rapid expansion of complex test in newborn screening programs. requests has required a complementary increase of knowledge in large data Grant support: RETO
S2014 /5938/I management, quality control and complex analyses, and a change in process for accepting requests for testing and reporting. 
P14 .064 To facilitate the transition to MPS, a broad, consultative, multi-disciplinary Beyond the Human Exome: finding solutions for clinical research NGS- team (MDT) approach was taken, whereby medical and research scientists, based applications bioinformaticians and specialist clinicians contributed to the evaluation and M. Corioni, E. Lin, K. Jeong, A. Vadapalli, F. Useche, M. Visitacion, G. Amparo, M. Ramaiah, validation of analytical platforms, clinical utility and best reporting practice. C. Pabon, M. Isaksson, D. Roberts; Eighteen months post-implementation, this MDT approach continues to su- Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States. stain the ongoing function and development of the molecular genetic ser- vice through regular meetings with three main foci:- service development, intake of MPS requests and complex reporting. Clinical-based input and de- Protein coding genes constitute approximately 1% of the human genome mand is imperative in all. but harbor most of the disease-associated variants. Targeted re-sequencing This presentation will outline key success factors in the transition process enables highly sensitive and comprehensive detection of variants and pro- from method validation to clinical implementation of MPS testing in South vides insights into the biology behind a given phenotype. With recent ma- Australia. jor advances in this technology, combined with a better understanding of 
P14 .062 biological pathways, NGS is now extensively considered for use in clinical Functional analysis of variants of uncertain clinical significance in research. A comprehensive Exome is a good solution to catalogue variants NF1 and provide deep coverage of genomic content from highly curated data- M. Kroos-de Haan, M. Hoogeveen-Westerveld, R. van Minkelen, Y. van Bever, L. Hoefsloot, bases such as CCDS, RefSeq, GENCODE, Vega, MirBase, UCSC known genes, F. Verheijen, M. Nellist; Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. and Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD®). We describe here several NGS-based solutions to add value to a comprehensive Exome for specific NF1 applications. The first is an augmented Exome for clinical research that fo- cuses on improved coverage of disease-related content, especially that rele- InactivNatFin1g mutations in cause neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), an vant to constitutional disease research. We also describe the combination of autosomal dominant disordNeFr1 that affects approximately 1 in 3500 indivi- Exome with OneSeq probes to extend target enrichment applications to the duals. encodes neurofibromin, a GTPase activating protein (GAP) for detection of genome-wide copy-number-changes (CNCs), and copy-neutral RAS. Loss or inactivation of results in increased levels of active RAS-GTP loss-of-heterozygosity (cnLOH). Finally, we demonstrate a phased Exome and increased signalingN tFh1rough the RAS-mitogen activated protein kinase coupled to 10x Genomics’ linked read technology. The addition of “phasing” (MAPK) pathway. We have performed RAS-GTP pull-down assays to assess probes allows determination of long haplotype blocks. The separation of the RAS-GAP activity of vaNrFia1nts of uncertain clinical significance (VUS) exonic reads into haplotypes further aids in structural variant and translo- identified in our NF1 patient population. Our preliminary analysis indicates cation determination, especially for disease causality in complex genotypes. that functional assessment of VUS could be a useful adjunct to standard We describe data analysis and performance attributes for each of these plat- genetic testing to improve molecular diaNgFn1ostics for individuals suspected forms, including SNP/INDEL, loss of heterozygosity, copy number variation, of NF1, and could help provide essential information for appropriate clinical phasing, translocation, and resolution of complex compound heterozygote management. Functional assessment of VUS is currently being valida- samples. ted for use in our diagnostic laboratory. We will present an overview of our work. 
P14 .065 
P14 .063 Using the wrong approach to solve the wrong problem: Sanger Next generation sequencing as second-tier test in newborn screening validation of single nucleotide variants from next-gen sequencing programs J. Rodríguez1, M. Segura-Puimedon2, B. Rodríguez-Santiago1, M. A. Bueno-Delgado3, L. G. Biesecker, T. Beck, J. Mullikin; A. González-Meneses3, I. Fernández-Carvajal4, M. J. Alonso4, Y. González-Irazabal5, M. NIH - NHGRI, Bethesda, MD, United States. Espada6, R. Yahyaoui7, L. Armengol1, L. A. Pérez-Jurado8; 1R&D, Department, Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories (qGenomics), Barcelona, Spain, 2Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Many next generation sequencing (NGS) clinical laboratories validate NGS Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital variants using Sanger sequencing, which is costly. To evaluate the utility of Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 4Laboratorio de Enfermedades genéticas y cribado this, we performed a large-scale evaluation of Sang®er validation of single nu- neonatal, Departamento de Genetica Molecular de la Enfermedad, Instituto de Biologìa cleotide variant (SNV) NGS variants using ClinSeq data. We used NGS data y Genética Molecular Universidad de Valladolid-CSIC, Valladolid, Spain, 5Servicio de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 6Public from 19 genes in five participants, comparing them to Sanger data on the Health Laboratory Standards, Basque Government Department of Health, Bilbao, Spain, same samples, and found 0/234 discrepancies. We then compared NGS vari- 7Newborn Screening and Clinical Laboratory, Málaga Regional Hospital, Málaga, Spain, ants in five genes from 684 participants against Sanger data. Of >5,800 NGS- 8Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Centro derived SNVs, 19 were not validated by Sanger. Using new primers, Sanger de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. sequencing confirmed 17 of the NGS variants. We conclude that a single round of Sanger sequencing is more likely to incorrectly refute a true posi- tive variant from NGS than to correctly identify a false positive NGS variant. Introduction: Newborn screening is aE pSuHbGlic l2y-0fu1n6de |d B hAeaRltCh EprLoOgrNamA ,f oSr PA OIN ur | v W alidW atW ion. E raS teH wG a. sO 9R 9.9G 65%, higher than many medical tests that 3do2n3’tABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .068 Evaluation of a custom mendeliome for diagnostic genetic testing necessitate orthogonal validation. Validation of NGS-derived variants using E. Souche, V. Race, A. Corveleyn, L. Dehaspe, J. Vermeesch, J. Van Houdt, G. Matthijs; Sanger has limited utility. We suggest moving to a model where NGS variants KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium. with good quality scores are reported to clinicians, without Sanger valida- tion, and with an estimate of the error rate. Then, clinicians should make a clinical determination as to which patients should undergo post-hoc Sanger Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) has become routinely used for the dia- validation, based on the testing scenario and the potential downstream cli- gnosis of various conditions. Although the most comprehensive NGS test nical utilization of the variant. The overwhelmingly important challenge for for the diagnosis of heterogeneous conditions would be Whole Genome Se- our field is the clinical validity and utility of NGS data, not analytic validity. quencing (WGS), this test cannot be implemented in a diagnostic setting yet. By focusing on analytic validity, we detract from the central issues that need In order to reduce sequencing costs, laboratories focus on the sequencing to be overcome to make genomics clinically useful. of either all genes by Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) or all genes known to be associated to diseases, generally referred to as clinical exome or men- 
P14 .066 deliome. Several mendeliomes are commercially available but the size of Is the $1,000 genome as near as we think? A cost analysis of next- the region they target differs and some genes listed in the Clinical Genomic generation sequencing technologies Database are not included in any test. We thus developed our own mendeli- K. J. M. van Nimwegen; Radboud umc, Nijmegen, Netherlands. ome by selecting the genes offered in commercial panels, those listed in the Clinical Genomic Database as well as a few more recently published genes. In addition, we included targets for 31 SNPs used for sample tracking. The Introduction: Substantial technological advancements in next-generation custom mendeliome protocol is based on Nimblegen SeqCap target enrich- sequencing (NGS) have been made, while sequencing costs have rapidly ment technology. It targets the exonic regions of 5,811 genes, representing decreased. This contributes to a swift diffusion of NGS technologies into cli- a target size of 16.5 Mb and a clinical target (coding bases +/- 2 bp) of 12.8 nical settings. However, since costs of equipment, personnel, and data ma- Mb. The performance of our custom mendeliome and analysis pipeline was nagement, are generally not considered, the real costs of NGS are currently evaluated by sequencing well characterized cell lines. The results of the tar- considerably underestimated. This study aims to provide a comprehensive, get genes were compared to the full genome information from the platinum transparent, and up-to-date overview of the total costs of NGS. genomes project. About 96% of the clinical target could be reliably geno- Methods: Cost calculations for targeted gene panels (TGP), whole exome typed. The sensitivity and specificity of genotyping single nucleotides was sequencing (WES) and whole genome sequencing (WGS) are based on the assessed prior to transfer to clinical diagnostics. Illumina NextSeq500, HiSeq4000, and HiSeqX5 platforms, respectively. Five- 
P14 .070 year lifecycles, 100x (TGP), 70x (WES), and 30x (WGS) coverage, and 15% niPy - Reproducible and scalable NGS workflows for pathology: Raw (TGP), or 75% (WES, WGS) utilization are assumed in the base case calcula- data to validated report tions. To anticipate future developments, sensitivity analyses are performed D. Brawand1, C. Wall1, P. Rushton1, L. Steedman1, M. Oakley1, F. Smith1, B. Clark1,2; in which these factors, as well as capital and operational costs, are varied. 1Viapath at King‘s College Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2King‘s College London, Results: Per-sample costs were €1,669 for WGS, €587 for WES and €333 for Molecular Haematology, Division of Cancer Studies, London, United Kingdom. TGP. Sensitivity analyses showed that very efficient, long-term use of the se- quencing equipment, large reductions in both capital and consumable costs, combined with lowering sequencing depth decrease these costs to €1,006 Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has been widely adopted in diagnostics, (WGS), €298 (WES) and €205 (TGP). and is set to replace Sanger sequencing as the Gold Standard for clinical ap- Discussion: Costs for TGP and WES are considerably lower than for WGS. plications. The complexity of the analysis process, breadth and quantity of However, this does not imply that these techniques should be preferred in data and the necessity for a complete audit trail, with a highly reproducible clinical practice, as the choice of NGS approach should be based on a care- analytical process presents an operational challenge to laboratories wishing ful trade-off between per-sample costs, sequencing quality, and diagnostic to transition to NGS. yield. The results of the present study contribute to making such trade- Here we present an open source, clinically validated diagnostic framework offs.<br which integrates four main components of a genetic testing workflow: A) NGS data processing, B) trend monitoring of quality control metrics, C) vari- 
P14 .067 ant classification, and D) automated variant validation. Reporting is possible Next Generation Sequencing, a powerful technique for diagnosis. A via a standard pathology LIMS using database outputs to reduce transcrip- large gene experience tion errors. A simple web frontend with PDF reports and worksheets enab- M. Roca-Cervera, A. Romera-López, D. Cantalapiedra, D. Diego-Álvarez, L. Pérez- le clinical and laboratory staff to analyse patient data, calculating variant Cabornero, A. Andújar, R. Pérez-De la Fuente, S. Valverde, L. Cano-Bermúdez, M. D. Arocas-Castillo, C. Collado-Micó, Á. Arilla-Codoñer, G. Marco, G. Legarda, D. Valero- observation frequencies and reviewing pathogenicity scores. Filtering of Hervás, S. Santillán; benign sequence variants, confirmation primer design and SNP check are Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain. fully automated. niPy is version controlled and packaged in cloud-ready application contai- ners allowing rapid replication on commodity hardware, computational clu- Analysis of large genes is one of the main challenges that genetic tests face. sters or cloud platforms with limited revalidation. NGS technology has helped overcome this situation but in many laborato- We have successfully integrated niPy into our diagnostic workup of rare ries, Sanger sequencing still remains the technique of choice for genetic anaemia cases and have successfully analysed data from 240 cases, with 15 diagnosis. The aim of the present work is to FcoBmN1pare both technique´s expe- having novel pathogenic variants including deletions >50bp in size. The tur- rience analyzing different large genes and to present the diagnostic results naround time from raw data to validated variants for a batch of 16 samples of a Marfan syndrome cohort of patients ( ). We review 492 samples is less than 4 weeks. niPy is a validated structured framework for analysis, analyzed with our GeneProfile-NGS panels or with Sanger sequencing to confirmation and reporting of NGS data in a clinical laboratory. evalTuTatNe, tFhBeNir1 p, DerMfoDr, mCOan
L1 ceAs1 u sing C OpaLr1aAm2eters such as time-consumed, co- 
P14 .071 verage or amount of DNA used. The cases reviewed included analysis of ge- False-negative in Sanger confirmation of a deletion in BRCA2 found by nes and (ranging 51-363 exons). NGS was Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) performed using SureSelect (Agilent) and SOLiD5500 (Life Technologies) or R. Muguerza, J. S. Crettaz, L. Otaolea, R. Sáez, Y. Ramírez; MiSeq (Illumina) platforms. Clinically significant variants identified were Genetics Department, Donostia University Hospital, San Sebastian, Spain. confirmed by Sanger.T STaNnger was performed using BigDye-Terminator-Kit in an ABIPrism3730xl (Applied Biosystems). Genes initially unaffordable to be analyzed by Sanger ( )F cBaNn1 now be sequenced by NGS in a moderate pe- Introduction: NGS techniques have increased the possibilities of genome riod of time, resulting cost-effective. Gene coverage by NGS and Sanger was analysis but there is still some reluctance to reporting results without San- similar, around 99-100%. gene was analyzed in 218 Marfan syndrome ger sequencing (SS) confirmation. We present a case where SS failed to con- patients, of whom 23.7% (2-3weeks/patient) were diagnosed by NGS while firm a deletion in BRCA2 found by NGS. 27.8% (2-3weeks/patient) by means of Sanger sequencing. However, the Materials and methods: Amplicon library of coding exonic and flanking time to complete a Sanger sequencing increases proportionally to the num- intronic regions of BRCA1/BRCA2 was performed and sequenced by NGS ber of samples analyzed, while for NGS remains constant. This confirms that (MiSeq, Illumina). Pathogenic, likely pathogenic or unknown variants and NGS is an effective and accurate technology that allows the analysis of large regions with depth <100x were confirmed by SS. genes in an affordable time. Results: A heterozygous deletion was found by NGS in BRCA2: 324 ESHG 2016 | BARCELON NA M, _S 0P 0A 00I 5N 9 .| 3 :W c.4W 00W 0_4.E 0S 01H dG el .O (dR eG pth=4996x, allele frequency=44.5%).ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Amplification with M13-tailed PCR primers usually used in our laborato- ant calling and higher uniformity of target coverage. ry and SS showed absence of the deletion, making us suspect a NGS false- Study was supported with grant VEGA-1/0048/14. positive or a sample swap error. PCR amplification and SS of a new DNA 
P14 .074 extraction showed in the electropherogram very slight peaks consistent Lyso-SM-509 is an easy-measurable and sensitive biomarker for NP-C: with the deletion. New primers were designed targeting a larger template a one- year study that included primer-binding sites, and SS confirmed the deletion this time. A. Rolfs, C. Cozma, G. Kramp, S. Eichler; Searching for possible causes for the false-negative in SS, we found by NGS Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. a variant (c.4068G>A) in the reverse M13-tailed primer binding site. Thciiss variant was absent in the first SS but was confirmed with the new primers. The segregation study supported the hypothesis that the variant was in Niemann Pick Type C (NPC) disease is an autosomal recessive disease with the deletion and caused an allele drop-out. caused by mutations in NP
C1  /NP
C2  genes translated in defects of the ly- Conclusion: Although SS is the gold standard sequencing method, false-ne- sosomes transport system (cholesterol transporters) leading to abnormal gatives can occur because allele drop-out, which did not occur in NGS, that accumulation of cholesterol and glycolipids in the lysosome. Although other was able to detect both the deletion and the variant. organs may be affected (e.g. hepatosplenomegaly), NPC is characterized 
