S1 ) is a liver-specific enzyme with the lowest enzymatic rate, E-
P01  which determines the overall rate of the other reactions in Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics thepathwaythatconvertsammoniatocarbamoylphosphate in the first step of the urea cycle. Carbamoyl-phosphate E-
P01 .01 synthetase 1 deficiency which usually presents as lethal A Novel Missense Mutation in the CP
S1  Gene Causes hyperammonemia, is a rare autosomal recessive hereditary arbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency identified disease. Here we report a case of a two-day-old female by next generation sequencing neonate with lethal hyperammonemia. The newborn infant presented with hyperammonemia. M. Vahidi Mehrjardi1, H. Hozhabri2, M. Dehghani1 Materials and Methods: We performed SNParray and after that we performed a WES based on NGS. Sanger 1Medical Genetics Research Center, Yazd, Iran, Islamic sequencing to confirm the mutation was in the patient. The Republic of, 2Department of Experimental Medicine, mutation was checked in her parent and other family Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy members too. Results: we found a novel missense c. 2758G>C A Novel Missense Mutation in the CP
S1  Gene Causes mutation in exon 23 of CP
S1  at amino acid position 920 Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency identified (p.Asp920His).WeusedtheSangersequencingtoconfirm by next generation sequencing the mutation was in the patient. The mutation was checked in her parent and other family members too. MY. Vahidi Mehrjardi1, H. Hozhabri2, M Dehghani1 Conclusions: We applied WES successfully to diagnose the patient with CP
S1 D in a clinical setting. This result 1Medical genetics research center, Shahid Sadoughi supportstheclinicalapplicabilityofWESforcost-effective University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran, 2Department moleculardiagnosisofUCDsinprenataldiagnosistofuture of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy procedures of disease-free embryo selection.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1815 M. Vahidi Mehrjardi: None. H. Hozhabri: None. M. Y. Suwanlikit: None. B. Panthan: None. S. Klum- Dehghani: None. sathian: None. A. Charoenyingwattana: None. W. Chantratita: None. O. Trachoo: None. E-
P01 .05 Developing comprehensive preconception carrier E-
P01 .06 screening for 21-hydroxylase-deficient congenital adre- Expanded carrier screening in Belgium: intentions and nal hyperplasia in Thai population attitudes of potential users visiting their gynaecologist Y. Suwanlikit1, B. Panthan2, S. Klumsathian2, A. E. Van Steijvoort1, H. Peeters2, H. Vandecruys3, K. Charoenyingwattana2, W. Chantratita2, O. Trachoo3,2 Peeraer4, G. Matthijs2, D. Chokoshvili1, P. Borry1 1Cultivating Medical-Scientific Expertise for Medical Stu- 1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, KU Leuven, dentsProgram,FacultyofMedicineRamathibodiHospital, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Human Genetics, KU Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand, 2Center for Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Jessa Ziekenhuis, Hasselt, Medical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Belgium, 4Department of Development and Regeneration, Hospital,MahidolUniversity,Bangkok,Thailand,3Depart- KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium ment of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand In Belgium, the Superior Health Council (SHC) recom- mended that expanded carrier screening (ECS) should be Introduction: 21-hydroxylase-deficient Congenital Adre- available to all couples considering a pregnancy. Little is nal Hyperplasia (21-OHD CAH) is an autosomal recessive known about the attitudes of potential users for such an disorder causing by mutations in CY
P21 A2. This condition offer within the Belgian population. The purpose of this has diverse severity, ranging from classical severe neonatal study is to assess attitudes and interest of potential users life-threateningtomildnon-classicalform.Themostsevere regardingpreconceptionalECSandtoexploredeterminants classical form can elicit salt-wasting crises in the newborn. related to the intention of accepting preconceptional ECS. Additionally, classical 21-OHD CAH is able to induce Women (aged 18–40 years) consulting their gynaecologist simple virilization resulting in ambiguous genitalia in will be invited to complete a self-administered question- females and precocious puberty in males. Identifying naire that was developed based on the Theory of Planned couple-at-risk at preconception stage will have a benefit Behavior and existing questionnaires previously used in on prenatal fetal monitoring and treatment. otherstudiesassessingattitudesregardingECS.Participants Materials and Methods: We developed a rapid mole- will be informed about their population risk of being a cular method to detect 9 common CY
P21 A2 mutations carrier couple, the risk of conceiving a child with a genetic which have been reported as common etiologies for both condition for carrier couples and reproductive options classical and non-classical forms using Amplification- available for carrier couples prior to filling in the Refractory Mutation System containing 
P30 L, Int2G, questionnaire.Descriptivestatisticswillbeusedtodescribe G110del8nt, I172N, V281L, Q318X, R356W, 
P453 S and characteristics of participants. Independent sample t-test exon 6 cluster variants (I236N, V237E and M239K). Null (continuousdata)andChi-Squaretest(categoricaldata)will variantorlargegenedeletiontestingwasperformedbyreal- be used to compare participants with and without intention timePCR andRestriction FragmentLengthPolymorphism. to have preconceptional ECS. Logistic regression analyses These screening tools were then tested in 50 enrolled willbeperformedtodeterminewhichindependentvariables subjects at preconception genetics clinic. have a significant predictive effect on the intention to have Results: The developed techniques revealed the consis- preconceptional ECS. The results of this study will tent results to standard methods and controls. Two of contribute to a better understanding of the attitudes of 50 subjects (1/25)wereidentifiedas 21-OHD CAH carrier. potential users and support the implementation of pre- Of them, one was interpreted as a carrier for large-scale conceptional ECS in the Belgian healthcare system. genedeletion,whereasanothercasecarried2variantslocate E. Van Steijvoort: None. H. Peeters: None. H. within the adjacent exons, Q318X and R356W which was Vandecruys: None. K. Peeraer: None. G. Matthijs: likely in cis. None. D. Chokoshvili: None. P. Borry: None. Conclusion: Carrier screening for 21-OHD CAH using mentionedtechniqueswerereliableandrapid.Thecostwas E-
P01 .07 also competitive to be proposed as a national screening. Prenataldiagnosisofisolated CongenitalHeart Defects: Grants: Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, results of a prospective study genome-wide high resolu- Mahidol University. tion array-CGH versus karyotyping and 22q11 FISH1816 L. Pasquier1, F. Roblot1, E. Launay2, M. Fradin1, C. A. Baquero Vaquer, M. Oliver Domínguez, R. Tena Ros, Quélin1, F. Demurger1, P. Loget3, G. Le Bouar4, C. P. Ferrer Herrera, R. Montaner Calatrava, M. Collado Combescure5, A. Leborgne6, A. Basquin7, M. Belaud- Díaz Rotureau2, S. Odent1, E. Oger8, S. Jaillard2 Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain 1Service de Génétique Clinique, CLAD Ouest, RENNES, France,2UnivRennes,CHURennes,UMR_
S1085 Inserm, Introduction: In cases with a high-risk result of X IRSET, RENNES, France, 3Service d’anatomie et cytologie chromosomeaneuploidyobtainedbyNon-InvasivePrenatal pathologiques, CHU, RENNES, France, 4Centre Pluridis- Testing, if the pregnant woman’s karyotype is unknown, is ciplinairedeDiagnosticPrénatal,CHU,RENNES,France, interestingtodetermine,inthematernalbloodsample,ifthe 5Centre Pluridisciplinaire de Diagnostic Prénatal, CH, NIPT result is a consequence of an X-chromosome SAINT-BRIEUC, France, 6Clinique La Sagesse, RENNES, aneuploidy present in the pregnant woman. France, 7Service de Cardiologie, CHU, RENNES, France, MaterialandMethods:Fluorescentinsituhybridization 8Univ Rennes, EA 7449 REPERES Pharmacoepidemiology (FISH) technique was performed in the buffy coat, and Health Services Research, CHU, RENNES, France exclusively containing maternal platelets and leukocytes, of three pregnant women blood sample (Cell -Free DNA Objectives: We evaluate the relevance of array-based BTC® tube); two of them with male fetal sex and X- comparative genomichybridization (aCGH)asadiagnostic chromosome high risk result in the NIPT (45,Y), and the prenatal tool in isolated congenital heart defect (CHD) by other, with X-chromosome trisomy high risk (47,XXX). comparing chromosomic imbalance rate (Copy Number Results:TheFISHstudyperformedinthematernalblood Variations:CNVs)identifiedbyaCGHversus karyotyping/ cells of the two samples with 45,Y NIPT result, showed 22q11 fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH). presenceof83.6%ofX-monosomiccells(45,X)inoneand Methods: In this prospective study, 78 pregnant women 75% in the other. FISH analysis performed in the sample whose fetus had an isolated CHD were recruited. Each withX-trisomyhighriskshowed90%ofthematernalblood patientunderwentfetalspecializedultrasoundscans,genetic cells with 47,XXX. counselling and amniocentesis. On the same sample, Conclusion: Non Invasive Prenatal Testing in maternal karyotyping, 22q11 FISH analysis and a-CGH were blood sample detects, in some cases, the presence of an performed. aneuploidy mosaicism in the pregnant woman, that Results: Out of the 78 fetuses, 15 CNV (19.23%) were compromise the result obtained by NIPT. detected by aCGH and only 5 (6.41%) were identified by A. Baquero Vaquer: None. M. Oliver Domínguez: karyotyping / 22q11 FISH (p=0.0001). CNVs were None. R. Tena Ros: None. P. Ferrer Herrera: None. R. interpreted as likely benign in 7/78 (8.97%), as Variants Montaner Calatrava: None. M. Collado Díaz: None. ofunknownsignificance(VOUS)in2/78(2.56%),andas pathogenic in 6/78 (7.69%). Finally, only 5 fetus E-
P01 .10 with 22q11 deletion were found out by aCGH as well The benefits of using a targeted sequencing in non- as FISH. invasive prenatal testing—two years’ experience of Conclusion: These results illustrate the complexity of constellation laboratory in Czech Republic identifying a new pathogenic CNV when inclusion criteria are strict. Even if the study couldn’t demonstrate the M. Putzova1,2,3, L. Sprdlikova1, M. Hasch1, B. Gomolca- usefulness of aCGH, this tool emerges as an appealing kova1, M. Michal1 alternative to karyotyping in prenatal isolated CHD. L.Pasquier:None.F.Roblot:None.E.Launay:None. 1Biopticka laborator s.r.o., Plzen, Czech Republic, 2UBLG M. Fradin: None. C. Quélin: None. F. Demurger: None. FN Motol, Praha, Czech Republic, 3LF UK, Plzen, Czech P. Loget: None. G. Le Bouar: None. C. Combescure: Republic None.A.Leborgne:None.A.Basquin:None.M.Belaud- Rotureau: None. S. Odent: None. E. Oger: None. S. Introduction: Nowadays we are witnessing the rapid Jaillard: None. penetrationofnon-invasiveprenataldiagnosticsintoroutine practice. In the past years, many types of cell free DNA E-
P01 .09 (cfDNA) tests both commercial kits and “homemade” tests Mosaicsexchromosomesaneuploidiesindirectdetection have appeared on the market. As big service laboratory in pregnant women by Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing Biopticka laboratory wanted to choose the best quality test (NIPT) to offer our cooperating obstetricians, so we paid attention to the significant differences in quality of available non-Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1817 invasive tests (NIPT) from molecular and clinical PraenaTest® is a screening test which needs to be offered perspective. in the context of genetic counselling. It does not replace MaterialsandMethods:Weimplementedandvalidated theprecisionachievedwithadiagnostictestanditshould Natera’s Panorama® test as a constellation partner labora- notreplacethedifferentiatedfetalultrasoundexamination tory, we have been running in-house service since of the fetus. February 2017. J. Graf: None. A. Benet-Pagès: None. K. Mehnert: Results and Conclusions: We would like to share our None. A. Ovens-Raeder: None. G. Schlüter: None. A. over two years’ experience with Panorama testing, provid- Abicht: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. ingtestingforover3000patientsin-house.Resultsconfirm qualitativebenefits,butalsosomedrawbacksofthetargeted E-
P01 .12 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) based NIPT Diagnosis of Noonan syndrome for an aborted fetus by approach of the Panorama® testing. whole genome sequencing M. Putzova: None. L. Sprdlikova: None. M. Hasch: None. B. Gomolcakova: None. M. Michal: None. J.H.Sun1,Q.Zhou1,2,T.F.Wang1,X.Yang1,Z.Z.Liu1, Y. R. Xing1, W. J. Wang1 E-
P01 .11 Experienceafter3yearsofNIPT(Non-InvasivePrenatal 1BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China, 2Department of Testing) Biology,UniversityofCopenhagen,Copenhagen,Denmark J. Graf1, A. Benet-Pagès1, K. Mehnert2, A. Ovens- Introduction: A Lymphatic Malformation (LM)/cystic Raeder3, G. Schlüter4, A. Abicht1, E. Holinski-Feder1 hygroma is a fluid-filled sac that results from the abnormal developmentoflymphaticvascularsystem.Whenidentified 1MGZ-Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Ger- in a fetus, it may increase the risk for miscarriage or fetal many, 2Genetikum-Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Neu- death.Itiscommonininfantswithgeneticdiseases,suchas Ulm, Germany, 3Genetische Beratung und Diagnostik, Turnersyndrome,DownsyndromeorNoonansyndrome.In Munich, Germany, 4Pränatalmedizin, Gynäkologie und many cases, the cause is still unknown. Humangenetik, Nürnberg, Germany Methods: we performed low and high coverage whole genome sequencing (WGS) for an aborted fetus, who was Fromthebloodofpregnantwomenwithanincreasedrisk discoveredaLMattheneckviaultrasoundatthe11thweek of fetal aneuploidy the PraenaTest® (Lifecodexx) deter- of pregnancy. mines trisomies 21, 18 and 13 as well as gonosomal Results:The LM was 21X8 mm when firstly detected. It aneuploidies (Turner’s, Triple X, Klinefelter’s and XYY developed as large as 24X12 mm one week later and syndromes) from 10th week of pregnancy. We have hydrops within the baby’s body was observed. We did not summarized the clinical experience over the past 3 years identifyabnormalchromosomeusinglowcoveragesequen- (>10000 analysis) regarding the performance of the NIPT cing. Next, we analyzed the high coverage WGS data and for fetal aneuploidy. In total, 91.61% of the analyses detected a heterozygous missense mutation c.182A>C (p. showed inconspicuous results (i.e. Z-score within the Asp61Ala)onthegenePTPN11,whichisknowntocausea normal range) after the initial analysis. 5.91% of the large fraction of the cases of Noonan syndrome. This analyses were not assessable because the Z-score was mutation is a reported pathogenic mutation for the within the non-evaluable range (autosomes 13, 18, 21: autosomaldominantdisorder.Furthermore,itwasvalidated 2.32%; gonosomes: 3.59%). Here, analysis of a second as a de novo mutation after sanger sequencing of the fetus test tube usually showed a conclusive result for chromo- and parents. somes 13, 18, 21; whereas the result for gonosomes often Conclusion:WeconcludethattheLMandhydropsofthe remained not assessable. A total of 1.22% of the ordered fetus are part of the features of Noonan syndrome, caused tests were cancelled for technical reasons (failed quality by a de novo mutation on the pathogenic site of the criteria). Here, a repetition using a second test tube PTPN11. Our findings provide potential application of resolved most of the cases. Finally, 0.16% remained WGStoclinicaldiagnosisanditcouldalsocontributetothe without results due to failed quality criteria. In summary, genetic counselling of couples with miscarriage history. 1.28% of analyses revealed a high-risk for chromosomal Grant: NA aneuploidy(i.e.Z-scoresbeyondthenormalrange).NIPT J.H. Sun: None. Q. Zhou: None. T.F. Wang: None. X. results that are inconsistent with the results of diagnostic Yang: None. Z.Z. Liu: None. Y.R. Xing: None. W.J. prenataltests(CVS,amniocentesis)were mostcommonly Wang: None. reported for gonosomal aneuploidies. In summary,1818 E-
P01 .13 allelic heterogeneity make it challenging to identify the TheeGoodtheBadandtheUglyofDirecttoConsumer genetic cause of the disorders. Usually it is difficult for the Genetic Tests practicing clinician to visit a patient, identify a candidate gene or mutation, and test for a single genetic disorder. P. Bitoun Using advanced NGS based methods like whole-exome sequencing (WES) made it feasible to study all coding Groupe Medical Jarente, Paris, France genes in a patient. This study was performed in Kawsar human genetics research center and 397 sample was The author presents 2 cases of paternity search performed recruited from 230 consecutive families with at least one usingDirecttoConsumerTests(DCT)fromthesearcher’s affected case suspected to inherited Mendelian disorders point of view for one family and from the father’s side in includingdevelopmental delay/intellectual disability, inher- another family. ited neuromuscular disease, hearing impairment and inborn The first case presents to the clinic with results of his error of metabolism. A pathogenic or likely pathogenic abnormal spermogram from which he is convinced that he variant was found in 122 patients (48.69%). Variant of maynotbethefather ofhispreviousbornson.Hewenton unknown significance (VOUS) was also found in 48 cases topresenttheDCTresultofhis2furtherbornchildren,his (20.87%). Identified pathogenic variants were related to 42 wife, his previous born son. The discussion was about the different genes, mostly were novel that was not reported understandingofthesetestsresults,detailedpresentationof before. Instead of being still expensive with limitation in theresultsdata,thevalidityofcommercialgenetictestsand diagnosisofrepeatexpansiondisorder(e.g.,spinocerebellar the psychological reasons for these tests. ataxia), mutation in a non-coding region (e.g., facioscapu- The second family presents with a man whose 2 cousins lohumeral muscular dystrophy) or large deletion duplica- whohadpreviouslyperformedDCTsandwerelatercontacted tion, WES is more reasonable against sequential gene by email about an unknown adopted individual claiming he testing that is more costly and time-consuming. It seems to had matched with them as possible cousins using the DCT be better to assess phenotypes with broad phenotypic databank family search tool. The man at first had not variability and overlap of many potential genetic causes answered these emails from his cousins he thought were a with WES and not reserve it as a last resort. joke until they called him informing him he may have been M.S. Fallah: None. M.S. Daneshpour: None. S. the father of this unknown individual from temporal and Zeinali: None. H. Bagherian: None. S. Masjoudi: None. geographical evidence. The reaction, action and results of S. Zoroufchin Tamiz: None. these will be presented in details. These cases are iconic examples of what geneticists may expect to be confronted E-
P01 .15 withastheuseofDCTarebecomingcommonplaceandwith Indicationandoutcomeofprenatalsamplestestedinthe their various impact on individuals and families. laboratory of the Department of clinical genetics P. Bitoun: None. Teaching hospital Olomouc, Czech Republic in 2017 E-
P01 .14 V. Curtisova, P. Čapková, Z. Čapková, E. Mracká, K. Application of whole-exome sequencing in daily prac- Tejkalová tice:reducingthecost,diagnosticodyssey,increasingthe diagnostic rate Department of Human Genetics, Fakultní nemocnice Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic M. S. Fallah1, M. S. Daneshpour2, S. Zeinali3, H. Bagherian1, S. Masjoudi1, S. Zoroufchin Tamiz1 Introduction: We set out to analyse the reasons for an invasive procedure and the outcome of the cytogenetic 1Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), testing of the samples tested in our laboratory in 2017. Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Cellular Molecular Materials and methods: Retrospective analysis of the and Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for samples examined in the cytogenetic laboratory of the EndocrineSciences,Shahid BeheshtiUniversityofMedical teaching hospital Olomouc, Czech Republic, which serves Sciences,Tehran,Iran,IslamicRepublicof,3Biotechnology the hospital and other privates prenatal centres in the city. Research Center, Department of Molecular Medicine, Results: 195 samples were tested, 142 form hospital Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of patients, 53 from external patients. Of the hospital patients 70% were tested because of a positive result of combined Indailyclinicalpracticeofinheritedgeneticdisorders,wide first trimester screening, 18% for congenital abnormality. spectrum and overlapping phenotypes beside the locus and CVS was performed in 46% of the external samples and inAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1819 56% of hospital samples. In the CVS group only 3 thatKRT9mutationinourpatientmightberesponsibleboth procedureswereneededperdiagnosisintheexternalgroup for EPPK and teratozoospermia. Since KRT9 c.487C>T compared to 11 in the hospital group. In the amniocentesis mutationhasbeendescribedinseveralgenerationsofEPPK group 30 procedures were needed per diagnosis in the families, it may have an incomplete penetrance for male external group compared to 15 in the hospital group. infertility. Conclusion: In our sample the positive predictive value Conclusions: Our study suggests extension of KRT9 ofprenataltestingdifferedgreatlybetweenthehospitaland associated phenotype. Fertility status evaluation and semen the external providers. This may reflect the diverse reasons analysisinotherpatientswithKRT9 mutationsmayhelpto fortestingandthefactthatnostandardizedprocedureexists clarify the role of KRT9 gene on sperm morphology and for first trimester combined screening in the Czech male fertility. Republic. P.Noveski:None.M.Vujovic:None.M.Terzic:None. V. Curtisova: None. P. Čapková: None. Z. Čapková: D.Shushleski:None.V.Sotiroska: None.Z.Petanovski: None. E. Mracká: None. K. Tejkalová: None. None. D. Plaseska-Karanfilska: None. E-
P01 .16 E-
P01 .17 Revealing hidden phenotypes in the Mendelian dis- Risk evaluation of thrombophilia in pregnancy orders: teratozoospermia due to KRT9 pathogenic variant? E. Borsi, C. Potre, O. Potre, M. Samfireag, I. Ionita, H. Ionita, D. Larisa-Marina P. Noveski1, M. Vujovic1, M. Terzic1, D. Shushleski2, V. Sotiroska2, Z. Petanovski2, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1 UniversityofMedicineandPharmacy,Timisoara,Romania 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnol- Introduction: Thrombophilia’s are hereditary or acquired ogy “Georgi D. Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of conditions that predispose patients tothrombosis and it can Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former increasetheriskofvenousorarterialthrombosis.Thestudy Yugoslav Republic of, 2General Hospital “Re-Medika”, wantstodeterminatetheriskofthrombophiliainpregnancy Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of and the importance of correct treatment administration in time. Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective study, Introduction: Teratozoospermia is a condition character- we have included 58 pregnant women with thrombophilia. ized by presence of sperm with abnormal morphology that The clinical information is containing the following: age, affects fertility inmales.Inthemajorityofcasesthecauses thrombosis type and location, indication and timing of are unknown, however recent studies suggest mutations in testing,anticoagulationtherapyatthetimeoftesting.There severalgenestobeimplicated.Invitrofertilizationhashigh weremeasuredfourevents:un-provoked/provokedvenous/ success rate in teratozoospermic men, and natural concep- arterialthrombosis(riskfactors),venousthromboembolism, tions have also been described. pregnancy morbidity and recurrent pregnancy losses. Materialsandmethods:Herewedescribea38-year-old Results: The median age observed was 31 years (19–44 male patient, with difficulties conceiving due to severe years). From the total range, 12% of them showed teratozoospermia(<1%normal,predominatingspermatozoa thrombosis events in antecedents, 68% had family history, with amorphous head changes and excess residual cyto- 75% had more than 3 lost pregnancies, 3% showed plasm in the midpiece) with coexisting epidermolytic infertility. Identifying women with risk of venous throm- palmoplantar keratodermia (EPPK) and hearing impair- bosis has become a priority and the identification of ment.Geneticanalysesincludedclinical exome sequencing thrombophilia markers has grown steadily. Inherited risk using Illumina TruSight One gene panel and Sanger factors for venous thrombosis include deficiencies of the sequencing for familial testing. natural anticoagulants: antithrombin III, protein C and Results: De novo heterozygous mutation in KRT9 gene protein S. The patients possess genetic polymorphisms (NM_000226.3:c.487C>T) and compound heterozygosity such: factor V Leyden mutation (33%), prothrombin for GJB2 mutations (NM_004004.5:c.[35delG];[269T>C]), mutation G20210A(27%), plasminogen activator inhibitor known to cause EPPK and hearing impairment, respec- (17%),twopolymorphismofthemethylenetetrahydrofolate tively, were identified. No pathogenic mutation was found reductasegene
C677 TandA1298C(23%).72%ofpregnant inthegenesassociatedwithteratozoospermia.Studieshave patients with thrombophilia where categorized with high shown that KRT9 gene is expressed in developing risk of thrombophilia, that triggered the administration of spermatids and its loss of function causes teratozoospermia low molecular weight heparin. and reduced fertility in mutated mouse. Thus, we believe1820 Conclusions:Thetestsshouldbecarriedoutinsituations variantinahomozygousformintheOTOFgenehavebeen with clinical suspicion of thrombophilia, because the reported. treatment decision in pregnancy could be different. A. Golub: None. A. Erjavec kerget: None. B. E. Borsi: None. C. Potre: None. O. Potre: None. M. Zagradinik: None. J. Rebol: None. D. Krgović: None. Samfireag: None. I. Ionita: None. H. Ionita: None. D. N. Kokalj Vokač: None. Larisa-Marina: None. E-
P02 .05 Novel LCA5 mutation causes Retinitis pigmentosa E-
P02  Sensory disorders (eye, ear, pain) O.Landau1,L.Gradstein2,Y.Yogev1,O.Wormser1,O.S. Birk1,3 E-
P02 .01 A case report of a boy with congenital nonsyndromic 1TheMorrisKahnLaboratoryofHumanGenetics,National deafness: Identification of a homozygous missense Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev and Faculty of variant in the OTOF gene Health-Sciences,BenGurionuniversityoftheNegev,Be’er Sheva, Israel, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Soroka A.Golub,A.ErjavecŠkerget,B.Zagradišnik,J.Rebol,D. Medical Center and Clalit Health-Services, Be’er Sheva, Krgović, N. Kokalj Vokač Israel, 3Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Be’er Sheva, Israel University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia Introduction:AconsanguineousBedouinfamilypresented Introduction: The diagnosis of OTOF-related deafness is with a phenotype of Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) confirmed by identification of biallelic deafness-related affectinganindividualatthelatestgenerationinanapparent variants in OTOF, the gene encoding the protein otoferlin, recessive mode of inheritance. on chromosome 2p23.3. In this report we will present the Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing data clinical characteristics and molecular data of the boy with of an affected individual were analyzed and filtered for prelingual nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss in known benign variants using our in-house databases along whom we identified a homozygous missense variant in with open access databases (1000 genomes, NHLBI the OTOF gene. ESP, ExAC). Materials and Methods: An specific allele-specific Results: The analysis yielded several candidate variants polymerase chain reaction (ARMS-PCR) was used as the in genes previously associated with various ocular dis- first trial test for the detection of the c.35delG mutation in orders. Among candidate variants, a novel homozygous the GJB2 gene. Next generation sequencing (NGS) of missensep.K391*mutationinLeberCongenitalAmaurosis genomic DNA was performed by Sistemas Genomicos® 5(LCA5)wastheonlyoneinagenepreviouslyassociated (Oto-GeneSGKit®). Sample sequencing was done on the withLCA.ThemutationwasverifiedbySangersequencing Illumina HiSeq®/MiSeq® platforms. GeneSystem® and and was found to be fully segregate in the affected kindred Variant studio (Illumina) software were used for the as expected for recessive heredity. Furthermore, the analysis and the interpretation of the NGS data. mutation was not found in 100 healthy ethnically-matched Results: ARMS-PCR for the detection of c.35delG controls. In-silico analysis of the p.K391* variant showed mutationrelievedthepresenceofaheterozygousframeshift that it is likely to have a deleterious effect on the mature variant in the GJB2 gene in the proband, which was protein. inherited from the mother. Furthermore, next-generation Conclusions: Mutations in LCA5 were previously sequencing detected a homozygous missense variant described as causative for conditions such as Retinitis c.2464C>T of uncertain significance in the OTOF gene. pigmentosa and Leber Congenital Amaurosis. Our data The same variant c.2464C>T, but in a heterozygous state, suggest that the novel LCA5 homozygous mutation is the was found in his parents and sister. cause for the autosomal recessive, isolated, inherited LCA Conclusions: The genetic heterogeneity underlying in this kindred. nonsyndromic deafness complicates genetic testing for O. Landau: None. L. Gradstein: None. Y. Yogev: deafness in most populations. Our case highlights the None. O. Wormser: None. O.S. Birk: None. possibility that the above-mentioned variant could be the cause of prelingual nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing E-
P02 .06 loss. To date, two more deaf patients (siblings) with this Postlingual deafness in Eveno-Bytantaysky NationalAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1821 DistrictoftheSakhaRepublic(EasternSiberia,Russia): E-
P03  audiological and clinical-genealogical analysis Internal organs & endocrinology (lung, kidney, liver, gastrointestinal) V.G.Pshennikova1,2,F.M.Teryutin1,N.A.Barashkov1,2, G.P.Romanov1,2,A.V.Solov’ev1,2,N.N.Gotovtsev1,2,A. E-
P03 .03 A. Nikanorova1,2, L. U. Dzhemileva3,4, E. K. Khusnutdi- Clinical characteristics of patients referred for HNF1B nova3,4, O. L. Posukh5,6, S. A. Fedorova2 testing - Polish population study 1Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Problems, P. Sztromwasser1, A. Michalak1,2, B. Małachowska1, K. Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2M.K. Ammosov North- Antosik3,P.Młudzik3,A.Hogendorf2,A.Zmysłowska2,W. Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, Młynarski4, M. Borowiec3, W. Fendler1,5 3Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Federal Research Center, Ufa, Russian Federation, 4Bashkir State 1Department of Biostatistics and Translational Medicine, University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 5Federal Research Medical University of Lodz, Łódź, Poland, 2Department of Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Pediatrics, Diabetology, Endocrinology and Nephrology, Russian Federation, 6Novosibirsk State University, Novosi- Medical University of Lodz, Łódź, Poland, 3Department of birsk, Russian Federation Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Lodz, Łódź, Poland, 4Department of Pediatrics, Oncology, Hematology Inthispaperwepresentforthefirsttimetheresultsofthe and Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz, Łódź, audiological and clinical-genealogical research of the Poland, 5Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana- populationofsettlementsBatagai-AlytaandKusturofthe Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Eveno-Bytantaisky National District (ulus) of the Sakha MA, United States Republic (Eastern Siberia, Russia) for studying the postlingual form of deafness of unknown etiology firstly Introduction: Patients with heterozygous mutations of identified by us earlier in three Evens. As a result of an HNF1B typically develop renal cysts and diabetes syn- audiologicalexaminationof72people,10patientsfrom6 drome(RCAD).However,theextentofpancreaticandrenal nuclear families who met the criteria of postlingual form involvement may vary, and additional manifestations often of hearing loss were found. The segregation analysis broaden the phenotypic spectrum. We analyzed probands carried out in these families confirmed the autosomal referred for HNF1B testing, comparing patients with, and recessive type of inheritance of this form of postlingual without genetic diagnosis. hearing loss. The distant relationship of the examined Methods: Probands tested for HNF1B in years 2005- patients with postlingual hearing loss living in two 2018 using Sanger sequencing, multiplex ligation- villages of the Eveno-Bytantaisky National District of dependentprobeamplification,andnextgenerationsequen- theSakhaRepubliccanindicate totheroleofthefounder cing, were retrieved from the Polish Monogenic Diabetes effect in the local prevalence of this pathology. The Registry. A structured medical interview was performed results of this study and obtained expedition material will with all individuals and their physicians. Patients without be the basis for further study of the molecular genetic clear indication for HNF1B testing at referral (diabetes and etiology of this form of deafness and the discovering of renal abnormalities or family history for those conditions) mechanisms of its accumulation in this region of Sakha were excluded. All genetic findings were reassessed Republic. This study was supported by the Ministry of according to ACMG criteria. Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation Results: The study included 35 unrelated probands, (Grant #6.1766.2017, the Russian Foundation for Basic amongwhich12harboredapathogenicorlikely-pathogenic Research (Grants #17-29-06-016_ofi_m, #18-015- variant in HNF1B (five whole-gene deletions, one indel, 00212_А, #18-013-00738_А, 18-05-600035_Arctica) five SNVs), and one a variant of uncertain significance. andtheprogramforsupportofthebioresourcecollections Among the 22 patients negative for HNF1B, four had non- of FASO of Russia “The Genome of Yakutia” YSC CMP HNF1B findings in GCK, PKD1, KCNJ11 and HNF4A. (BRK 0556-2017-0003). Presence of polycystic kidneys (OR=6, 95% V.G. Pshennikova: None. F.M. Teryutin: None. N.A. CI:1.23–29.45) and pancreatic abnormalities (OR=15, Barashkov: None. G.P. Romanov: None. A.V. Solov’ev: 95%CI:1.49–151.30) best discriminated the HNF1B- None.N.N.Gotovtsev:None.A.A.Nikanorova:None.L. positive cases from the negative ones. U. Dzhemileva: None. E.K. Khusnutdinova: None. O.L. Conclusions:PatientsreferredforHNF1Btestingpresent Posukh: None. S.A. Fedorova: None. very heterogenous phenotypes. Despite suggestive char- acteristics, many do not harbor mutations in HNF1B1822 warranting further investigations into the genetic basis of In one abort a deletion in chr2:143,581,413–150,270,689 the RCAD syndrome. (6Mb) was identified causing Mowat-Wilson Syndrome. Project funded by National Science Center in Poland Conclusions: After validation and segregation of the (2016/23/P/NZ2/04251,2016/21/N/NZ5/01448,2015/19/B/ possible disease-causing CNVs of the genome-wide NZ5/02243). This project has received funding from the analysis, a re-sequencing of candidate genes in a larger European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation cohort could be suggested to further investigate the impact programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant of variants in these genes on LUTO. Further our study agreement No 665778. suggests that prenatal CNV testing in non-isolated LUTO P. Sztromwasser: None. A. Michalak: None. B. should be warranted. Małachowska: None. K. Antosik: None. P. Młudzik: Grant: BONFOR O-2018-4-01, O-149.0123 None. A. Hogendorf: None. A. Zmysłowska: None. W. L.M. Schierbaum: B. Research Grant (principal inves- Młynarski: None. M. Borowiec: None. W. tigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as Fendler: None. wellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;BONFOR2018-4- 01.M.Zaniew:None.S.Weber:None.G.C.Dworschak: E-
P03 .05 None.M.Ludwig:None.H.Reutter:None.A.C.Hilger: Copy number variation analysis in 164 patients with B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or lower urinary tract obstruction consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; BONFOR O-149.0123. L. M. Schierbaum1,2, M. Zaniew3, S. Weber4, G. C. Dworschak1,2, M. Ludwig5, H. Reutter1,2, A. C. Hilger1,2 E-
P03 .06 Maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3and 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,Bonn,Germany,2Department pregnancy: Spontaneous hypoglycaemia and different of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital, University of Bonn, pregnancycoursesintwosisterswithanHNF1amutation Bonn, Germany, 3Children’s Hospital, Poznań, Poland, 4University Children’s Hospital Marburg, Philipps-Uni- J. T. Skaugen1, A. L. Fredriksen1, K. Brusgaard1, A. J. versity, Marburg, Germany, 5Department of Clinical Schou2, H. T. Christesen2, L. L. T. Andersen3, D. M. ChemistryandClinical Pharmacology,UniversityHospital Jensen3,4 of Bonn, Bonn, Germany 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital Introduction: Congenital lower urinary tract obstruction (OUH), Odense, Denmark, 2Hans Christian Andersen (LUTO) is caused by anatomical blockage of the bladder Children’s Hospital, OUH, Odense, Denmark, 3Dept. of outflow tract or by functional impairment of urinary Gynaecology and Obstetrics, OUH, Odense, Denmark, voiding. Associated with early-onset oligohydramnios and 4Steno Diabetes Center Odense, OUH, Odense, Denmark renal disease, it is a major cause for childhood renal insufficiency and dialysis. Recent studies indicated the Introduction: Diabetes is a known risk factor associated importance of copy number variations (CNVs) as genetic with a number of adverse pregnancy outcomes. Conse- risk factor for LUTO. To systematically identify rare quently,well-regulatedpre-conceptionbloodglucoselevels disease-causing CNVs, we performed a genome-wide and closely monitored glycaemic control during pregnancy CNV analysis in LUTO patients. are considered pivotal for optimal foetal outcome and Methods: An array-based molecular karyotyping maternal health. Maturity onset diabetes of the young was performed in 164 LUTO patients using Illumina (MODY) comprises a group of monogenetic dominantly GSA1.0. CNVs were calculated from raw intensity data. inherited types of diabetes. This paper aims to describe the In order to exclude common CNVs a filter has been phenotypes of two pregnancies in two sisters heterozygous developed filtering each CNV against 4168 healthy for the c.526C>T-mutation in HNF1a. controls. CNV overlapping features were annotated using Materials and Methods: Clinical assessment during AnnotSV. Only CNVs containing gene- or promotor- pregnancies included biochemical measurements, bio- codingregionswereincluded.InamanualstepeachCNV metrics, blood pressure, and ultrasonic assessments with is currently filtered for frequency in the Database of regards to maternal and foetal health. Data were retrieved Genetic Variants. from the sisters’ medical records. Results: In the genome-wide analysis, we identified Results: Pre-gestational HbA1c-levels were elevated in over 900 possible disease-causing CNVs. The application both sisters, following a steady decline throughout the first of additional filter criteria is ongoing in order to half of both pregnancies. Likewise, both sisters initially prioritizepossibledisease-causingCNVs/candidategenes. suffered low fasting glucose levels in early pregnancy.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1823 Glycaemic control in Sister A deteriorated during the depended onthedoseofvitaminD.Alowlevel ofvitamin pregnancy despite treatment with sulfonylurea and later DwasregisteredinpatientswithVClessthan80%,inthose insulin,withglucoselevelsstabilizingshortlyafterdelivery. with cirrhosis of the liver and those taking glucocorticoid Sister A suffered from preeclampsia, and delivered a drugs. The work was carried out within the framework of macrosomic child by vaginal delivery at gestational week the state task. 34+4. Sister B retained fasting hypoglycaemia without E. Zhekaite: None. E. Kondratyeva: None. N. Petrova: medicinal treatment of the diabetes throughout the preg- None. V. Sherman: None. A. Voronkova: None. R. nancy. Sister B delivered a child after induction at Budzinskiy:None.A.Zodbinova:None.Y.Melyanovskaya: gestational week 35+6 due to gestational hypertension. None. Conclusion: Two sisters with MODY3 due to the same HNF1a mutation presented very different pregnancy courses and glycaemic control during pregnancy. Sponta- E-
P04  neous hypoglycaemia in early pregnancy may complicate Skeletal, connective tissue, ectodermal and skin the management of diabetes in MODY3 patients. disorders J.T. Skaugen: None. A.L. Fredriksen: None. K. Brusgaard: None. A.J. Schou: None. H.T. Christesen: E-
P04 .01 None. L.L.T. Andersen: None. D.M. Jensen: None. A genome-wide association study of bisphosphonate- associated atypical femoral fracture E-
P03 .08 The effect of exogenous and genetic factors on the M. Kharazmi1, M. Wadelius1, K. Michaëlsson1, J. development of vitamin D deficiency in patients with Schilcher2, N. Eriksson1, H. Melhus1, P. Hallberg1 cystic fibrosis 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Linköping Uni- E. Zhekaite, E. Kondratyeva, N. Petrova, V. Sherman, versity, Linköping, Sweden A. Voronkova, R. Budzinskiy, A. Zodbinova, Y. Melyanovskaya Introduction:Atypicalfemoralfractureisanadverseeffect ofbisphosphonatedrugsthatareusedtopreventthelossof Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian bone density in osteoporosis and metastatic bone disease. Federation The mechanism of this adverse effect is unclear, but a geneticpredispositionhas been suggested. We performed a Objective: To investigate the level of Vitamin D in Cystic genome-wide association study with the aim to identify Fibrosis (CF) children in the three regions of the Russian common genetic variants predisposing to atypical femoral Federation with taking due to exogenous and genetic fracture associated with bisphosphonates. factors. Materials and methods: 158 CF patients were Materials and Methods: Cases were recruited mainly examined during the winter period: 73 from Moscow (51 - through reports to the Swedish Medical Products Agency. CF,22healthy),45fromKrasnoyarsk(29-CF,16healthy), Cases without a current diagnosis of cancer (n=51) were 40 from Stavropol (20 - CF, 20 - healthy). Polymorphic compared with population controls (n=4891), and with variants CY
P2 C9
*3, CY P2
C9 *2, CY
P2 D6*4, CY
P3 A4*3, bisphosphonate-treatedcontrolswithoutacurrentdiagnosis CY
P3 A4*1B were investigated. The synthesis of endogen- of cancer (n=324). Single nucleotide polymorphisms ous antimicrobial peptides was determined by enzyme (SNPs) were imputed using the haplotype reference immunoassay using Hycultbiotech kits. Results. Signifi- consortium panel. The genome-wide significance threshold cantlylowerserumVitaminDlevelsweredeterminedinCF was p<5x108. patients from 3 regions, compared with healthy controls Results: Bisphosphonate-associated atypical femoral frac- (p=0.003). With increasing age, the content of vitamin D ture was associated with four isolated SNPs: rs7729897 p=4.00x10−10; in the serum of patients with CF was reduced (p<0.01). upstream of NR3
C1 , OR 10.27, rs11465606 The lowest rates of Vitamin D were recorded in the intronic in I
L18 R1, OR=6.15, p=7.13x10−9; rs145787127 Stavropol region (p=0.001). No relationship was found intronic in NTN1, OR=7.37, p=3.08x10−8; and between thecarrierofpolymorphicvariants ofgenesofthe rs144094653 close to TUBB8
P5 , OR=7.68, p=4.20x10−8. first phase of xenobiotic biotransformation and the level of Variants of NR3
C1  and NTN1 have previously been Vitamin D in CF patients. The level of HN
P1 -3 was associated with decreased bone mineral density and significantly higher in CF children compared with healthy osteoporosis,respectively.When caseswerecompared with controls (p=0.017) and does not depend on the content of bisphosphonate-treated controls, no statistically significant Vitamin D. Conclusion. The availability of vitamin D association remained.1824 Conclusions: We found no evidence of a common N.F. Hassib: None. A.F. Abdelazeem: None. M. genetic predisposition to bisphosphonate-associated atypi- ElMasry: None. H. Mattar: None. N. Ahmed: None. cal femoral fracture. Further studies with larger sample sizes, and whole genome sequencing studies to identify E-
P04 .03 possible rare risk variants, are warranted. Genomic analyses in the Lebanese population identify Funding: The Swedish Research Council (Medicine); risk loci for cleft lip and palate Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation; Swedish Medical Pro- ducts Agency; Selander’s foundation, Thuréus’ foundation, L.AbiFarraj1,A.K.Salloum2,F.Nabbout3,J.Sabbagh4, and Clinical Research Support (ALF) at Uppsala Univer- N. Abou Chebel5, M. Ghassibe-Sabbagh1 sity; Östergötland County Council. M.Kharazmi:None.M.Wadelius:None.K.Michaëls- 1Department of Natural Sciences, School of Arts and son: None. J. Schilcher: None. N. Eriksson: None. H. Sciences, Lebanese American University, Beirut, Lebanon, Melhus: None. P. Hallberg: None. 2SchoolofMedicine,LebaneseAmericanUniversity,Beirut, Lebanon, 3Department of Orthodontics, Faculty of Dental E-
P04 .02 Medicine, Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon, 4Depart- Regenerative approach for repairing large odontogenic ment of Restorative Dentistry and Endodontics, Faculty of cystic defects in two genetic disorders Dental Medicine, Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon, 5Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, N. F. Hassib1, A. F. Abdelazeem1, M. ElMasry2, H. American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon Mattar3, N. Ahmed1 Introduction: Cleft lip and palate is a common complex 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Ganzouri developmental disorder that presents with medical, socio- SpecializedHospital,Cairo,Egypt,3OralandMaxillofacial economicandpsychologicalproblems.Theaimofthestudy unit, New Cairo Hospital,, Cairo, Egypt wastoidentifyknownand/ornovelgenesandgenevariants thatplayaroleinthesusceptibilitytocleftlipandpalatein Introduction: Odontogenic cysts arise from tissue(s) that the Lebanese population. are involved in tooth development and usually cause a Materials and Methods: Seven unrelated families were variable degree of bone resorption. Following the cyst chosen based on positive consanguinity history, and/ or enucleation, whether or not to fill the resultant bone defect positive family history for isolated as well as syndromic with bone substitute depends mainly on the size of the clefts and tooth agenesis. Whole exome sequencing was defect. In this study, we present two cases with large performed on 30 members and comprehensive filtering odontogenic cystic lesions that have been treated via a strategies were carried out on the single nucleotide variant regenerativeapproach.Materialandmethods:Thefirstcase and indel files. In silico tools were used to model and was a 16 years old girl diagnosed with Xeroderma predict potential causality of the variants having a minor Pigmentosum (XP) and the second case was a 48 years allele frequency of ≤ 2%. old female had diabetes mellitus type 2, systemic lupus Results: Ten variants showed a co-segregation with erythromatosus and under cortisone treatment. Histopatho- the condition in our families and were thus shortlisted. logicalexaminationrevealedacystfromodontogenicorigin Variants included missense and nonsense changes in the either dentigerous or radicular. Autologous bone marrow Notch 2 (rs141935585), CFTR (rs377319489), PGA
P3  mononuclear cells (BMMNCs), nano-hydroxyapatite, gela- (rs761733666), and MID2 (rs763059099) genes. tin sponge and autologous platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) was Conclusions: Replication studies will help assess the used to fill the resultant bony defect. shortlisted variants in populations of different ethnic Results: Radiographic assessment was performed after origins. In parallel, we are analyzing one variant using six months showed bone regeneration with few trabecula- functional studies. This would help us understand the tions. Regular follow-up last for three years and radio- physiologicalmechanismbehindthefailureofproperfusion graphic evaluation showed successful and complete bone atthelevelofembryologicalfacialbuds.(http://sas.lau.edu. regenerationwithnormaltrabeculationsandnosignofcyst lb/natural-sciences/people/michella-ghassibe-sabbagh.php) recurrence. (michella.sabbagh@lau.edu.lb) Conclusions: This study proved that the regenerative L.AbiFarraj:None.A.K.Salloum:None.F.Nabbout: approach led to satisfactory healing of large odontogenic None. J. Sabbagh: None. N. Abou Chebel: None. M. cysts defects and it positively induced bone regeneration, Ghassibe-Sabbagh: None. regardless of the type of genetic disorder.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1825 E-
P04 .04 E-
P04 .05 Splicingmutation(c.1155+1G>C)intheCO
L1 A1gene Heritable disorders of connective tissue: diagnostic in a Romanian patient with osteogenesis imperfecta approachandcoordinationofcarein10unrelatedcases followed by prenatal diagnosis V. Plaiasu1,D.Ozunu1,G.Motei1,M. Ivan1, V.Bicu2,G. C.GUG1,A.Raţiu2,D.Stoicanescu1,M.Cevei3,M.Gug4, Nedelkoski2, A. Radulescu1, A. Coltoiu1 V. Gorduza5 1INSMC Alessandrescu-Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, 1Department of Microscopic Morphology, University of 2Kineto Medical Health, Bucharest, Romania Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology II, Introduction: There are more than 450 heritable disorders University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, of connective tissue and represent a heterogeneous group Timisoara, Romania, 3University of Oradea, Faculty of that affect one or another of the primary elements of the Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, Oradea, Roma- connective tissues, characterized by abnormalities in nia, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor skeletal tissues muscle, skin, the cardiovascular system, Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 5University of Medicine and eyes, lungs and may interfere with normal growth and Pharmacy “Grigore T. Popa”, Iaşi, Romania development. The aim of our present study was to assess geneticdiagnosisofsuspectedpatientsbyconnectivetissue Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), (OMIM®: 120150) also disorders and to establish the nature of the management known as brittle bone disease, is a rare heterogeneous with a personalized therapeutical program. group of inherited disorders. The purpose of this study is Methodology: Full work-up was done to the patients to report one patient, with OI type I in a Romanian family presenting with a phenotype involving connective tissue: with an RNA-splicing mutation in CO
L1 A1 gene. The 37 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome, cutis laxa years old patient was clinically diagnosed at birth with OI spectrum, melorheostosis with osteopoikilosis, different type I, presenting right clavicle fracture. Since birth, he congenital collagen disorders. Each patient was confirmed had 60 fractures, mostly lower limbs fractures, conse- with molecular investigation of the responsible gene. quently now has short stature (1.36 m). The patient has Targetedmonogenicdiagnosis,genepaneltestingorWhole blue sclerae, but no dentinogenesis imperfecta and no Exome Sequencing technique have been performed, degree of hearing loss. depending on clinical suspicion of the case. Methods: For the patient, a Clinical Whole Exome Results: In our group known or new variants have been Sequencing test was performed focusing on 3583 OMIM described involving the genes: EFEM
P2 , TNXB, PYCR1, disease genes with target region capture followed by Next FBN1, LEMD3, CO
L5 A1, CO
L4 A1, CO
L4 A4, CO
L10 A1. Generation Sequencing. NGS testing was followed by The mutations of these genes can lead to various diseases prenatal diagnosis. His wife was pregnant, amniocentesis with clinical heterogeneity, with secondary physical was performed, amniocytes were cultured, then DNA discomfort,medicalcomplicationsandsocialrepercussions. extraction followed by targeted sequencing was performed Critical areas of clinical management comprised pain, on both DNA strands of the relevant CO
L1 A1 region. cardiovascular and respiratory issues, fatigue and dysauto- Results: Direct DNA sequencing analysis of CO
L1 A1 nomia,bonefragility,skinandsofttissuefragility.Physical generevealedasplicingmutation(c.1155+1G>CorIV
S17  therapy, psychological support and reproductive concerns +1G>C) in heterozygous state. The c.1155+1G>C muta- represented majorissues for care ofthese patients and their tionhasbeenreportedforitspathogenicitybeingpresentin families. the LOVD database with 7 entries, all are substitutions Conclusions: Understanding and appreciation for the within intron 17, classified as pathogenic splice-site medical issues in each diagnosed disorder improve the variants. The fetus is not a carrier of this mutation. quality of life and life span of these individuals. Conclusion: Each reported case is important because it V.Plaiasu:None.D.Ozunu:None.G.Motei:None.M. helps to know the pathogenic gene mutation in Romanian Ivan: None. V. Bicu: None. G. Nedelkoski: None. A. patients with OI and the detailed molecular and clinical Radulescu: None. A. Coltoiu: None. features will be useful for exploring phenotype-genotype correlations. E-
P04 .07 C. Gug: None. A. Raţiu: None. D. Stoicanescu: None. First case of non-lethal variant in Fibrochondrogenesis M. Cevei: None. M. Gug: None. V. Gorduza: None. case in Kuwait1826 A. A. Alaqeel1, H. H. Albalool1, H. Y. Mohammed2, F. oro-dentalmanifestationsinfivepatientswithMADAfrom Alterki3, M. H. Dashti1 three unrelated families. Subjects and Methods: Patients were recruited from the 1Kuwait Medical Genetic Centre, Sulaibikhat, Kuwait, outpatient clinics of genodermatoses and oro-dental genet- 2DepartemtnofRadiology;MaternityHospital,Sulaibikhat, ics, NRC, Egypt. After acquiring the informed consents; Kuwait,3FacultyofMedicine,KuwaitUniversity,Jabriyah, pedigrees were constructed, phenotyping was performed, Kuwait dental panoramic radiographs were taken and molecular studies were performed to confirm the diagnosis. Background: Fibrochondrogenesis (FCG) is rare lethal Results: The first family had 3 siblings, 1 female and 2 chondrodysplasia disorder characterised by recessively males. The second and third families had a male and a inherited disorder and multiple skeletal anomalies [1-3,5]. female respectively. All patients are the result of con- To date, there are 26 reported cases in the literature, where sanguineousmarriages.Theiragesrangedfrom8–17years. onlyfewreportedcasessurvivedafterfirstyearoflife[4,5]. Oro-dentally, all five patients showed microstomia and Here,wearereportingacaseofFCGwhosurvivedbeyond severe crowding leading to excessive proclination of the neonatal and even first year of life with unusually mild-to- anterior incisors and incompetence of the lips which moderate sensory-neural deafness. To our knowledge, this increased as the patients aged. The repercussions of is the first case of FCG in Kuwait. crowdingfromcariesandcalculusformationalsoincreased Material and methods: we are reporting an girl whom by aging. Dental panoramas showed accentuated mandib- first came to genetic clinic at the age of 18-months ular angles & severe micrognathia. Bent roots were present presenting with short limbs, facial dysmorphism and cleft in4ofthecases. Themandibularramuswasseverelyshort palate.Skeletalsurveyshowedmultipleskeletalanomalies in 2 cases and it was absent completely in 3- from two including rhizomelic shortening, possible hypoplastic families- with subsequent absence of the condyle and pelvic bones, displaced and adducted thumb B/L. Both coronoidprocesses.Acro-osteolysisofthechinwasevident KniestandFCGwereconsistentbasedonbothclinicaland in the two elder siblings. radiological features. However, FCG was initially Conclusion:Thisstudyextendsthephenotypicspectrum excluded because it is known to be lethal. As a result ofMADAwiththeabsentramus,condyleandcoronoidas CO
L2 A1 gene analysis to rule-out Kniest syndrome was anadditionalfeaturefoundinthreeofthecasesherein.This requested, which surprisingly revealed no detectable finding also supports the suggested role of LMNA gene in mutations. After that, skeletal dysplasia gene panel intramembranous ossification of bone. revealed novel likely pathogenic variant (c.2323G>C) in M.I. Mehrez: None. CO
L11 A1 gene in homozygous state. Result:suchasurprisinggeneticresult isconsistentwith E-
P04 .12 the genotype-phenotype contrary to the lethality nature of Intranasal desmopressin treatment for massive subcu- FCG. Furthermore, both parents are found to be hetero- taneous hematoma in five patients with musculocon- zygous carriers further supporting the pathogenicity of the tractural Ehlers-Danlos syndrome detected variant. Conclusion: although FCG is a lethal skeletal dysplasia; T. Kosho1,2, N. Fujita2,3, M. Ishikawa2, E. Kise2, T. however, we detected non-lethal likely pathogenic variant Kojima1, T. Yamaguchi2,1, M. Minatogawa1, K. Naka- in our patient. mura2,1, K. Takano2,1 A.A. Alaqeel: None. H.H. Albalool: None. H.Y. Mohammed:None.F.Alterki:None.M.H.Dashti:None. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 2Center for E-
P04 .10 MedicalGenetics,ShinshuUniversityHospital,Matsumoto, Mandibuloacral dysplasia type A; an oro-dental Japan, 3Problem-Solving Oriented Training Program for perspective Advanced Medical Personnel: NGSD (Next Generation Super Doctor) Project, Matsumoto, Japan M. I. Mehrez MusculocontracturalEhlers-Danlossyndrome(mcEDS)isa National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt recentlydelineatedtypeofEhlers-Danlossyndrome(EDS), associated with impaired synthesis of dermatan sulfate Background: Mandibuloacral dysplasia type A (MAD A) caused by mutations in CHST14 or DSE. Massive (OMIM #248370) isaprogerialaminopathy.Wereportthe subcutaneous hematoma is one of the most serious complications in mcEDS, occurring with mild traumas,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1827 spreadingacutelywithseverepain,andsometimesresulting Patientandmethods:A14-year-oldgirl,wasreferredto in hemorrhagic shock. Intranasal or intravenous desmo- our Oro-dental Genetics clinic. She was born to apparently pressin treatment is used for patients with mild hemophilia healthy non-consanguineous parents. Her deciduous teeth and von Willebrand disease through increased activities in erupted and exfoliated normally. Although her permanent factor VIII and von Willebrand factor. The treatment was teeth were all present, mobility of some of the teeth and also described to be useful for management of bleeding in mild gingivitis were present. Panoramic radiographs patients with various types of EDS. We report experiences showed mild generalized horizontal bone loss, only severe intranasal desmopressin treatment (150μg/episode) on five at the areas of first molars and anterior teeth in both jaws. patients (1 male, 4 females; the mean age 18.2 years) in Moreover, mild dryness and fissuring of the skin of the Shinshu University Hospital. Clinical information was palms and soles were observed. After obtaining written retrospectively reviewed from medical records of these consent, peripheral blood samples were obtained from the patients. The mean age of the first episode of massive patient and her parents. Sequencing of the coding exons of subcutaneous hematoma was 9 years (range, 3 to 15). CTSC gene was performed. Surgical drainage was required in three and blood Results: Despite the mild clinical features of PLS, transfusion in two. Elevated activities of factor VIII and compound heterozygous mutations of CTSC gene were von Willebrand factor were measured in all after adminis- identified on exon 7 (c.935A>G and c.1234A>G) in the tration of intranasal desmopressin. Four continue the paternal and maternal chromosomes, respectively. The treatment without adverse effects, whereas one child parents were found to be heterozygous carriers without discontinued it because of transient numbness in an arm. any clinical feature of PLS. Thetreatmentwasrealizedbythepatientsandtheirfamilies Conclusion: Some forms of PLS can be confused with to suppress growth of hematoma, shorten the duration of aggressive periodontitis suffering,andrelievepsychologicalburdenabouttheriskof N.E.B.Ahmed:None.A.K.T.Saad:None.H.Soliman: massive subcutaneous hematoma. Intranasal desmopressin None. M.R. Abouzaid: None. M.I. Mostafa: None. treatment could be a preventive and therapeutic option for massive subcutaneous hematoma in patients with mcEDS. E-
P04 .18 T. Kosho: None. N. Fujita: None. M. Ishikawa: None. Variable familial expression of spondylometaphyseal E. Kise: None. T. Kojima: None. T. Yamaguchi: None. dysplasia with coxa vara& a novel FN1 mutation M. Minatogawa: None. K. Nakamura: None. K. Takano: None. E. Steichen-Gersdorf1, R. Biedermann2, M. Witsch- Baumgartner3 E-
P04 .16 AcompoundheterozygousEgyptianpatientwithamild 1DepartmentofPediatrics,Innsbruck,Austria,2Department form of Papillion LeFevre syndrome of Orthopedic surgery, Innsbruck, Austria, 3centre of medical genetics, Innsbruck, Austria N. E. B. Ahmed1, A. K. T. Saad2, H. Soliman2, M. R. Abouzaid1, M. I. Mostafa1 Introduction: Spondylometaphyseal dysplasias (SMDs) comprise a diverse group of skeletal dysplasias and often 1Oro-dental Genetics, National Research Centre, Giza, manifest as short stature, growth-plate irregularities, and Egypt, 2Medical Molecular Genetics, National Research vertebral anomalies. One such condition is SMD with Centre, Giza, Egypt “corner fractures” (OMIM #184255). These individuals generally show development of coxa vara, scoliosis and Introduction: Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome (PLS) is a rare triangular ossification centers at the edges of metaphyses autosomal recessive genodermatosis, characterized by that simulate fractures. To date 16 patients with SMD and palmoplantar hyperkeratosis combined with early-onset biallelic Fibronectin (FN1) mutations have been reported. severe periodontitis. On the other hand, aggressive period- The majority had a substitution of a cysteine in the N- ontitis (AgP)isanearly-onsetrapid progressivedestructive terminal assembly region. disease that affects the periodontal ligament and alveolar Methods: Analysis of candidate genes by massive bone but without dermal manifestations. Mutations in parallel sequencing (TruSightTM One Panel, NextSeq CTSC gene were found to be responsible for PLS and in Illumina) and data analysis by SeqNext (JSI). some cases forAgP. Here,wepresentacase with PLSthat Results: We report a family with a novel missense was initially confused with aggressive periodontitis and mutation in FN1:c.341G>C (p.Arg114Pro) inherited from carries two different mutations in the CTSC gene on each themother.Thegirl,bornattermBW1,895kg(−3,03SD), chromosome. 
L44 cm(−2,83SD),wasfirstevaluatedforshortstatureand1828 developing waddling gait at 7 years. Radiographic features Results: The frequency of minor A allele (rs2595104) of were compatible with a bilateral “perthes like” hip PITX2 was 0.38 and 0.44 in the control group and in AF dysplasia, coxa vara, flattened epiphysis with corner patients,respectively.Therewasnosignificantdifferencein fractures, abnormal vertebrae with end-plate irregularities. alleleandgenotypedistribution(p=0.52).Thelogadditive Height at 8,4years 113,5cm (−3,5SD). odds ratio is 1.235 (C.I.=0.783–1.947; p=0.363). The Thebrotherwasbornpreterm at33/3 weekswith normal frequency of minor C allele (rs6584555) of NEUR
L1  was birth measurements, normal development. At 9 years he 0.22 in the control group and 0.23 in AF patients. In allele developedan abnormal gait caused by unilateralcoxavara. and genotype distribution we could not find any significant Height was 127,6cm (
P10 ). difference (p=0.92). The log additive odds ratio is 1,056 The mother was evaluated in her childhood with short (C.I.=0.618–1.805; p=0,842). statureandcoxavara.Finalheightwas149cm.Inadulthood Conclusion: We did not find significant association of she developed painful osteoarthritis and osteonecrosis SNP rs2595104 and rs6584555 with AF. The network affecting mainly knees and ankles. analysis showed that PITX2 and NEUR
L1  are connected Conclusion: The report expands the clinical phenotype indirectly via two intearctors take part in Wnt and Notch and demonstrates familial variability concerning onset and signaling pathways. severity of symptoms. K. Szirák: None. B. Soltész: None. O. Hajas: None. R. E.Steichen-Gersdorf:None.R.Biedermann:None.M. Urbancsek: None. E. Nagy-Baló: None. A. Penyige: Witsch-Baumgartner: None. None. Z. Csanádi: None. B. Nagy: None. E-
P05 .03 E-
P05  Familial association of both molecularly confirmed type Cardiovascular disorders 1 Neurofibromatosis and Brugada syndrome E-
P05 .02 E. Micaglio1, G. Ciconte1, M. M. Monasky1, G. Vice- PITX2andNEUR
L1 SNPpolymorphismsinHungarian domini1,V.Mecarocci1,L.Giannelli1,F.Giordano1,A.V. atrial fibrillation patients determined by quantitative Pollina1,M.Saviano1,S.Crisà1,V.Borrelli1,A.Ghiroldi1, real-time PCR and melting curve analysis S.D’Imperio1,C.DiResta2,S.Benedetti2,M.Ferrari2,V. Santinelli1, L. Anastasia1, C. Pappone1 K.Szirák1,B.Soltész1,O.Hajas2,R.Urbancsek2,E.Nagy- Baló2, A. Penyige1, Z. Csanádi2, B. Nagy1 1IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, Italy, 2IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, Italy 1Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Institute of We present a family in which segregates the inherited Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, nonsense mutation [c. 3946C > T (p.Arg1316*)] in the Debrecen, Hungary SCN5A gene in association with Brugada syndrome (BrS). In the same family segregates the frameshift mutation Introduction: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common [c.7686delG (p.Ile2563fsX40)] in the NF1 gene as well, cardiac arrhythmia affecting 1–2% of the general popula- associated with type 1 neurofibromatosis (NF1). This tion. The aim of our study was to investigate whether the genetic association, reported for the first time ever, might rs2595104 SNP located in the enchancer of the PITX2 at identify a subset of NF1 patients at higher risk of sudden 4q25 region and rs6584555 SNP in an intronic region of cardiacdeath.Wethinkthatthosepatientsrequireacareful NEUR
L1 geneonchromosome10areassociatedwithAFin arrhythmologic counselling in addition to clinical evalua- a Caucasian population. PITX2 and NEUR
L1  regulate the tion performed for type 1 Neurofibromatosis. Our case expression profile of ion transporters and changes in action series highlights the importance of genetic testing not only potentialdurationsoreducedexpressionofbothproteinsin to confirm a pathology but also to identify asymptomatic patients could increase AF susceptibility by AP duration family members. They can need further clinical examina- shortening. tions and preventive interventions, as well as to be advised MaterialsandMethods:Weperformedaprotein-protein about the possibility of avoiding recurrence risk with networkanalysistoassessfunctionalconnectionamongthe medicallyassistedreproduction.Furtherstudiesarerequired protein products. We genotyped DNA samples of 76 AF to clarify the relationship between molecularly confirmed patientsand77healthycontrolsusingquantitativereal-time NF1 and arrhythmias. PCR followed by melting curve analysis. E.Micaglio:None.G.Ciconte: None.M.M.Monasky: None. G. Vicedomini: None. V. Mecarocci: None. L.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1829 Giannelli:None.F.Giordano:None.A.V.Pollina:None. Acknowledgement:ThisworkwassupportedbyInternal M. Saviano: None. S. Crisà: None. V. Borrelli: None. A. Research Grants of the University of Medicine, Pharmacy, Ghiroldi: None. S. D’Imperio: None. C. Di Resta: None. Sciences and Technology of Tîrgu Mureş, Project no. 615/ S. Benedetti: None. M. Ferrari: None. V. Santinelli: 4/17.01.2019. None. L. Anastasia: None. C. Pappone: None. G. Crauciuc: None. F. Tripon: None. L. Gozar: None. R. Togănel: None. C. Bănescu: None. E-
P05 .05 TCF21 rs12190287 and GATA4 rs804280 in pediatric E-
P05 .06 patients with Congenital Heart Disease Disease variants associated with coronary heart disease in exomes of Bulgarian centenarians and controls G. Crauciuc1, F. Tripon1, L. Gozar2, R. Togănel2, C. Bănescu1 M. B. Ganev1, D. Serbezov1, L. Balabanski1,2, R. Vazharova3,2, D. Nesheva1, Z. Hammoudeh1, O. Anto- 1Genetics Laboratory, Center for Advanced Medical and nova1, D. Nikolova1, S. Hadjidekova1, D. Toncheva1 Pharmaceutical Research, University of Medicine, Phar- macy, Sciences and Technology of Tîrgu Mures, Tîrgu 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Mureş, Romania, 2Institute of Cardiovascular Disease and Sofia,Sofia,Bulgaria,2GynecologyandAssistedReproduc- Transplantation, Clinic of Pediatric Cardiology, Tîrgu tion Hospital “Malinov DM”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Faculty of Mureş, Romania medicine, Department of biology, medical genetics and microbiology, Sofia University “St. Climent Ohridski”, Introduction: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of Sofia, Bulgaria GATA4 and TCF21 genes, such as rs804280 and rs12190287, were reported to be associated with the risk Introduction: Cardiovascular diseases cause an estimated for congenital heart disease (CHD). Until now the results annual mortality of 4 million deaths in Europe. Among arecontradictory,inthisrespectweexploredwhetherthese them, coronary heart disease (CHD) is the most common two SNPs contribute to the occurrence of CHD. with overall prevalence of 6.4% in individuals over 20 Materials and Methods: This study consisted of 72 years. To identify previously reported disease variants nonsyndromicpediatricpatientsdiagnosedwithCHD(atrial linked to CHD that are compatible with longevity and septal defect-ASV, ventricular septal defect-VSD and healthy life, we performed WES of the genomes of Tetralogy of Fallot-TOF). The control group was repre- Bulgarian centenarians and controls. sented by 43 healthy subjects. Predesigned TaqMan assays Materials&Methods:DNAsamplesfrom32Bulgarian were used for genotyping. centenarians and 61 healthy subjects (18–30 years) were Results:Ourresultsrevealednosignificantdifferencesof obtained, two DNA pools were constructed and subse- the genotypes between the groups (p>0.05). Also, the quently whole exome sequenced. We have selected 1351 alleles distribution of rs12190287 and rs804280 between SNP variants in 705 genes and 190 noncoding regions the groups were approximatively similar, so there were not associated with CHD (https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sa associated with CHD risk (OR=1.54;95%IC= piens/Phenotype/Locations?oa=EFO:0000378). 0.911–2.68;p=0.135 respectively OR=1.25;95%IC= Results: We identified 54 variants in centenarians and 0.71–2.21;p=0.46). The distribution of the combined controls which were previously reported to be associated variant genotypes of the investigated SNPs remained with CHD. Out of them, 33 variants could not be accepted approximatively equally between the groups (p>0.05). as predisposing (18 variants have frequency higher than EveniftheCHDgroupconsistinarelativelysmallnumber 0,50; 15 have higher frequency in centenarians). Only 5 of of patients, we investigated the genotypes and alleles the remaining 21 variants have statistically significant (p distribution separately, analyzing their distribution between FDR<0,05) lower frequency in centenarians compared to controls and ASV patients/VSD patients/TOF patients, but controls: CCD
C92  rs11057401 (0,254/0,384); DHX38 no differences were observed (p>0.05). rs1050362 (0,269/0,364); PDLIM5 rs2452600 (0,297/ Conclusions:Thepresentstudyrevealedthatrs12190287 0,379); CENPQ rs2501968 (0,268/0,470); LIPG and rs804280 are not associated with CHD risk. While the rs2000813 (0,258/0,349). Sixteen variants have statistically groups size of our study represents a limitation, we will insignificant frequency differences between the two pools continuetoincludenewcases andtoinvestigate newSNPs and could not be considered as having effect on longevity. in order to characterize the risk for developing CHD in our Conclusion: Our data demonstrates that an incidental pediatric patients. finding of certain reported disease-associated variants may not preclude an extraordinarily long life. The genome of1830 centenarians can be successfully used to clarify the clinical A.Bukaeva: None. G. Radzhabova: None. M. Polyak: relevance of genetic variants. None. Y. Frolova: None. S. Dzemeshkevich: None. E. Acknowledgments: DN 03/7 from 18.12.2016-NSF Zaklyazminskaya: None. Bulgaria; D-148/20.06.2018-CMH M.B.Ganev:None.D.Serbezov:None.L.Balabanski: E-
P05 .08 None. R. Vazharova: None. D. Nesheva: None. Z. Anovel pathogenicTBX5variant inafamilywithHolt- Hammoudeh: None. O. Antonova: None. D. Nikolova: Oram syndrome: reverse phenotyping counts None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D. Toncheva: None. N.Pekkola Pacheco,K.Lagerstedt- Robinson, B. Tesi, A. E-
P05 .07 Hammarsjö,M.Mannila,A.Lindstrand,G.Grigelioniené Mutation spectrum of the TNNT2 gene in Russian patients with dilated cardiomyopathy reveals the “hot Department of Clinical Genetics, Stockholm, Sweden spot” codon Introduction:Holt-Oramsyndrome(HOS)isanautosomal A.Bukaeva1,G.Radzhabova1,M.Polyak1,Y.Frolova1,S. dominant disorder associated with a broad spectrum of Dzemeshkevich1, E. Zaklyazminskaya1,2 congenital heart defects, arrhythmias, and upper limb malformations. HOS is caused by heterozygous mutations 1Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery, Moscow, inTBX5,ageneessentialforcardiacandlimbdevelopment. Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National Research Here we report a three-generation family diagnosed with Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation HOS through whole genome sequencing and reverse phenotyping. Introduction: The prevalence of the hereditary forms of Materials and methods: All individuals, two siblings dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is 1: 500. Up to 80 DCM- and their mother, had atrium septal defects and later associated genes are known, but most of them do not developed sick sinus syndrome and supraventricular correspondfor>5%ofcases.MutationsintheTNNT2gene arrythmias. In addition, one sibling lost a child and, in a contributeto3–6%offamilialDCM.Theaimofthisstudy later pregnancy, a foetus due to congenital heart defects. was to evaluate the spectrum of the TNNT2 mutations in Whole genome sequencing was performed in one sibling. Russian DCM patients. Data analysis was restricted to 203 genes associated with Methods: The cohort included 92 probands with DCM, Defect in the atrial septum (HP:0001631) and Sick sinus and 36 of them were diagnosed under 18 y.o.. Genetic syndrome (HP:0011704). Sanger sequencing was used for investigation was performed by NGS of the target genes validation and segregation analysis. panel flanking 81 DCM-associated genes including TNNT2 Results: A heterozygous, not previously reported, non- with following Sanger sequencing of all clinically sig- sense variant, c.1081>T (p.Gln361*) in TBX5 nificant findings. (NM_000192) was found to segregate in the family. The Results: We revealed three heterozygous pathogenic motherwasshowntobemosaic.Carefulreversephenotyp- variants in the TNNT2 gene in three adult probands with ing revealed unilateral mild radial malformation in both familial DCM, demonstrating both common (heart dilata- siblings. Unfortunately, DNA of the child and foetus were tion) and specific features. The carrier of p.R173Q variant not available for testing. has also left ventricular non-compaction. All substitutions Conclusion: We report a novel pathogenic variant in (p.R173Q, p.R173L, and p.R173W) affect the same codon TBX5 that prompted clinical re-examination, leading to a 173,whichisplacedintheactivationdomainoftroponinT diagnosisofHOSinourfamily.OurresultsshowthatHOS and participates in its complexation with the troponin I. should be considered in patients with seemingly isolated Conclusion: The mutation rate in the TNNT2 gene is congenital heart defects and/or arrhythmias. Reverse 3.2%inthewholeDCMcohort,and5.4%intheadultDCM phenotyping is valuable for clinical interpretation of NGS subgroup.Thisratioisconsistentwiththepublishedstudies. resultsincaseswherethesuspicionofanunderlyinggenetic Mutations affecting arginine 173 were previously reported syndrome has not been previously raised. infamilialDCM studies. Wesuggestthat codon173 might N. Pekkola Pacheco: None. K. Lagerstedt- Robinson: be crucial in myocardial remodeling by dilation and is a None.B.Tesi:None.A.Hammarsjö:None.M.Mannila: mutational “hot spot” in the TNNT2 gene in Russian DCM None. A. Lindstrand: None. G. Grigelioniené: None. patients. ThisstudywassupportedbyRussianScienceFoundation E-
P05 .09 research grant №16-15-10421 Restricted analysis of multiplex PCR based exome datasets in cardiomyopathy casesAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1831 B.Kocsis-Deák1,2,K.Árvai1,2,V.Horvath1,V.Klujber2,B. Cardiology, Lady Ridgway hospital, Colombo, Sri Lanka, Balla2, G. Uzonyi3, B. Tóbiás2, P. Lakatos1,2, J. Kósa1,2 3Centrum medische genetica - Het Universitair Ziekenhuis, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Department of Paediatric Ophthalmol- 11st Department of Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, 2Penta- ogy, Lady Ridgway Hospital, Colombo, Sri Lanka Core Laboratory, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Cardiology, Uzsoki Hospital, Budapest, Hungary Introduction: Molecular diagnosis is included in the diagnostic criteria for Marfan syndrome (MFS) and aids Introduction: Until recently, more than 40 cardiovascular Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) diagnosis. disorders have been described as a consequence of a single Methods: Review clinical and molecular results of six gene defect. Genetic diagnostics is becoming a mainstream consecutive tests on suspected MFS cases referred to a practice in the field of cardiology and is recommended in clinical geneticist in Sri Lanka. differentguidelines.Knowingtheunderlyinggeneticdefect Results: can help to tailor treatment, define lifestyle recommenda- Case 1: female (10y) Myxomatous mitral valve prolapse tions as well as aid in making decisions on placing an ICD (MVP),myopia,MFSskeletalfeatures.Fatherandyounger or determine the timing of surgical intervention. sister have similar cardiac, ocular and skeletal findings; Materials and Methods: Total genomic DNA was paternal uncle and his son clinically MFS. Previously extracted from the biological sample using a spin column describedFBN1exon19pathogenicvariant[c.2243G>Ap. method. We have targeted all of the coding exons with (Cys748Tyr)]. exon-intron boundaries using ultrahigh multiplex PCR- Case 2: Female (12y) MFS skeletal features, strabismus, based AmpliSeq exome library preparation method. myopia,MVP,largesebaceousnaevusofscalpandautism. Sequencingreadsweregeneratedon
S5 instrument,mapped Insignificantly elevated plasma homocysteine. Previously tothereferencegenome(hg19)andaftervariantcallingthe undescribed, FBN1 exon 20, likely pathogenic (Class 5) variantswereclassifiedbasedonExAc,ClinVarandOMIM variant [c.2364dupT p.(Val789Cysfs*13)]. information. Case 3: Male (17y) MFS skeletal features, MVP, normal Results: The bioinformatic analysis of the datasets were eye examination. Father died 31y following septicaemia. restrictedto326knowncardiologicaldiseasecausinggenes, Unclassified FBN1 intron 57 c.6998-12T>G class 3 variant resulting less variant with uncertain significance and also predicting extension of exon 58 by 11bp. saved computing time. Our positive cases harboured Case 4: Female (4y) MFS skeletal features, MVP, pathogenicorlikelypathogenicalterationsintheMYBP
C3  divergent squint. FBN1 exon 26 c.3125G>A p. (c.1484G>A, c.1776_1777delGT, c.3199_3200insA, c.821 (Gly1042Asp) variant reported once in MFS and another +1G>A), BAG3 (c.1288G>T) and, in the FLNC causal variant with (Glu1042Ser) described. (c.2713C>T, c.7847A>C) resulting cardiomyopathies with Case 5: Female (4y) Finger camptodactyly, dilated aortic different phenotypes. root,MVP.PreviouslydescribedTGFBR2exon8mutation Conclusions: Multiplex PCR based library preparation c.1658G>A(p.Arg553His) confirming LDS. could result highly uniform target coverage with sensitive Case 6: Female (10y) Surgery for craniosynostosis and variantcalling.Weconcludedthatifthepatientsphenotype umbilical hernia, MVP, MFS skeletal features. TGFRBR1 iscertain,insilicogenepanelanalysisfromexomedatasets exon 7 c.1198G>A p.(Asp400Asn) pathogenic variant is a faster approach to find the disease causing mutations. (Class 5) confirming LDS. Variants of uncertain signifi- B. Kocsis-Deák: None. K. Árvai: None. V. Horvath: cance of LTB
P3 , NOTCH1 and EMILIN1 were found. None. V. Klujber: None. B. Balla: None. G. Uzonyi: Discussion: Molecular diagnosis of MFS/LDS in Sri None.B.Tóbiás:None.P.Lakatos:None.J.Kósa:None. Lanka improves management and generates novel informa- tion from a previously unstudied population. E-
P05 .10 D.C. de Silva: None. D. Samarasinghe: None. S. Molecular confirmation of Marfan and Loeys Dietz Perera:None.L.VanLaer:None.A.Verstraeten:None. syndromeamongSriLankanpatientswithidentification D. Weerasuriya: None. R. Morawakkorala: None. D. of novel likely pathogenic variants Irugambandara: None. H. Abeysekera: None. B. Loeys: None. D. C. de Silva1, D. Samarasinghe2, S. Perera2, L. Van Laer3,A.Verstraeten3,D.Weerasuriya2, R.Morawakkor- E-
P05 .11 ala2, D. Irugambandara4, H. Abeysekera4, B. Loeys3 Detection of novel аnd reported rare disease-causing genetic mutations in Macedonia: A Collage of Case 1DepartmentofPhysiology,FacultyofMedicine,University Reports ofKelaniya,Ragama,SriLanka,2DepartmentofPaediatric1832 S. Mehandziska1, A. Stajkovska2, M. Stavrevska1, M. and ultra-rare VUS that according to our study represent Janevska2, M. Markovska2, I. Kungulovski2, Z. Mitrev1, pathogenic/potentially pathogenic variants involved in G. Kungulovski2 cardiovascular diseases. Keywords: next-generation sequencing, rare congenital 1Zan Mitrev Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former cardiovascular diseases, cardiomyopathy, long QT syn- Yugoslav Republic of, 2Bio Engineering LLC, Skopje, drome, TAAD Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of S. Mehandziska: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant;ZanMitrevClinic,Skopje.A.Stajkovska:A. Nextgenerationsequencingapproacheshavethepowerto Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio Engi- assess hundreds to thousands of genes in parallel and are neering LLC, Skopje. M. Stavrevska: Other; Modest; becomingafirstlinediagnostictoolingenomicmedicine. Formerly employed at Zan Mitrev Clinic, Skopje and Herein, we applied clinical exome sequencing or whole contributed to the analysis of the cases, currently MSc exome sequencing in patients presenting with rare student at Radboud University Nijmegen. M. Janevska: cardiovascular disorders. We detected novel and already A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio reportedrareandultra-rarepathogenicmutationsingenes Engineering LLC, Skopje. M. Markovska: None. I. known to cause dilatative cardiomyopathy, Long QT Kungulovski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock syndrome 2, Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; dissection(TAAD),anddilatativecardiomyopathycaused Bio Engineering LLC, Skopje. Z. Mitrev: E. Ownership by Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency. We Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual validated some of the detected mutations with additional property); Significant; owner of Zan Mitrev Clinic, SangersequencingorNGSsequencing.Tothebestofour Skopje. G. Kungulovski: B. Research Grant (principal knowledge,thisisthefirststudytoreporttheroleofnovel investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrants variants such as c.3672C>G, p.Tyr1224* in the FLNC as well as grants already received); Significant; Bio gene and c.12964G>A, p.Glu4322Lys in the SYN
E1  gene Engineering LLC, Skopje. E. Ownership Interest (stock, in dilated cardiomyopathy, and c.1850A>G, p.His617Arg stock options, patent or other intellectual property); in the CPT2 gene in cardiomyopathy caused by CPT II Significant; Bio Engineering LLC, Skopje. deficiency. Besides that, we report additional known rare Novelandknownraremutationsidentifiedinthisstudy Patient NGStest Diagnosis Gene c.DNA protein rsID MAF Clinvar ACMG Novelty Inheritance (GnomAD/ ExAC/1000G) 
P1  WES Dilatative FLNC c.3672C>G p.Tyr1224* / / / PV
S1 , Unknown AD cardiomyopathy PM2,P
P3  
P1  WES Dilatative MYBP
C3  c.1783A>G p.Ile595Val rs730880550 / / PM1, KnownVUS, AD cardiomyopathy PM2,P
P2  extremelyrare 
P1  WES Dilatative MIB1 c.1552C>T p.Arg518* rs769209279 2,845E-05 / P
P3  KnownVUS, AD cardiomyopathy extremelyrare 
P1  WES Dilatative KCNQ1 c.1349A>G p. rs1057518902 / / PM1, KnownVUS, AD cardiomyopathy Glu450Gly PM2,P
P2  extremelyrare 
P2  CES Congenitalarrhythmia KCNJ2 c.566G>T p.Arg189Ile rs199473381 / Likely PM2,PM5, KnownVUS, AD pathogenic P
P2 , extremelyrare P
P3 ,P
P5  
P3  CES FamilialTAAD TGFBR3 c.2423A>G p. rs746368140 3,251E-05 / P
P3  KnownVUS, AD Tyr808Cys extremelyrare 
P4  Genepanel Cardiomyopathy VCL c.1352 / rs374522164 4,47E-05 Uncertain P
P3  KnownVUS, AD +5G>A significance extremelyrare 
P5  WES LongQTsyndrome2 KCNH2 c.2948C>T p.Thr983Ile rs149955375 0.000152 Uncertain PM1, KnownVUS, AD significance P
P3 ,P
P5  extremelyrare 
P5  WES Dilatative SYN
E1  c.12964G>A p. / / / PM2 Unknown / cardiomyopathy Glu4322Lys 
P5  WES Dilatative MYPN c.3833G>A p. rs142877365 0.000451 Uncertain / KnownVUS, AD cardiomyopathy Arg1278Gln significance extremelyrare 
P6  WES Dilatative CPT2 c.338C>T p. rs74315294 0.00138 Pathogenic P
P3 ,P
P5  Known,rare AR cardiomyopathy; Ser113Leu CPT2deficiency 
P6  WES Dilatative CPT2 c.1850A>G p. / / / PM2 Unknown AR cardiomyopathy; His617Arg CPT2deficiencyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1833 E-
P06  A.Mihailescu:None.N.Andreescu:None.V.Serafim: Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders None.D.Tiugan:None.P.Tutac:None.C.Paul:None.I. Velea: None. C. Zimbru: None. M. Puiu: None. M. E-
P06 .01 Niculescu: None. Association of ABCB4 Gene Polymorphism with Lipid metabolism in Overweight Children E-
P06 .02 AcasewithahomozygousnovelmutationinAGPSwith A. Mihailescu1, N. Andreescu1, V. Serafim1, D. Tiugan1, non-rhizomelic body structure P. Tutac1, C. Paul2, I. Velea2, C. Zimbru1, M. Puiu1, M. Niculescu1 Z. Manav Kabayeğit1, E. Can1, L. Mardan1, T. Özdemir2, G. Bozkurt1, A. Tosun1 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes, CenterofGenomicMedicine,Timisoara,Romania,2Pedia- 1Adnan Menderes University Faculty of Medicine, Aydın, tric Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Turkey, 2Tepecik Training and Research Hospital, İzmir, Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania Turkey Introduction: A major concern is the excess nutrient Introduction: Alkylglycerone Phosphate Synthase (AGPS) intakes in children as a driver to obesity. Obesity is gene encodes a protein that localized to the inner aspect of associated with dyslipidemia and type-2 diabetes. Genet- the peroxisomal membrane and plays role at plasmalogen ics seems to play an important role in obesity, as various synthesis.Rhizomelicchondrodysplasiapunctata(RDCP)is gene polymorphisms may influence lipid metabolism. a rare autosomal recessive disorder with shortening of The ABCB4 gene encodes a protein involved in proximal extremities, punctate calcification of cartilage, the transport of phospholipids from hepatocytes into flexion contractures, vertebral clefts, congenital cataracts, the bile. seizures, severe growth deficiency and intellectual disabil- Objective: The aim was to evaluate the association of ity. We report a non-rhizomelic case with a novel mutation several ABCB4 polymorphisms with plasma levels of in AGPS which is responsible for RDCP type 3. cholesterol, triglycerides and PUFAs in overweight MaterialsandMethods:Afterperformingtargetednext- children. generation sequencing including FAR1 gene, Illumina Methods: The cohort consisted of 200 overweight TruSight Inherited Disease panel including PEX7, PEX5, children, aged 7–18, (97 males, 103 females) with BMI > AGPS genes was performed. +2 SDas comparedto theWHO reference, and abdominal Results:A4-year-oldmalewhohadahistoryofoperated circumference above the 90th percentile. Total cholesterol, congenital cataract, flexion conractures, seizures, growth HDL-c, triglycerides and PUFAs were measured in plasma deficiency and intellectual disability was consulted to the samples. LDL-c levels were calculated using Friedewald genetics department with clinical suspicion of Peroxisomal equation. Next generation sequencing was used for FattyAcyl-CoAReductase1disorderandRDCP.Thecase identification of 6 ABCB4 gene polymorphisms had growth retardation and microcephaly. Extremities (rs1149222, rs2071645, rs31672, rs4148811, rs9655950, weren’t rhizomelic although X-rays showed stippled and rs1202283). epiphyses. FAR1 analysis was normal. Inherited Disease Results: By comparing the levels of cholesterol (Total-c panel revealed a novel homozygous variant at AGPS, andLDL-c),triglyceridesandPUFAs,wefoundsignificant c.1475+3 A>G, in the patient. Parents who have con- differencesintheplasmalevelsforlinoleicacid,Total-cand sanguinity were heterozygous for the same variation. It is LDL-c for the groups identified based on one ABCB4 predicted to be disease causing by disrupting the splice genotype.Childrenwithrs2071645varianthadlowerlevels region of the exon 14. ofTotal-c,LDL-candlinoleicacidascomparedtochildren Conclusion: While all RCDP genotypes are associated having the wild type variant. most commonly with the classical phenotype, milder Conclusion: The results indicated that the ABCB4 phenotypes like having non-rhizomelic limbs have been rs2071645 polymorphism may have a protective effect described.Ourcaseisnoteworthyintermsofbothhavinga against dyslipidemia in overweight children. new mutation at AGPS and being non-rhizomelic. Acknowledgement: This work was performed at The Z.ManavKabayeğit:None.E.Can:None.L.Mardan: Center of Genomic Medicine, funded by POSCCE Project, None. T. Özdemir: None. G. Bozkurt: None. A. SMIS: 48749, and by POC Project NutriGen, SMIS: Tosun: None. 104852.1834 E-
P06 .03 L. Tichy1, H. Vaverkova2, D. Karasek2, T. Freiberger3 First genetically proven Arginase deficiency case of Bulgarian Roma origin due to a novel pathogenic splice 1UniversityHospitalBrno,Centreofmolecularbiologyand site variant in the ARG1 gene gene therapy, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Third department of internal medicine, Faculty of medicine and dentistry, S. Atemin1,2, T. Todorov1, M. Ivanova3,4, H. Kathom5, D. Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3Centre for Avdjieva5, V. Mitev2, A. Todorova1,2 cardiovascular surgery and transplantation surgery, Brno, Czech Republic 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria,2DepartmentofMedicalChemistryandBiochem- Introduction: Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia istry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National (ARH; OMIM catalog number # 6038133) is a rare, Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and inheritedlipid metabolism disorder.Thisdisorder iscaused Gynecology “Maichin dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department by loss of adaptor protein function, encoded by LDL of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Phar- receptor adaptor protein 1 gene (LDLRA
P1 ). macy, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Sofia, Materials and Methods: Next generation sequencing of Bulgaria, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, University theLDLR,PCSK9andAPOEgenesandpartofAPOBgene Pediatric Hospital Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria (exon26)usingADHMASTRkit(Multiplicom,Belgium); Sanger sequencing of the ABCG5, ABCG8 and LDLRA
P1  Argininemia [MIM #207800] is a rare metabolic disease genes. DNA samples have been collected within the which is characterized by a defect in the final step of the framework of the MedPed project. urea cycle. The gene ARG1 encodes arginase which Results: Performed sequence analysis of the LDLRA
P1  catalyzes the hydrolysis of arginine to urea and ornithine. gene revealed a new variant in the 2nd exon, c.143T>C; Pathogenic variants in ARG1 gene can cause Arginase p.(Phe48Ser) in a homozygous constitution in the deficiency. Here we report a 14 years old Gypsy boy from proband and in a heterozygous state in all 4 her brothers. Bulgaria. The patient has respiratory distress syndrome in This sequence variant is located in the phosphotyrosine- early neonatal period. A regress in his development at age binding domain, which is responsible for binding to the of 9 months was observed. At 1 year and 8 months he was NPXYinternalization signal of the LDL receptor protein. diagnosed with epilepsy. Blood ammonia was slightly ACMG criteria were used for pathogenicity evaluation of elevated—102,9 μmol/l (normal range 10–47 μmol/l). founded sequence variant. There was relatively good Based on the clinical symptoms, Sanger sequencing of the lipid-lowering drugs therapy response in our ARH ARG1 gene was performed. The molecular-genetic analysis proband.Thisfindingisinagreementwiththepreviously showedanovelhomozygousdonorsplicesitevariantinthe published studies. ARG1 gene: c.329+1G>A. Segregation analysis in the Conclusions: We descripted the first case of Czech family showed the same variant in heterozygous state in family with a rare mutation in the LDR receptor adaptor both parents. The detected variant was not present among protein 1 gene, which cause autosomal recessive hyperch- 138.000 controls of the gnomAD project. The result from olesterolemia. There are only few cases of ARH mutations the tool for theoretical pathogenicity prediction (Human described worldwide. Splicing Finder) supports possible splicing effect, which is This work was supported by the Ministry of Health of pathogenic. In conclusion, we present the first genetically Czech Republic, grant nr. 16-29084A. verified patient with Arginase deficiency in Bulgaria. We L. Tichy: None. H. Vaverkova: None. D. Karasek: established anovel pathogenic variantintheARG1genein None. T. Freiberger: None. a patient from Roma community, born to consanguineous parents. We hypothesize a possible private variant for the E-
P06 .08 Gypsy population in Bulgaria. The study was supported by AreCOX11variantsresponsibleforautosomalrecessive Medical University Sofia, Contract number D-116/2018. Mitochondrial Complex IV Deficiency? S. Atemin: None. T. Todorov: None. M. Ivanova: None. H. Kathom: None. D. Avdjieva: None. V. Mitev: Z. Yüksel1, S. Al Tala2, A. Ali al-Muheiry3, C. Betz1, C. None. A. Todorova: None. Bergmann1 E-
P06 .04 1Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Ger- Family study of the first case of autosomal recessive many, 2Armed Forces Hospital Southern Region, Pediatric hypercholesterolemiaintheCzechRepubliccausedbya Directorate and Genetic Unit, Khamis Mushait, Saudi newvariantintheLDLreceptoradaptorprotein1geneAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1835 Arabia, 3Armed Forces Hospital Southern Region, Pediatric Fabrydisease,isanX-linkedmetabolicdisordermanifestedin Directorate, Neonatal Unit, Khamis Mushait, Saudi Arabia males with angiokeratoma, acroparestesia, cardiomyopathy, nephropathy and early stroke. Clinical features develop with Introduction: Mitochondriopathies are a clinically hetero- age, the diagnosis being challenging in children. Females geneous group ofdisordersthatarisefromthevariationsof have a very variable clinical picture due to X chromosome genes encoded by either mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or inactivation. We shall present 4 boys diagnosed with Fabry nuclear DNA. Common clinical features include external disease in Iasi Regional Medical Genetics Centre to present ophthalmoplegia, proximal myopathy, cardiomyopathy, diagnosticandmanagementchallengeswehaveencountered. sensorineural deafness, optic atrophy, diabetes mellitus AllcaseswereconfirmedwithenzymaticandDNAtest.Case and abnormal plasma/CSF lactate/pyruvate levels. 1:26yearsold,presentedat15yearswithangiokeratomaand MaterialsandMethods:Wholeexomesequencing(WES) acroparestesia. Echocardiography revealed mild cardiomyo- analysis performed in a 2.5-month-old preterm girl with pathy. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) started the persistentfeedingintoleranceandhighlactate,andherparents. progression of the disorder. However, at 22 years he WES analysis did not yield a diagnostic result. Therefore, a developed sudden deafness, corrected by ENT specialists. scientific approach focusing on disease candidate genes are Family history is highly suggestive. Case 2: 14 years old, performed due to the informed consent of the family. cametomedicalattentionat10yearsduetoshortstatureand Results: WES revealed a homozygous frameshift variant anemia. Physical examination revealed a few angiokeratoma in COX11 (OMIM *603648), resulting in a premature stop and investigations showed chronic renal failure and marked codon, and subsequent mRNA degradation (nonsense- cardiomyopathy. ERT corrected cardiomyopathy, but he had mediated decay) or truncation of the protein to follow renal transplant. Family history is positive, but not [c.35_36delinsG, [p.(Val12Glyfs*21)]. Both parents are suggestive.clinical picture in time Case 3: 21 years old, heterozygous carriers. diagnosed at 18 years after developing rapidly progressive Conclusion: COX11 is a nuclear-encoded subunit of renalfailure.Nootherfeatureswerepresent,butstoragewas cytochrome c oxidase or Complex IV (COX; EC 1.9.3.1), provenintherenalbiopsy.Familyhistoryispositive,butnot comprised of 13 polypeptide subunits, 3 of which are suggestive. Case 4: 17 years old, admitted to hospital for a encoded by mtDNA (MT-CO1, MT-CO2, MT-CO3). different reason. Physical examination revealed angiokera- Several nuclear-encoded genes directly encoding the toma and acroparestesia. Family history is positive, but not subunits or maintaining their activities are known for suggestive. In conclusion, we present 4 children with Fabry Mitochondrial Complex IV Deficiency (OMIM #220110) disease to underline early features, evolution in time and which is clinically heterogeneous, ranging from isolated particularities. myopathy to severe multisystem disease. In addition to C. Rusu: None. M. Starcea: None. M. Munteanu: clinical medical analysis, reporting scientific findings in None.C.Iliescu:None.G.Russu:None.D.Iliescu:None. disease candidate genes is a crucial task of the diagnostic laboratory settings in the era of Next Generation Sequen- E-
P06 .11 cing for expanding theknowledge base. In order to be able Geneticcharacteristicsofpatientswithglutaricaciduria to report such scientific findings, informed consent of the type I from Ukraine families will be required. Z. Yüksel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- O. Barvinska1, N. Olkhovych1, N. Pichkur1, T. Shkurko1, cant; Bioscientia. S. Al Tala: None. A. Ali al-Muheiry: N. Trofimova1, N. Mytsyk1, I. Hrehul1, S. Kormoz1, N. None. C. Betz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Gorovenko2 Significant;BioscientiaGmbH.C.Bergmann:A.Employ- ment (full or part-time); Significant; Bioscientia GmbH. 1National Specialized Children Hospital “OKHMATDYT” MOH Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2P.L. Shupyk National E-
P06 .09 Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kyiv, Fabry disease - diagnostic challenges in children Ukraine C. Rusu1, M. Starcea1, M. Munteanu2, C. Iliescu3, G. Introduction: Glutaric aciduria type I (GA-I) (MIM Russu2, D. Iliescu3 608801) is an autosomal recessive inherited disease caused by rearrangements in GCDH gene, which encode glutaryl- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Grigore T Popa”, CoA dehydrogenase. Nowadays, 244 mutations are Iaşi, Romania, 2“Sf Maria” Children’s Hospital, Iasi, described in GCDH gene according to HGMD. The most Romania, 3Arcadia Hospital, Iasi, Romania common mutations are p.R402W in patients from Europe and p.A421V in population of Amish in the USA. In1836 Ukraine spectrum of mutations of patients with GA-I Materials and methods: The first case, a 20-years-old haven’t been studied yet. Tunisian female, was born to a consanguineous union. She Materials and methods: dry blood spots and venous had two sisters and a brother who died in early childhood blood with EDTA of 5 patients (aged from 7 month to 8 from hepatic manifestations of WD. The patient presented years old); DNA-sequencing by Sanger. with recurrent jaundice, neurologic and psychiatric mani- Results: In the study 100% of mutant alleles in GCDH festations. Biochemical tests showed low ceruloplasmin gene in patients with GA-I from Ukraine were detected. concentration and high cupruria. Spectrum of pathogenic variants was represented by 2 The second and third cases were two male brothers born common mutations: p.R402W (3/10 alleles) and p.A421V to non-consanguineous Algerian parents. The elder patient, (3/10 alleles); 2 rare mutations p.R383C (2/10 alleles) and presentedwithanhepaticformofWDassociatedtokayser- p.G390R (1/10 alleles), all mutations were identified in Fleisher ring, decreased ceruloplasmin, and increased heterozygous state despite the rare variant p.R383C (1 cupruria. Biochemical screening in the patient’s sibs found homozygote).Also,wefoundonenovelmutationp.D396G decreased ceruloplasmin and high cupruria in a 8-year-old (1/10 alleles). Prognostic analysis showed that this novel asymptomatic brother. A sequencing of the whole coding variant p.D396G is pathogenic (Polyphen2—0,853, Pro- regions of AT
P7 B gene was performed in the three cases. vean—(−6,394)). All detected mutations were localized in Results:NopathogenicvariantwasfoundinAT
P7 Bgene 10,11,12exonsofGCDHgene.AnalysisofGA-Ipatients’ incase1.Twovariantsinthecompoundheterozygousstate parents origin showed that 50% of pathogenic alleles were were found in the second and third cases. Each one of the from Western part of Ukraine. healthy parents was a heterozygous carrier of one variant. Conclusion: Missense variants p.R402W and p.A421V Conclusions: Sequencing of AT
P7 B gene is very are most common within Ukrainian patients with GA-I. In important when WD is suspected as it allows to give an order to confirm diagnosis GA-I for Ukrainian patients it is appropriate genetic counseling. expedient to primarily examine 10, 11, 12 exons of M. Chaouch: None. S. Hizem: None. H. Jilani: None. GCDH gene. Y. Elaribi: None. I. Rejeb: None. M. Bouhlel: None. A. O.Barvinska:None.N.Olkhovych:None.N.Pichkur: Zerzeri: None. H. Ouerda: None. A. Meherzi: None. V. None. T. Shkurko: None. N. Trofimova: None. N. Alvarez Martinez: None. L. Ben jemaa: None. Mytsyk: None. I. Hrehul: None. S. Kormoz: None. N. Gorovenko: None. E-
P06 .14 Whole mitochondrial genome analysis in carriers of E-
P06 .12 mt3460 mutation with Leber’s hereditary optic Variable clinical and genetic manifestations of Wilson neuropathy disease in two North-African families P. Dawod1,2, B. Rovcanin2, M. Brankovic2,3, A. Marja- M.Chaouch1,S.Hizem1,H.Jilani1,Y.Elaribi1,I.Rejeb1, novic2,3, M. Janković2,3, I. Novakovic2,3, F. Abdel M. Bouhlel1, A. Zerzeri1, H. Ouerda2, A. Meherzi2, V. Motaleb1, J. Jancic2,4, V. Kostic2,3 Alvarez Martinez3, L. Ben jemaa1 1Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Faculty of 1Department of congenital and hereditary diseases, Mongi Medicine Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt, 2Faculty of Slim university hospital, La Marsa, Tunis, Tunisia, Medicine University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Neu- 2Department of pediatrics and neonatology, Mongi Slim rology Clinic Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, university hospital, La Marsa, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Laboratory 4Child and Adolescent Neurology and Psychiatry Clinic, of Molecular genetics, University Hospital of Asturias, Belgrade, Serbia oviedo, Spain Background: Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy consid- Introduction: Wilson disease (WD) is a disorder caused ered one ofthemost frequentneurodegenerativemitochon- in most cases by biallelic pathogenic variants in AT
P7 B drial diseases in which the mutated or impaired gene, resulting in abnormal copper metabolism leading to mitochondriaimplicatedinretinalganglioncell(RGC)loss a varying combination of hepatic, neurologic, and and optic nerve degeneration. So LHON clinically mani- psychiatric features. Diagnosis is established on clinical fested by blurred vision, followed by gradual painless loss and biochemical features, and confirmed by mutation of vision in both eyes within a short time that eventually analysis of AT
P7 B gene. We report on the clinical and leads to devastating loss of central vision. molecular findings in three cases from two North-African Objective: This study has been provided a mutational families with WD. screeningforfullmt-DNAbySangersequencinginSerbianAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1837 patients carriers of mt3460 G>A mutation for detection of Materials and methods: We used a custom-made secondary changes associated with LHON. targeted exome sequencing panel to identify genetic Material and Methods: Individuals included in this variantsassociatedwithearly-onsetobesityinsubjectswith study were recruited from the Child and Adolescent severe obesity (height-adjusted weight >60%) before age Neurology and Psychiatry Clinic and from Neurology 7 years. ClinicCCS,Belgrade,Serbia.Allexaminedindividualshad Results: Targeted exome sequencing identified a novel characteristic clinical presentation suggesting the presence heterozygous frameshift deletion that introduces a prema- of LHON. Multiple segmental PCR amplicons of mtDNA ture termination of translation NM_005912 (M
C4 R): have been sequenced by Sanger’s method and the obtained c.308delT, (p.Val103fs), in two index cases, an 18-year- results were compared with the Revised Cambridge old male and a 20-year-old female. The overweight mother Reference Sequence “rCRS ”. ofthefemaleindexcarriedthesamemutation.Thedeletion Results: We have detected mt.3460 G>A mutation in leads to a truncated protein and likely results in loss of ND1,in3/19LHONfamilies.In3460G>ApositiveLHON receptor function. The two index patients had persistent cases, additional mtDNA mutations that co-occur with obesity since childhood and the male index had BMI 35 primary mutation are identified as secondary/intermediate (BMI Z-score 3.0) and the female index had BMI 44 (BMI LHON mutations: T4216C, G13708A, G15257A, and Z-score 4.3), hyperphagia and type 2 diabetes. G15812A, in addition to multiple polymorphic variants Conclusion: Our findings support that mutations in the (
C295 T, T489C, A11251G, A12612G 
C16069 T, and melanocortinpathwayarerelatedtosevereobesity.Screen- T16126C). Our finding is the first instance showing that ing for monogenic obesity in patients with early-onset mt3460 G>A mutation in Serbian LHON subjects is obesity and hyperphagia should be considered as it enables associated with variants belonging to mitochondrial early intervention, potential treatment and helps to reduce haplogroup J. stigma of obesity. M
C4 R is a promising target for Conclusion: Wide spread European mitochondrial hap- development of anti-obesity therapy. logroup J may modulate the phenotypic manifestation of Grant references: Päivikki ja Sakari Sohlberg Founda- LHON in carriers of mt3460G>A mutation. tion, Folkhälsan Research Foundation, and University of P. Dawod: None. B. Rovcanin: None. M. Brankovic: Helsinki research funds None. A. Marjanovic: None. M. Janković: None. I. P. Loid: None. M. Pekkinen: None. R. Mäkitie: None. Novakovic: None. F. Abdel Motaleb: None. J. Jancic: H. Viljakainen: None. O. Mäkitie: None. None. V. Kostic: None. E-
P06 .16 E-
P06 .15 Genetic characterisation of a Maltese cohort with A novel frameshift mutation in the melanocortin-4 atypical non-autoimmune diabetes receptor gene (M
C4 R) in two unrelated families with severe early-onset obesity N. P. Pace, R. Caruana, J. Craus, J. Vassallo P. Loid1,2,3, M. Pekkinen1,2,3, R. Mäkitie2,3, H. Viljakai- University of Malta, Msida, Malta nen2,4, O. Mäkitie1,2,3 Introduction: Maturity onset diabetes of the young 1Children’s Hospital, Helsinki University Hospital, Hel- (MODY) is a heterogeneous group of early-onset non type sinki, Finland, 2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, 1 diabetes caused by single gene defects in a number of Finland, 3Research Program for Clinical and Molecular genes affecting pancreas development and beta-cell func- Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, tion. Obtaining an etiological molecular diagnosis in Helsinki,Finland,4TheDepartment ofFood andNutrition, suspected monogenic diabetes is important for both a University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland correct clinical management and genetic counselling of patientsat-risk. Genetic testing for MODY is a challenging Introduction: The melanocortin-4-receptor (M
C4 R), process, in view of the clinical heterogeneity of cases and expressed in the central nervous system, is a part of the the possible overlap in phenotypes with both type 1 and leptin-melanocortin signaling pathway and an important type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, the large number of genes regulator of appetite and energy homeostasis. M
C4 R implicated in MODY makes screening for mutations by mutations are the most common cause of monogenic Sanger sequencing an expensive and time-consuming obesity, accounting for approximately 2–5% of severe process. childhood obesity with variable penetrance. Methods: 31 adult patients with suspected monogenic diabetes and a high probability of MODY were recruited.1838 Whole exome capture using a SeqCap-EZ-MedExome kit, mutated, result in obesity phenotypes in murine models. In followed by paired end sequencing was performed on each this pilot dataset, we found a number of rare missense and sample, in collaboration with the European Genomic insertion/deletionmutationsinPEG3,PIK3
C2 G,ATXN2and InstituteforDiabetes.Wecarriedoutgene-focusedanalysis HRH3 genes (in both heterozygous and homozygous of all known MODY genes to filter and prioritize condition). In addition to the phenotypic data from mice, pathogenic variants. SNPs in ATXN2 and PIK3
C2 G have been reported to be Results: We present the clinical characteristics of the associated with human BMI and related phenotypes while probands and the relevant genetic findings from the cohort PEG3 expression has also repeatedly been reported to be are discussed. A number of rare mutations in several genes important in pancreatic beta cell renewal and function: weredetected,andwepresentevidenceforpossiblegenetic notably 7/8 PEG3 mutation carriers had concommittent type founder effects. II diabetes. Thus, our results add to the accumulating list of Conclusion: Our findings are novel to a regional genes putatively responsible for highly penetrant forms of population, where the genetic epidemiology of MODY human obesity and/or diabetes. has never been characterised. The use of high-throughput S. Almansoori: None. S.I. Alsters: None. H.S. Chahal: sequencing facilitates the detection of both known muta- None. S. Purkayastha: None. A.I. Blakemore: None. tions in a defined gene panel and novel unreported rare variants as possible diabetes-causing mutations. E-
P06 .20 N.P.Pace:None.R.Caruana:None.J.Craus:None.J. Correlation of Vitamin D deficiency and PKU genotype Vassallo: None. in Georgian patients E-
P06 .18 D. Agladze1, L. Margvelashvili2, E. Kldiashvili3, P. Analysis of genes associated with obesity phenotypes in Gundorova4, O. Kvlividze1,5 mouse models, reveals new potentially causative muta- tions for monogenic obesity in humans 1School of Medicine, New Vision University, Tbilisi, Georgia, 2Children’s New Clinic, Tbilisi, Georgia, 3Tbilisi S. Almansoori1,2, S. I. Alsters3, H. S. Chahal1,4, S. Medical Academy, Tbilisi, Georgia, 4Research Centre for Purkayastha5, A. I. Blakemore1,2 Medical Genetics, Tbilisi, Russian Federation, 5Georgian FoundationforGeneticandRareDiseases,Tbilisi,Georgia 1Section of Endocrinology and Investigative Medicine, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, Lon- Introduction:PatientswithPKUcandevelopdeficiencyof don, United Kingdom, 2Department of Life Sciences, several vitamins. Aim of the study was to find correlation College of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel University between the genotype and Vitamin D deficiency level in London, Uxbridge, United Kingdom, 3Department of 148 Georgian PKU patients. Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amster- Materials and methods: Study was made in Georgian dam,Netherlands,4DepartmentofEndocrinology,Imperial populationandtheresultsof148patientswereanalyzed.25 College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, (OH)DVitaminwasmeasuredinthebloodplasmaofPKU 5Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College patients. The only Vitamin D intake during last 3 month London, London, United Kingdom wasexclusivelyfromaminoacidformula(8.7mgin100g). Results: In 20 patients with PAH mutation 
P281 L on Thediscoveryofgenesresponsibleforhighlypenetrantforms both alleles, the mean of Vitamin D was 12,8 ng/ml, in 61 of monogenic obesity and type II diabetes has been patients with mutation 
P281 L on one allele, the mean of underpinned by knowledge gained from analysis of mouse Vitamin D was 17.6 ng/ml, in 61 patients with mutation models. Exome sequencing of obese humans, particularly other than 
P281 L on both alleles the mean of Vitamin D with extreme phenotypes, has since resulted in a steady was 22.1, and finally, in 7 patients with HPA Vitamin D stream of new causative genes being identified, and we mean made 35.3 ng/ml. Based on our study, only 8,6% of postulatethatmoreareyettobediscovered.Mousephenome investigated 148 patients showed normal rate of VitaminD databases represent a rich source of unexplored candidate (30.1–100 ng/ml) in the blood. genesforpotentially causativeof human monogenic obesity. Conclusions: There is a noticeable correlation between Here we present the results of re-analysis of whole exome the genotype of PKU patients and the concentration of sequencing from 70 people with severe obesity (BMI>50), Vitamin D in blood. PKU patients with homozygous from a cohort of individuals seeking weight loss/metabolic mutation 
P281 L are more affected with low concentration surgery in the UK. The data were examined specifically for of Vitamin D, then the patients with the same mutation on rare, predicted deleterious mutations in genes that, when oneallele,andthePKUpatientswithalltheothermutationsAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1839 arelessaffectedwithVitaminDdeficiency.Thereisaneed E.Islamagic:None.S.Kurtovic:None.A.Hasic:None. tosupplementpatientswiththeVitaminDthroughtakingin A. Kurtovic-Kozaric: None. consideration their genotype. D. Agladze: None. L. Margvelashvili: None. E. E-
P07 .02 Kldiashvili: None. P. Gundorova: None. O. When we must suspect a genetic cause of hyper IgE Kvlividze: None. syndrome ? M. T. Bataneant1,2, M. Serb2, M. Baica2, M. Mardan2, A. E-
P07  Beloia2, P. Urtila3,2 Immunology and hematopoietic system 1UniversityofMedicineandPharmacy,Romania,Romania, E-
P07 .01 2Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children „Louis Tur- How we treat CML patients in developing countries: 13 canu”, Timisoara, Romania, 3University of Medicine and years experience Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania E. Islamagic1, S. Kurtovic2, A. Hasic1, A. Kurtovic- Introduction: Hyper IgE syndrome is usually associated Kozaric2 with allergic phenomenas such as asthma, dermatitis, parasitosis. But hyper-IgE in a patient presenting eczema, 1Faculty of Science, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, asthma associated with recurrent skin and respiratory tract 2Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, infections, should raise the question of an underlying Bosnia and Herzegovina immunodeficiency. Casepresentation:A11yearoldboywithalonghistory Introduction: TKI therapy for CML patients, including ofmultipleskinandrespiratorytractinfectionsofbacterial, imatinib and nilotinib, was gradually introduced in Bosnia viral and fungal etiology and asthma that started in early and Herzegovina because of financial considerations and childhoodisaddressedtoourhospital.Clinicalexamination lackofinsurancecover,whichhaddrasticconsequenceson revealed eczema, hand warts, hypo- and hyperpigmented patients’ outcomes. Aim of this study was to compare the facial lesions, severe oral candidiasis, inspiratory dyspnea, long-term clinical outcomes of CML patients receiving productive cough, and severe dysphonia. Laboratory delayed and immediate front-line TKI therapies. investigations showed lymphopenia, eosinophilia (1500/ Methods: Newly diagnosed CML-CP patients (n=178) mm3), very elevated IgE values (>2500 IU/ml) and treated with TKI in period from August 2005 to December hypogammaglobulinemia (Ig G 5,54 g/l). The indirect 2018 were included in this multicentre retrospective cohort videolaringoscopy showed juvenile laryngeal papillomato- study. Patients were on front-line imatinib (Group 1, n= sis. All these findings suggested a primary immunodefi- 135) and on front-line nilotinib (Group 2, n=43). Further ciency. The clinical and laboratory aspects of Job’s subcategoriesweremadebasedonthedurationoftreatment syndrome and DOCK8 deficiency are overlapping but delay: <5 months, 6–13 months and >13 months for distinct. The absence of connective tissue and skeletal imatinib treatment and <6 months and >6 months for abnormalities (scoliosis, hyperextensibility, pathologic nilotinib treatment. Survival probabilities were estimated fractures, retained primary dentition) helped distinguish with the Kaplan-Meier method using the log-rank test. between these two rare syndromes. The latter has been Results: Median follow-up was 43 months and confirmed by absence of DOCK8 protein. Management of 58 months, respectively. OS at 13 years in Group 1 and DOCK8 deficiency includes prophylactic antibiotic, anti- Group 2 was 84.6 and 90.7%, respectively. CCyR and fungal, and antiviral therapy. In view of the high risk of MMR at 24 months were higher in Group 2 compared to early death from opportunistic infection or malignancy, Group 1 (90 vs 75% and 79 vs 64%, respectively). For stem cell transplantation is considered to be the curative delayed imatinib treatment (<5 months, 6–13 months, treatment. >13 months) at 24 months, CCyR was 75 vs 64 vs 40%, Conclusions: Any hyper-IgE syndrome in children respectively. Regarding nilotinib treatment (<6 months, presenting recurrent respiratory and viral skin infections >6months), patients achieved93 vs82%for CCyR and82 should raise the suspicion of a genetic immunodeficiency. vs 77% for MMR, respectively. Thediagnosismustobtainearlieraspossible,bonemarrow Conclusion:Front-linenilotinibshowedimprovedefficacy transplantation being the unic curative treatment. overfront-lineimatinib.Nosignificantdifferenceswerefound M.T. Bataneant: None. M. Serb: None. M. Baica: among subgroups of patients on front-line nilotinib. None. M. Mardan: None. A. Beloia: None. P. Urtila: None.1840 E-
P07 .03 In conclusion, in our study group, mutations in F9 gene A single center experience in Turkey in the molecular could be found anywhere throughout the entire gene; as in diagnosis of Hemophilia B previous studies. This study may contribute to the phenotype-genotype correlation of HB due to the 5 novel E. Isik1, B. Akgun1, K. Kavakli2, F. Sahin3, M. S. Evim4, mutations mentioned herein. C. Albayrak5, G. T. Kinturp6, B. Antmen7, E. Y. Keskin8, E. Isik: None. B. Akgun: None. K. Kavakli: None. F. H. Onay9, F. Ozkinay1, T. Atik1 Sahin:None.M.S.Evim:None.C.Albayrak:None.G.T. Kinturp:None.B.Antmen:None.E.Y.Keskin:None.H. 1Division of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Onay: None. F. Ozkinay: None. T. Atik: None. School of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey, 2Divi- sion of Pediatric Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, E-
P07 .04 School of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 3Division of Hematol- Implication of HLA-G +3142G/C polymorphism and ogy, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, solubleHLA-Gin mastectomized breast cancer patients Ege University, Izmir, Turkey, 4Division of Pediatric in Tanzania Hematology,DepartmentofPediatrics,SchoolofMedicine, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, 5Division of Pediatric I. C. Adolf1, G. Akan1, N. Dharsee2, T. F. Mselle1, F. Hematology,DepartmentofPediatrics,SchoolofMedicine, Atalar3,1 Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey, 6Division of PediatricHematology,Department ofPediatrics,Schoolof 1Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences, Dar Medicine,AkdenizUniversity,Antalya,Turkey,7Divisionof es Salaam, Tanzania, United Republic of, 2Ocean Road PediatricHematology,DepartmentofPediatrics,Acibadem Cancer Institute (ORCI), Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, United Hospital, Adana, Turkey, 8Division of Pediatric Hematol- Republic of, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey ogy, Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Suley- man Demirel University, Isparta, Turkey, 9Department of Introduction: HLA-G is an immunosuppressive molecule Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Ege University, existinginasoluble(sHLA-G)andmembrane-boundform. Izmir, Turkey It’sthoughttobeexpressedmorebytumorcellsandhence contributing to immune evasion. The HLA-G +3142G/C Hemophilia B (HB) is an X linked recessive bleeding polymorphism(rs1063320)post-transcriptionallyaffectsthe disorder with a prevalence of 1 in 30,000 live male births. expression of HLA-G. This molecule and SNP have been Bleeding symptoms vary according to the level of implicated in breast cancer (BC) and others, but with coagulation factor IX activity. To date more than 1200 limited studies in African population. mutations have been defined in F9 gene. The aim of this Aim: The aim was to determine whether sHLA-G and studywastodeterminethemutationspectrumofF9genein rs1063320 are relevant in BC in Tanzanian population. HB patients from Turkey and to establish a phenotype- Materials and Methods: The study consisted of 75 BC genotype correlation. patients and 84 normal controls. 81.3% had undergone Twenty eight HB patients, who were molecularly mastectomy. Plasma sHLA-G was quantified by ELISA. analyzedforF9genemutationsinEgeUniversityPediatric Genotyping was done by LightSNiP typing assay using Genetics Laboratory, were included in the study. Clinical quantitative Real-Time PCR. and laboratory findings were obtained from hospital Results: The sHLA-G level was significantly lower in records. The Factor IX Gene Variant Database and Human patientsandmastectomizedpatientsascomparedtocontrols Gene Mutation Database were searched for the identified (p<0.01) and non-mastectomized patients(p=0.018) mutations. Pathogenicity of the variants was classified in respectively. sHLA-G was not relevant to metastatic and accordance with ACMG criteria. receptors expression (ER, PR and HER2) status. The From the 28 HB patients 12 (42.9%) were classified as frequenciesdistributionofrs1063320genotypesandalleles severe,13(46.4%)moderateand3(10.7%)mild.Missense, wererelativelysimilarbetweenpatientsandcontrols.There nonsense and splice site mutations were identified in 16 was no significant influence of rs1063320 genotype on (57.1%), 8 (28.6%) and 4 (14.3%) of the study group, sHLA-G level. The Kaplan-Meir analysis revealed no respectively. Five mutations (c. 89-2_89-1insT, c.521- significant difference between patients carrying at least 1G>A, c. 839-1G>T, c. 1088G>T, and c. 1238G>T) were one risk allele versus no risk allele(GG) in their likelihood novel. Two of the 5 patients with novel mutations had to have metastatic free survival (Log rank, p=0.6508). moderate phenotype while the remaining 3 had severe Conclusion: While changes in sHLA-G levels in phenotype. response to medical interventions such as mastectomy may be translated into its potential use as a prognosticAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1841 marker for BC, the rs1063320 may not solely affect the A. Kurtovic-Kozaric: None. L. Mehinovic: None. E. sHLA-G level and reliably serve as a genetic risk factor Islamagic: None. A. Dizdarevic-Rekic: None. H. Komic: for BC. None. S. Kurtovic: None. I.C.Adolf:None.G.Akan:None.N.Dharsee:None.T. F. Mselle: None. F. Atalar: None. E-
P07 .06 Clinical outcomes of patients with JAK2, CALR and E-
P07 .05 MPL positive myeloproliferative neoplasms Clinicopathological characteristics of patients with myeloid neoplasms from Bosnia and Herzegovina: 20 H. Komic1, E. Islamagic2, S. Kurtovic3, A. Burekovic4, A. year follow-up Uzunovic4, A. Kurtovic-Kozaric3 A. Kurtovic-Kozaric1, L. Mehinovic2, E. Islamagic2, A. 1TIMMLaboratory,SahlgrenskaCancerCenter,University Dizdarevic-Rekic1, H. Komic3, S. Kurtovic1 of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 3Clinical 1Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and BosniaandHerzegovina,2FacultyofScience,Universityof Herzegovina,4ClinicalhospitalZenica,Zenica,Bosniaand Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 3TIMM Herzegovina Laboratory, Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden Introduction:Myeloproliferativeneoplasmsareagroupof clonal myeloid disorders. The aim of this study was to Introduction: Treatment of patients with myeloid malig- evaluate disease phenotypes and evolution in JAK2, CALR nanciesissuboptimalinBosniaandHerzegovinaduetothe and MPL mutations in the population of MPN patients in lack of targeted therapies. The aim of this study was to Bosnia and Herzegovina. collect all available data in the last 20 years. Materialsandmethods:Weincluded138MPNpatients Methods: Patients with myeloid neoplasms (n=271) (PV(n=41),ET(n=56),PMF(n=10)andMPN-U(n= treated at the Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, 31)). Three genes were analysed: JAK2, CALR, and MPL. B&H, were included in this study (MPN n=106, AML n JAK2V617F allele burden was performed by qPCR (Ipsogen =64, MDS n=52, CML=47). Patient data was collected MutaQuant, Qiagen). Statistical analysis was conducted including age at diagnosis, sex, blood parameters, using SPSS v21. molecular-cytogenetic findings, therapy, and survival. Results: Table 1 reports clinical parameters and muta- Results: JAK2V617F was detected in 41% of MPN tionalstatusofMPNpatients.JAK2V617Fwasfoundin71%, patients, 6.60% had a CALR gene mutation, MPL mutation CALR (type 1 and 2) in 13%, and MPL (W515L and had 2%, while 5% reported abnormal cytogenetic findings. W515K) in 4% of MPN patients. JAK2V617F PV patients 35.8% of MPN patients had afatal outcome, while 47.20% hadhigherplateletcount.JAK2V617FETpatientshadhigher had survival ≥ 60 months. CML patients enrolled in this RBC levels, and lower platelets compared to CALR+ ET study received imatinib, nilotinib (60%, n=28), or never patients. JAK2V617F ET versus PV patients showed lower received TKI (40%, n=19). Patients on nilotinib achieved valuesforRBC,HbandHct,highervaluesforplatelets,and CCyR faster than patients on imatinib. 28% (n=13) of higher frequency of splenomegaly. When we compared CML patients had a fatal outcome. Abnormal molecular- JAK2V617F PMF, ET, and PV patients, PV patients had cytogenetics of MDS patients was found in: 12.24% had higher RBC, Hb, and Hct values. The JAK2V617F allele (7q)/- 7, del(5q) and +8 had 8.16% respectively, and a burden was directly correlated with Hb, RBC, and Hct and complexkaryotypehad6.12%.AccordingtoIPSS-Rscore, inversely correlated with platelet count. MPN-U patients themajorityhadmedian(12.24%)andhigh(10.2%)risk.A had the worst survival among MPN subgroups. total of 63.27% MDS patients died, and five-year survival Conclusion: Mutational signatures affect the phenotypic was 24.48%. Molecular-cytogenetic abnormalities of AML presentation of MPN subtypes. Mutant allele burden is a patientswerefoundin55%.52%ofAMLpatientsachieved determinant of the phenotypic features of JAK2V617F MPN. remission, lasting on average 19 months, while 22% H. Komic: None. E. Islamagic: None. S. Kurtovic: patients had survival ≥24 months. None. A. Burekovic: None. A. Uzunovic: None. A. Conclusion: Clinical outcomes of MN patients were Kurtovic-Kozaric: None. suboptimal.1842 PV ET PMF JAK2+ NA(N=9) JAK2+ CALR+ MPL+ TRIPLE NA(N=11) JAK2+ CALR+ MPL+ TRIPLE (N=25) (N=31) (N=8) (N=2) NEGATIVE (N=6) (N=2) (N=1) NEGATIVE (N=4) (N=1) Male/Female 9/16(36%) 8/1(89%) 9/22(29%) 5/3(63%) 1/1(50%) 0/4(0%) 4/7(36%) 4/2(67%) 1/1(50%) 0/ 1/0(100%) (%Male) 1(100%) Age,Y 70(29–84) 69(61–81) 66(40–82) 68(37–84) 62(56–68) 67.5(28–87) 69(39–78) 63.5 56(47–65) 56 32 (25–78) Rbc 6.67(2.87–8.32) 5.82(4.60–7.77) 5.01 4.85 4.5 4.51 4.73 4.88 4 4.46 1.89 (3.22–7.29) (3.35–5.03) (4.29–4.71) (4.41–5.14) (2.68–7.94) (3.57–5.63) Hemoglobin 169(118–217) 173(155–207) 146(78–169) 143.5 130.5 144.5 147 138 121.5 115 35 (Hb) (118–156) (129–132) (134–151) (118–194) (89–149) (118–125) Hematocrit 0.55(0.35–0.66) 0.53(0.47–0.63) 0.44 0.43 0.38 0.43 0.44 0.41 0.34 0.29 / (Hct) (0.25–0.55) (0.36–0.45) (0.39–0.45) (0.33–0.59) (0.31–0.47) MCV 82(56.8–124) 87(80.6–101) 87.5 89.5 89 92.05 88(74–114) 80.8 86 77 / (73.4–102) (85–95.6) (88.2–95.2) (78–103) WBC 10(5.2–16.9) 7.10 11.15 9.98 11.09 9.63 9.35 18.55 8.16 9.85 5.5 (5.13–13.00) (6.06–15.97) (6.5–18.01) (10.98–11.2) (5.1–12.5) (3.3–19.4) (1.63–40.8) Neutrophils 68.5(41.7–82) 59.11(42–80.2) 68.50 60.8 65.00 66.68 71.93 75.9 / 69.64 / (43.2–75.6) (46–85.6) (61.45–71.9) (53.9–90.9) (62.6–84) Eosinophils 2(0.3–6.15) 1.85(1–2.93) 1.60 1.49(1–1.98) 1.80 2.25 2.38 2.63 2.14 1.42 / (0.129–5.3) (0.161–4.68) (2–3.43) Basophils 0.8(0.1–3.01) 1(0.83–1) 1.03 0.34 0.91 1.49 0.68 1.8 / 1.3 / (0.263–3.57) (0.04–0.64) (1.06–1.92) (0.102–1.25) (1.18–3) Platelets(Plt) 471(97.3–1650) 266(151–532) 834 1155.5 977 648 927 342 284.5 1479 140 (367–1438) (848–1250) (922–1032) (448–1051) (530–1643) (158–2250) (157–412) Splenomegaly 5/14(36%) 3/3(100%) 3/14(21%) 1/6(17%) 1/2(50%) 1/3(30%) 1/9(11%) 4/4(100%) 1/1(100%) 1/ / 1(100%) Hepatomegaly 1/10(10%) 0/4(0%) 2/12(17%) 0/5(0%) 1/2(50%) 0/2(0%) 1/8(13%) 2/3(67%) / 1/ 1/1(100%) 1(100%) Ldh 381.5 321(159–721) 282 345 261.5 387 337 609 1166.5 410 / (217–1876) (167–521) (183–553) (175–348) (161–613) (235–427) (254–1697) (1102–1231) Bilirubin 12.7(7.6–19.5) 33.1 10 / 23.1 / 7.2 31.95 / / / (7.4–38.8) (22–41.9) Therapy Hydroxiurea, Hydroxiurea, Hydroxiurea, Hydroxiurea, Hydroxiurea, Hydroxiurea, Hydroxiurea, Surea, Surea, Surea, Surea, Litalir, Litalir, Allopurinol, Allopurinol, Allopurinol, Allopurinol, Allopurinol, Folacin Folacin Folacin Folacin Allopurinol, Allopurinol, Controloc, Controloc, Controloc, Controloc, Controloc, Aspirin Aspirin Aspirin Aspirin Controloc, Controloc, Aspirin Aspirin Aspirin Aspirin Aspirin Protect Protect Protect Protect AspirinProtect AspirinProtect Protect Protect Protect Protect Protect BM 3/4(75%) 0/1(0%) 11/16(69%) 2/2(100%) 1/2(50%) 0/1(0%) 4/5(80%) 4/5(80%) / 1/ 1/1(100%) Cellularity 1(100%) FollowUp 24(2–218) 113(11–164) 19(4–131) 69(17–159) 40.5(4–77) 43(19–102) 90(68–170) 40.5 109 69 1 Months (1–100) Deceased 2/25(8%) 3/9(33%) 2/31(6%) / / / 1/11(9%) 0/6(0%) 0/2(0%) 0/1(0%) 0/1(0%) E-
P07 .07 Materials and Materials and Methods: The study was Genotype and phenotype of Vietnamese patients with conductedon10patientswithdiagnosedofSCID.Weused severe combined immunodeficiency sequencing method for screening mutations in 6 genes: I
L2 RG, I
L7 R, RAG1, RAG2, Artemis and JAK3. M.P.T.Nguyen,L.Q.N.Nguyen,A.V.T.Nguyen,T.M. Results: 5/10 patients detected mutations in 6 studied Ngo, N. D. Ngo, H. T. Le, H. M. T. Le genes. 1 patient had homozygous of c.616C>T (p. Arg206Stp) mutation in I
L7 Rα gene with T-B+NK+ National Children’s Hospital, Hanoi, Viet Nam phenotype. 3 patients detected mutations in I
L2 RG gene respectively were c.865C>T (p.Arg289Stp); c.272A>G (p. Introduction: The incidence of Severe combined immu- Tyr91Cys) and c.[757G>T;757+1G>C]. All three patients nodeficiency (SCID) is about 1:50,000 live births. Genetic hadT-B+NK-phenotype; 1ofthis3patientreceivedbone mutationscanbefoundinabout85%ofpatientswithSCID. marrow transplantation. The chimerism was not increased TheclassificationofSCIDphenotypesandanalysisofgene andpatientwasdiedafter1monthoftransplantationdueto mutations for the diagnosis has become an important severe infection. We also found 1 patient with compound content for treatment. heterozygous in RAG2 gene: mutation c.104G>T (p. Gly35Val) inherited from her mother and mutationAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1843 c.368G>C (p.Arg123Pro) inherited from her father. This (112152600-115198406)regionwasdetected.Congenital patient had T-B-NK+ phenotype, and she was received deletions affecting 3q13.31 have rarely been reported. bone marrow transplantation at 5 months old. The There is a hypoplastic male genital dominancy in chimerism test was increase to 100% after 18 days of previously published cases but our case is a new and transplantation. unique example presented with macroochidism in con- Conclusions: Identification of disease-causing mutations trast to the typical form of this syndrome. has important implications in genetic counseling, prenatal E. Susam: None. O. Cilingir: None. B. Durak Aras: diagnosis, treatment and prognosis. None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. S. Kocagil: None. S. M.P.T. Nguyen: None. L.Q.N. Nguyen: None. A.V.T. Artan: None. E. Simsek: None. Nguyen: None. T.M. Ngo: None. N.D. Ngo: None. H.T. Le: None. H.M.T. Le: None. E-
P08 .03 Association study to determine if there is a phenotypic pattern associated to molecular defects in chromatin E-
P08  remodelling genes Intellectual disability M. Pacio Miguez E-
P08 .02 Macroorchidism as a unique sign in 3q13.31 Deletion Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, INGEMM, syndrome Madrid, Spain E. Susam1, O. Cilingir1, B. Durak Aras1, E. Erzurumluo- Introduction: Chromatin regulation has emerged as one of glu1, S. Kocagil1, S. Artan1, E. Simsek2 the two domains, along with synaptic function, most affectedbycausativemutationsorCopyNumberVariations 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). In this study, we Department of Medical Genetics, Eskısehır, Turkey, 2Eski- have compared a cohort of 60 patients with syndromic sehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- intellectualdisability(ID)andvariantsingenesinvolvedin ment of Pediatric Endocrinology, Eskısehır, Turkey chromatin regulation, with another cohort of60individuals with causal variants in other ID genes. We have evaluated 3q13.31 deletion syndrome is a CNV syndrome which is 70 HPO terms to determine if there is a statistical characterized by marked developmental delay, character- association between some characteristics of the phenotype istic faces, hypotonia, and mental retardation. Abnormal and molecular defects in genes involved in chromatin genitalia were found in the majority of males, with regulation. several having micropenis and also Shawl scrotum, Materials and methods: We have retrospectively cryptorchidism, small testes. Here we report an interest- selected 120 patients with syndromic ID evaluated ing case, a 16 years-old male who has machroorchidism in our Department between 2008 and 2017 with a with 3q13.31 deletion syndrome. Patient was referred to confirmed molecular diagnosis. Variants were identified genetic evaluation due to developmental delay and by whole exome sequencing (WES) or using a custo- overgrowth. He was born at 32 weeks of gestation due mized NGS panel containing 1586 genes associated with to premature contractions. Motor milestones delayed; neurodevelopmental disorders (RD-Seq © V4.0). Sanger with head control obtained at 6–8 months of age, sitting sequencing was performed for validation of all without support at 12–15 months and walking indepen- variants. For the phenotypic statistical association analy- dently at 24 months old. He was monitored by pediatric sis 70 HPO terms were registered and evaluated in both cardiologist because of mitral valve regurgitation and groups. once he was hospitalized due to pericardial–pleural Results: Results of the phenotypic statistical analysis in effusions after influenza infection. At physical examina- both groups and of the causal variants will be presented. tion he presented with broad forehead, downslanted Conclusions: The existence of a phenotypic pattern palpebral fissures, long filtrum, prominent thick lower associatedwithmolecular defectsinchromatinremodelling lip, thin upper lip, and microretrognaty. Parameters of genes might be of clinical interest helping clinicians to growth were all measured over the highest percentile recognize the pattern of anomalies and guiding the (weight 71.5 kg (>
P99 ), height 193 cm (>
P99 ) and OFC diagnosis 60cm(>p99))whilebilateralorchidvolumeswere30ml. M. Pacio Miguez: A. Employment (full or part-time); After excluding Fragile X syndrome, microarray analysis Significant; IdiPaz, HULP. was performed and 3,045.807 kb loss at 3q13.2q13.311844 E-
P08 .05 including missing teeth. Chromosomal microarray analysis Expending the clinical phenotype of CTCF related did not reveal clinically significant chromosomal imbal- intellectual disability ances. Trio whole exome sequencing detected a de-novo c.1102C>T; p.Arg368Cys heterozygous variant in the D. Brabbing-Goldstein1,2,3, E. Botzer4,3, A. Orr CTCF gene, interpreted as likely pathogenic according to Urterger1,3, S. Ben‐Shachar1,3 ACMG guidelines. Discussion: Upon comparing the clinical picture of our 1TheGenetic institution TelAviv SouraskyMedicalCenter, patient with previously reported individuals (table), some Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecol- symptomsareshowntobehighlyrepeatable.Microcephaly ogy, Lis Maternity Hospital Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical although common, does not uniformly exist. This case Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel expands the phenotype of CTCF-related disorders, includ- Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Pediatric Dentistry, Tel ingthepresenceofbrainmalformations,epilepsy, andcleft Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel palate as a part of the clinical spectrum. Finely, this is the first case described with hearing loss. Introduction: Germline heterozygous disease-causing var- D.Brabbing-Goldstein:None.E.Botzer:None.A.Orr iants inthe transcriptional repressor CCCTC binding factor Urterger: None. S. Ben‐Shachar: None. (CTCF) gene are a rare cause for a syndromic intellectual disability with cardinal features of short stature, and E-
P08 .06 microcephaly. Thus far, to the best of our knowledge, Severe intellectual disability and epilepsy due to a seven cases were described in the literature. parental mosaicism of an EEF1A2 mutation Case: We present a patient born with cleft palate, dysmorphicfacialfeatures,abnormallywidesagittalfissure, S. M. Ribeiro1, L. Ramos1,2, P. Louro1,2, J. M. Saraiva1,3, atrio-septal defect, mild pulmonic stenosis and low- birth M. Venâncio1,4, J. Sá1 weight. During pregnancy, polyhydramnios and transverse lie were reported. Karyotype and FISH for 22q11.2 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro chromosomeperformedafterbirthwerenormal.Thepatient HospitalareUniversitáriodeCoimbra,Coimbra,Portugal, represented to our clinic at 9 years old. She had an 2Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Beira Interior, intellectual disability, failure to thrive, moderate-severe Covilhã,Portugal,3UniversityClinicofPediatrics,Faculty hearing loss, epilepsy and non-specific changes in brain of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, MRI. In addition, the patient had dental abnormalities OurCase BastakiF.etal. HoriIetal.JournalofMedical GregorAetal.AmJHumGenet.2013 BMCMed Genetics,2017 Genet.,2017 Case1 Case2 Case1 Case2 Case3 Case4 Global + + + + + + + + developmentaldelay andintellectual disability Failuretothrive + + − + + − − − Distinctfacial + + + + + + + + characteristics¹ Microcephaly − + + − + + + − Cleftpalate + − − − + − − − Dentalabnormalities Abnormalinappearanceand prominent − − prominent Dental − − missingteeth incisors incisors anomalies reportednot specified Hearingloss + − − − − − − − Congenitalheart Atrio-septaldefect,pulmonic Atrio-septal − − Atrio-septal − − − malformation stenosis defect,patent defect,patent ductucarteriosus ductucarteriosus Epilepsy + − − + − − − − Neuroimaging Asymmetryandslightdilatationof normal Normal Normal ventriculomegaly Non-available Normal Ltventricle lateralventricles.parenchymal dilatation thinningatoccipitalarea Prenatalsigns Intrauterinegrowthrestriction Intrauterine Non-available Non-available Non-available Non-available Non- Non-available Polyhydramnios,Abnormallie growthrestriction available Molecularalternation c.1102C>T;p.Arg368Cys c.612delAAAG; 1.1Mbdeletion 1.2Mbdeletion c.375dupT;p. c.1186dupAp. c.1699C>T 280kbdeletion p. of16q22.1 of16q22.1 Val126Cysfs*14 Arg396Lysfs*13 p. includingCTCF Lys206Profs*13 includingCTCF includingCTCF Arg567TrpAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1845 4University Clinic of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, U1256, Nutrition-Genetics and Environmental Exposure, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal Medical faculty and University Hospital Center, Université de Lorraine, Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, France Introduction: De novo pathogenic variants in EEF1A2 are associated with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy Introduction:FragileXsyndrome(FXS)isoneofthemost [MIM 616409] and autosomal dominant mental retardation common causes of inherited intellectual disability. This X- 38 [MIM 616393]. linked disease isduetoabnormalCGG triplet expansionin MaterialsandMethods:Abroadgenepanelsequencing the FMR1 5′UTR (> 200 CGG repeats). Triplet instability (Agilent 6.110 genes) was performed in a blood sample duringmaternalmeiosisalmostalwaysleadstoCGGrepeat from our patient followed by parental segregation study. number expansion, even though allele retraction can occur Afterwards, we compare the clinical features with the inlessthan 1%ofthecases. Wedescribe thefirstcase ofa published cases. post-zygotic premutation retraction without associated Results: A 15-year-old girl has been observed at our expansion, occurring in a male fetus. We discuss mechan- clinical department since she was three years old for isms that could explain this event. etiological investigation of severe intellectual disability, Materials and Methods: The analysis of the number of epileptic encephalopathy with myoclonic seizures, autistic CGGs was performed using a triplet repeat primed PCR behaviour with stereotypies and borderline microcephaly. (AmplideX, Theradiag), as part of a prenatal diagnosis in a Additional features included strabismus and sialorrhea. female carrying a normal allele (29 CGGs) and a After a previous extensive negative etiological investiga- premutation (63 CGGs). tion, we found in the EEF1A2 gene the heterozygous Results: The male fetus was free from fragile X variantc.1295C>Tp.(Thr432Met).Thisvariantisnotreport syndrome with a somatic mosaic for two different alleles: in the literature or population databases, affects a highly a 48 CGG grey zone allele and the maternal 63 CGG conservedresidueandinsilicoanalysispredictsdeleterious premutation allele. function.Itwasinheritedfromthehealthymotherwhohasa Conclusions: Two hypotheses could explain the mosai- low mosaicism (less than 25% by Sanger analysis). cism with retraction from a premutation to a grey zone Conclusion: The phenotype in our patient is in allele: accordance with the literature. Until now, only eight de novopathogenicvariantshavebeenreportedinHGMDPro. – a post-expansion retraction hypothesis as proposed by Ourfamilyistheonlyknowncasewithasignificantriskof Ferreira et al. with expansion of the maternal premuta- recurrence. Our results reinforce the likely pathogenic role tion followedby apost-zygoticretraction. Thishypoth- of EEF1A2-missense variants in intellectual disability, esis is highly questionable because the size of the adding more information to the previously described cases. maternal allele is conserved in part of the fetus. This work was partly funded by the In2Genome, ref – stability and retraction hypothesis: transmission of the CENTRO-01- 0247- FEDER-017800, of the CENTRO maternal premutation without any CGG expansion 2020program,Portugal2020,EuropeanUnion,throughthe followedbypost-zygoticretractiontoagreyzoneallele. European Regional Development Fund. S.M.Ribeiro:None.L.Ramos:None.P.Louro:None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. V. Roth: None. J. Ravel: J.M. Saraiva: None. M. Venâncio: None. J. Sá: None. None. L. Faivre: None. C. Philippe: None. P. Jonveaux: None. C. Bonnet: None. E-
P08 .07 Case report: first case of mosaicism with a premutation E-
P08 .08 post-zygotic retraction in FMR1 without associated Associationofepilepsy,antiepilepticdrugsandcognitive expansion in a male fetus performanceindizygotictwinswithFragileXsyndrome A. Denommé-Pichon1,2, V. Roth3,4, J. Ravel3,4, L. T. Tkemaladze, E. Kvaratskhelia, E. Abzianidze Faivre1,2, C. Philippe1,2, P. Jonveaux4, C. Bonnet3,4 Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Tbilisi 1FHU TRANSLAD and GAD INSERM UMR 1231 team, State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia University of Burgundy Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 2Reference Center Anomalies of Development and Mal- Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common inherited formation Syndromes, University Hospital of Dijon, Dijon, cause of intellectual disability and autism. Most of FXS France, 3Department of Genetics, Regional University cases aredue to expansionsin the5′ untranslated region of Hospital of Nancy, Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, France, 4Inserm the FMR1 gene leading to the absence of the FMRP. It has1846 been shown that epilepsy occurs in about 20% of patients Ribonucleoprotein K (HNRNPK, MIM#616580) gene, and that mosaicism is present in approximately 40% of encoding a member of the hnRNPs family, have been cases.Itisreportedthatdizygotictwinningismorecommon recently associated with a Kabuki-like syndrome, named in FXS permutation carrier females than in general Au-Kline syndrome (AUKS, MIM#616580), characterized population. by facial dysmorphisms, cognitive impairment, and multi- Herewepresentacaseof13y.o.dizygotictwin brothers organ defects. Here, we report on a patient with an with FXS. Molecular genetic testing showed that one twin intellectual disability syndrome, displaying craniofacial has >200 CGG repeats (full mutation) and the other twin anomalies suggestive of a Developmental Disorder of has 90 and >200 repeats (size mosaic). Initially mosaic Chromatin Remodeling (DDCR), harboring two de novo brother used to have better cognitive performance than his microrearrangements, consisting of a 4q13.3 microdeletion full mutation brother, however his development regressed andofa14q11.2microtriplication.Thesecondoneincludes as he developed seizures and was treated with antiepileptic the Heterogeneous Nuclear Ribonucleoprotein C drugs (AEDs). He has been seizure-free for the last five (HNRNPC, MIM#616580) gene, belonging, as well as years.Thefullmutationtwinneverhadseizuresandhehas HNRNPK, to the hnRNPs family and nowadays not better cognitive andbehavioral skills. Noteworthythere are associated with any genetic disorder. After excluding two more dizygotic twin pairs in the relatives from the further underlying molecular defects by family-based mother’s side. exome sequencing, we pointed out HNRNPC as a probable Despitethefactthatmosaicismisusuallyassociatedwith contributor to the DDCR craniofacial appearance in our better cognitive functioning, at present mosaic twin brother patient, through an altered gene dosage. HNRNPC encodes functions at a lower level than his full mutation brother. heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein 
C1 /
C2 , a ubiqui- Epilepsy and/or AEDs could contribute as an additional tously expressed RNA-binding protein (RBP), that influ- impact on cognitive performance in FXS. Presence of ences variousaspects ofmRNA metabolismandintervenes twinning in the mother or close relatives of the child with in the ATP dependent chromatin remodeling process. intellectualdisabilitymayprovideanadditionalclueforthe Moreover, we performed a DeepGestalt analysis trough diagnosis of FXS. the Face2Gene platform, confirming an overlap between T. Tkemaladze: None. E. Kvaratskhelia: None. E. facial dysmorphisms of our proband and patients harboring Abzianidze: None. HNRNPK mutations. This case highlights and corroborates the importance of an emergent subgroup of conditions, in E-
P08 .09 thecontextofDDCRs,causedbyanomaliesinthehnRNPs CraniofacialappearanceofaDevelopmentalDisorderof components. Chromatin Remodeling in a girl with syndromic E. Agolini: None. N. Fleischer: None. R. Pierantoni: intellectual disability and a novel de novo microrear- None. S. Loddo: None. A. Novelli: None. L. Bernardini: rangement encompassing HNRNPC gene None. S. Majore: None. P. Grammatico: None. G. Pascolini: None. E. Agolini1, N. Fleischer2, R. Pierantoni3, S. Loddo1, A. Novelli1, L. Bernardini4, S. Majore5, P. Grammatico5, G. E-
P08 .10 Pascolini5 Heterozygous IGF1 deletion in a family with short stature, microcephaly and intellectual disability 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Chil- dren’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2FDNA Inc., Boston, MA, M.Moreno-Igoa1,V.García-Solaesa1,M.Artigas-López1, United States, 3Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, ASL C-Local L.Morales-Garófalo1,M.Chueca2,M.A.Ramos-Arroyo1 HealthDistrict,Viterbo,Italy,4LaboratoryofCytogenetics, CSS-Mendel Institute, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza 1Hospital Complex of Navarre - Genetic Department, Foundation, Rome, Italy,5Laboratory ofMedicalGenetics, Pamplona, Spain, 2Hospital Complex of Navarre - Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Pediatric Endocrinology Department, Pamplona, Spain Rome, Rome, Italy Introduction: Frequently, the underlying etiology of short Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) com- stature is unknown, resulting in a diagnosis of idiopathic prise a large family of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) short stature. involved in multiple aspects of nucleic acid metabolism, Case report: We present a family with short stature: the includingregulationofchromatinremodeling,transcription, proband,a15monthsoldchild,her34yearsoldmotherand RNAstabilityandsplicing,translation,andsignaltransduc- maternal grand-mother. The phenotype among them is tion. Mutations in the Heterogeneous Nuclear slightly different, as the child and her mother have alsoAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1847 ® microcephalyanddevelopmentaldelay/learningdisabilities, evaluated with: SOPHiA DDM (Sophia Genetics) and respectively. Maternal medical history was remarkable for VarAFT 2.14. intrauterine and postnatal growth restriction. The diagnosis Results: A novel heterozygous pathogenic variant of Russel-Silver syndrome was suggested and she received NM_004586.2:c.932T>G, p.(Leu311*) was identified in growth hormone therapy from 9 to 15 years, achieving a the RP
S6 KA3gene on the X chromosome, associated with finalheightof149cm.From16to22yearsofageshewas Coffin-Lowry syndrome. treated for anorexia nervosa and at 31 years of age insulin Discussion:TheRP
S6 KA3geneprovidesinstructionsfor resistance was diagnosed. making a ribosomal-
S6  kinases (RSKs) that play role in Results: Cytogenetic analysis and MLPA studies for several important cellular processes, cell growth, prolifera- SHOX gene deletions and BWS/RSS del/dup/IC defects tion,differentiationandapoptosis.Morethan125mutations were normal in the mother. The aCGH identified a 200Kb in the RP
S6 KA3 have been identified in people with CLS. deletion at 12q23.2 close to IGF1 gene, not present in the Thesemutationsseverelyreduceoreliminatetheactivityof maternal grand-mother. MLPA analysis confirmed the the RP
S6 KA3 protein. Coffin-Lowry syndrome is a rare heterozygous loss of exons 1 and 2 of IGF1 in the mother form of semi-dominant X-linked mental retardation, as it and the proband. usually presents more severe expression in male than in Conclusions: Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) are femaleindividuals.ThemajorityofCLSfemaleshaveonly important for growth and development. Homozygous minimalfindingssuchasmildfacialcoarsening,obesityand IGF1 deletions or mutations are relatively rare. The tapering fingers with normal intelligence or mild learning phenotypic severity is variable and includes intrauterine difficulties.CEScansupportdefinitivediagnosisinpatients growth retardation, postnatal growth failure, microce- with speech delay of unknown etiology, contributing to phaly, varying degrees of developmental delay, sensor- precise prognosis, systematic monitoring, and when appro- ineural hearing loss, and hyperinsulinism. A few patients priate, identification of other family members. with heterozygous mutations have been described mainly N. Marinakis: None. K. Kosma: None. A. Klimento- with only short stature. Here we describe two patients poulou: None. J. Traeger-Synodinos: None. H. bearing a heterozygous IGF1 deletion with an expanded Fryssira: None. phenotype. M. Moreno-Igoa: None. V. García-Solaesa: None. M. E-
P08 .12 Artigas-López: None. L. Morales-Garófalo: None. M. Novel genomic rearrangements affecting chromosome Chueca: None. M.A. Ramos-Arroyo: None. 15 in Bulgarian cases with epilepsy and intellectual disability E-
P08 .11 Definitive diagnosis of a female with speech delay using V.Peycheva1,K.Kamenarova1,N.Ivanova1,D.Avdjieva2, clinical exome sequencing: a rare case of Coffin-Lowry V. Bozhinova3, V. Mitev1, A. Jordanova1,4, R. Kaneva1 syndrome 1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical N. Marinakis, K. Kosma, A. Klimentopoulou, J. Traeger- Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Synodinos, H. Fryssira Bulgaria, 2Children’s Hospital „Prof. Ivan Mitev MD“, Department of Endocrinological and Genetic Diseases, Department of Medical Genetics, National and Kapodis- MedicalUniversity,Sofia,Bulgaria,3UniversityHospitalof trian Athens of University, Athens, Greece Neurology and Psychiatry “St’ Naum”, Clinic of Child Neurology, Department of Neurology, Medical University, Introduction: We present a female in whom targeted Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Neurogenetics Group, VIB Department of clinicalexomesequencingsupporteddefinitivediagnosisof Molecular Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, a rare hereditary disorder. Belgium Materials and Methods: A 3-year old girl was referred to the Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University High resolution chromosomal microarray (CMA) is now with speech delay and abnormal facial features. Laboratory worldwide first tier diagnostic tool for detection of genetic investigation involved classical karyotype analysis submicroscopic Copy Number Variations (CNVs), as (negative), followed by semi-targeted Exome Sequencing, genetic cause of neurodevelopmental disorders. Recently, using Sophia Genetics Clinical Exome Solution (CES) and it became evident that the co-occurrence of epilepsy, Nextera Rapid Capture Exome (Illumina), run on a autism,attentiondeficitandhyperactivitydisorder(ADHD) NextSeq-500 (Illumina). The CES panel includes ~4900 and intellectual disability (ID) is related to common genes (114.405 exons). Bioinformatic data analysis was biological pathways and in this sense, one CNV may be1848 causativeformorethanoneneuropsychiatricphenotype.In Results: Our three patients had a specific diagnosis the present study, we performed array Comparative identified after perform a commercial broad disease gene Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) using Agilent Microarray panel. All of them had previously an extensive etiological Kit, 4x180K in Bulgarian patients with comparable investigation. We found in patient 1 a probable pathogenic neurodevelopmental disorders such as epilepsy, ID and frameshift variant in the ZMYND11 gene: c.1317_1320del autistic features. A quantitative PCR was conducted for [p.Thr440Argfs*3]; in patient 2 a pathogenic missense confirmation and segregation analysis. As a result, we mutation in the PP
P2 R5D gene: c.592G>A [p. detected one novel deletion 1.33 Mb in size and 402-kb (Glu198Lys)]; and in patient 3 a probable pathogenic duplication covering different sub—bands of chromosome frameshift variant in the STXB
P1 : c.1099C>T. They were 15 in two non-consanguineous patients with unprovoked de novo in patients 2 and 3 and inherited from an affected seizures, variable severity of ID, behavior problems and parent in patient 1. congenital anomalies. The deletion is located in 15q22.31 Discussion: The search for a specific diagnosis is a key region and covers 16 OMIM genes. Among them, component of the assessment of the child with intellectual CSNK1G1 gene is most likely associated with the seizure disability. These cases demonstrate how the new technol- phenotype, observed in our patient. The duplication is ogies can change the number of cases in which we can located in 15q13.1 region, covers the whole APBA2 gene achieveaspecificdiagnosis,that hadpreviouslyescaped in and was found in three generations of a family with clinical recognition. epilepsy, ID and psychiatric abnormalities. This study In retrospective, after reviewing the literature, it is demonstrates the importance of CMA as comprehensive possible that patient 1 and patient 2 have recognizable genomic approach for identification of novel microaberra- phenotypes and this could alert us to suspect of these tions responsible for neurodevelopmental disorders. The specific causative genes in future cases. study was supported by Grants DTK/67/2009 and DUNK P.MaiaAlmeida:None.J.Sá:None.F.Ramos:None. 01-2/2009 of NSF, Ministry of Education and Science, J.M. Saraiva: None. Bulgaria. V. Peycheva: None. K. Kamenarova: None. N. E-
P08 .14 Ivanova:None.D.Avdjieva:None.V.Bozhinova:None. Epilepsy in patients with intellectual disability V. Mitev: None. A. Jordanova: None. R. Kaneva: None. M. Atanasoska1, R. Vazharova1,2, L. Balabanski1, S. E-
P08 .13 Andonova3, I. Bradinova3, A. Savov3, D. Toncheva1,4 How new technologies can improve the old clinical awareness? 1GynecologyandAssistedReproductionHospital“Malinov D.M.”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Sofia University St Kliment P. Maia Almeida1,2, J. Sá1, F. Ramos1, J. M. Saraiva1,3,4 Ohridski, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biology, Medical genetics and Microbiology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro 3National Genetic Laboratory, UHOG “Maichin dom”, HospitalareUniversitáriodeCoimbra,Coimbra,Portugal, Sofia,Bulgaria,4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Medical 2Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Beira Interior, University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria Covilhã,Portugal,3UniversityClinicofPediatrics,Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, Introduction:Epilepsyasaneurologicaldisorderhasdeep 4Clinical Academic Center of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal influence on patient life. The incidence among individuals with intellectual disability is higher than in general Introduction: Intellectual disability isa neurodevelopmen- population—22 vs. 0.6–1%, respectively. Here we present taldysfunctionwithonsetduringdevelopmentalperiodthat resultsfromastudyofBulgarianpatientswithco-occurring includes both intellectual and adaptative functioning in epilepsy and intellectual disability. conceptual, social and practical domains. Historically, a Materials and Methods: Ten patients with sporadic specific diagnosis has been made achievable in only a early onset epilepsy and intellectual disability were tested minority of the cases, but this has changed dramatically through NGS (Massive parallel sequencing) on an Illumina with the use of new diagnose technologies. platform using TruSight One gene panel and/or WES. Materials and Methods: Clinical and molecular char- Previous genetic tests of SCN1A were negative in these acterization of three cases with intellectual disability and patients and microstructural chromosome abnormalities non-specific dysmorphisms in our hospital, including have been ruled out. retrospective review of previous patients described in Results: Four different probably causative mutations literature with pathogenic variants. were found: heterozygous mutations in the SCN8A geneAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1849 (NP_055006.1:p.Arg1872Gln) and in the SCN2A gene hands with tapering fingers. Karyotype, FMR1 molecular (NP_001035232.1:p.Arg853Gln); a hemizyoguos mutation analysis, RP
S6 KA3 (RSK2) gene sequencing, and array- in SL
C9 A6 (NP_001036002.1:p.Arg500Ter); and an CGH were normal. unreported heterozygous mutation in MTOR gene Results: Whole exome sequencing was performed (NP_004949.1:p.Val2406Met). Among parents of affected revealing a homozygous KDM5B missense variant: individuals no carriers of mutantalleles have been observed. c.1976G>A, p.(Arg659Gln). Homozygosity was confirmed Conclusion: To establish the genetic basis of a hetero- by segregation analysis. This variant was previously geneous disorder as epilepsy with intellectual disability unreported and is classified as of uncertain clinical couldbechallengingandcomplex.Thehigherincidenceof significance. epilepsy among patients with intellectual disability than in Conclusions:This patient has similar features to those generalpopulationsuggeststhatbothdisordersmaypossess reported before with bi-allelic LoF KDM5B variants. a partially shared genetic background. Results from our Assuminghisvariantiscausative, hecontributestoexpand pilot study show that in some cases severe early onset the phenotypic spectrum associated with KDM5B disorders like epilepsy and mental retardation could result deficiency. fromdenovodominantsinglegenedefects,whichhampers O. Moldovan: None. R. Gouveia: None. A. theirprophylaxis.Despitethis,knowledgeoftheunderlying Sousa: None. genetic cause is helpful in genetic counseling of patients and may point out new targets for treatment. E-
P08 .16 M. Atanasoska: None. R. Vazharova: None. L. Novel compound heterozygous splicing variants in Balabanski: None. S. Andonova: None. I. Bradinova: KIAA1109 broaden the mutational spectrum and refine None. A. Savov: None. D. Toncheva: None. the clinical picture of Alkuraya-Kucinskas syndrome (ALKKUCS) E-
P08 .15 New homozygous missense variant in KDM5B gene - M. Elgizouli1, L. Gueneau2, K. Schäferhoff3, U. Grassh- guilty unless proven innocent off3, C. Depienne1, A. Reymond2, A. Kuechler1 O. Moldovan, R. Gouveia, A. Sousa 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universtitätsklinikum Essen, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Centre for Genetic Department, Santa Maria Hospital, Centro Hospi- Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, talar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal Switzerland, 3Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Ange- wandte Genomik, UniversitätsklinikumTübingen,Universi- Introduction: In 2018 Faundes et al. described three cases tät Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany of a new autosomal recessive developmental delay (DD) syndrome(MRT65;MIM618109)causedbybi-allelicloss Biallelic loss of function (LoF) and missense mutations in of function (LoF) variants in KDM5B gene. All three KIAA1109 (OMIM *611565) encoding an evolutionary patients had severe DD, camptodactyly and overlapping conserved protein with yet poorly understood function are facialdysmorphism. KDM5B belongstotheKDM5 family described as causative of the recently characterised of JmjC domain-containing histone demethylases which Alkuraya-Kucinskas Syndrome (ALKKUCS, OMIM specifically remove dimethyl and trimethyl marks from #617822). Patients with this rare autosomal recessive and histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4), acting as transcription often lethal disorder generally share a clinical picture of modulators. profound developmental delay, infantile epilepsy, ventricu- Case Presentation: An 8-year-old boy was referred for lomegaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, cerebral parenchymal geneticevaluationforDDandcataplexy.Hewasthesecond rarefaction and arthrogryposis. So far, only 13 patients child of consanguineous parents; his father and sister had described in a single report (Gueneau et al., 2018) and two febrileseizures,andoneofhismaternaluncleshadcerebral prenatallyidentifiedfetuses(Filatovaetal.,2018)havebeen palsy. Congenital torticollis and bilateral cryptorchidism publishedwithaspectrumofseverityrangingfromdeathin were noted in the neonatal period. He evolved with utero or soon after birth in association with LoF mutations moderatetosevereDD,absenceofspeech,hypotonia,joint to several neurodevelopmental disease and brain anomalies hyperlaxity, cataplexy triggered by laughter and tickles, in individuals with missense variants compatible with life. attention deficit disorder, astigmatism and hypogonadism. Using exome sequencing we identified a boy born to Brain MRI showed white matter reduction and ventricular healthy non-consanguineous German parents with severe asymmetry. On physical examination he had a square face, neurodevelopmental delay, hypotonia, Dandy-Walker mal- hypertelorism, epicanthus, broad nose, macrotia, and small formation, hydrocephalus, cerebral atrophy, epilepsy,1850 respiratory insufficiency, hypothyroidism and dysmorphic E-
P08 .18 facial features but no arthrogryposis and KIAA1109 A duplication of the whole MID1 gene in a 14-years old compound heterozygosity for a nonsense and a splice boy with a non-Opitz GBBB phenotype variant inducing skipping of an exon (confirmed by RT- PCR). Through comparison with the hitherto described A. Sandestig1,K. Flejmer2,P. Palmebäck1,M.Stefanova1 patientsandcharacterisationofthesplicingmutationinthis patientweexpandandrefinethephenotypicandmutational 1LinköpingUniversityHospital,Linköping,Sweden,2Ryhov spectrum of ALKKUCS. County Hospital, Jönköping, Sweden M. Elgizouli: None. L. Gueneau: None. K. Schäferh- off: None. U. Grasshoff: None. C. Depienne: None. A. The MID1 gene (Xp22.2) spans approximately 400 kb of Reymond: None. A. Kuechler: None. genomicsequenceandencodes theMID1protein,acentral enzymeinvolvedinmanydifferentprocessesinthecelland E-
P08 .17 a member of the RING (Really Interesting New Genes) A de novo balanced 3;5 translocation in a patient with finger family. Besides regulating the activity of the intellectual impairment, autistic features, macrocephaly translational regulators P
P2 A (protein phosphatase 2A) and absence epilepsy putatively affects MEF2C and mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin), MID1 expression assembles a large microtubule-associated protein complex involvedinmRNAtransportandtranslation.Thus,itexerts I. Hüning1, F. Kortüm2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, F. J. the role of an 
E3  ubiquitin ligase and is a central player Kaiser1, K. Kutsche2 during development. A spectrum of MID1 mutations comprising missense mutations, nonsense mutations, small 1Institute of Human Genetics, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institute insertions and deletions, splice site alterations as well as of Human Genetics, Hamburg, Germany exondeletionsandduplications,werefoundtocausetheX- linked form of Opitz G/BBB syndrome (XLOS, OMIM Haploinsufficiency of MEF2C is known to cause severe 300000), an entity with a very distinguished phenotype. developmental delay, intellectual impairment, autistic Here we report on a 14-years-old boy with a novel features and epileptic encephalopathy. maternallyinheritedduplication,550bpinsize,comprising We report a 4-year-old female patient with severe the whole MID1 gene. Remarkably, patient’s phenotype intellectual impairment, macrocephaly, autistic features differed considerably from the one delineating XLOS. He and absence epilepsy. She presented with developmental presented with mild to moderate ID, hypermetropia, febrile delayfrombirth,hasnoexpressivelanguageandisnotable seizuresbetweentheageof9monthsand5years,aswellas to walk. CMRI was unremarkable. The girl carries a de the following minor anomalies: long narrow face, hypote- novo balanced translocation, with the karyotype 46,XX,t lorism, upslanting palpebral fissures, blepharophimosis, (3;5)(p22.1;q14.3). Array CGH analysis and trio exome prominent base of the nose, long prominent nose, low sequencingdidnotrevealanycopynumbervariationand/or hanging columella, wide mouth, upturned corners of the sequence variant of pathogenic relevance. mouth, micrognathia, posteriorly rotated ears and macrotia. By using serial fluorescenceinsituhybridization (FISH), His gestalt shares features between Schillbach-Rott syn- wenarroweddownthebreakpointin3p22.1to~850kb.No drome and Floating-Harbor syndrome. Single exome genes of putative clinically relevance have been described analysis including SRCAP gene did not find any disease- within this chromosomal region. The BAC clone R
P11 - causing gene variants. Thus, patient’s diagnosis remains 690G22 spanned the 5q14.3 breakpoint. We delineated the unclear. breakpoint to ~50 kb; it mapped either in the proximity of A. Sandestig: None. K. Flejmer: None. P. Palmebäck: the MEF2C gene or directly disrupted this gene. Two None. M. Stefanova: None. patientswithadenovotranslocationanda5q14breakpoint inproximity toMEF2Chavebeenreportedintheliterature E-
P08 .19 (Floris et al. 2008, Saitsu et al. 2011). Both had clinical Severe neurodevelopmental disease caused by a homo- features typically reported for individuals with MEF2C zygous TLK2 variant haploinsufficiency. Our data suggest that the chromosomal rearrangement in A. Topf1, Y. Oktay2, S. Balaraju1, E. Yilmaz2, E. our patient leads to deregulated MEF2C expression likely Sonmezler2,U.Yis3,S.Laurie4,R.Thompson1,A.Roos1,5, underlying the clinical features in the girl. D. G. MacArthur6,7, A. Yaramis8, S. Güngör9, H. I. Hüning: None. F. Kortüm: None. G. Gillessen- Lochmüller10,11,4, S. Hiz3, R. Horvath12 Kaesbach: None. F.J. Kaiser: None. K. Kutsche: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1851 1John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, howeverpresentmoreseveresymptoms,withprofoundID, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, New- West syndrome, pontocerebellar hypoplasia and spastic castle, United Kingdom, 2Izmir Biomedicine and Genome tetraparesis. Both parents are heterozygous for the variant Center, Dokuz Eylul University Health Campus, Izmir, and clinically unaffected. Our variant is located at the N- Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylul University, School of Medicine, terminus in a region expected to contain a nuclear Department of Paediatric Neurology, Izmir, Turkey, localization signal. 4CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Conclusion:Thisreporthighlightsthatrecessivevariants Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, inTLK2canalsobedisease-causingandmayactthrougha 5Leibniz Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften, ISAS, different pathomechanism. Dortmund, Germany, 6Analytic and Translational Genetics A. Topf: None. Y. Oktay: None. S. Balaraju: None. E. Unit, MassachusettsGeneralHospital,Boston,MA,United Yilmaz: None. E. Sonmezler: None. U. Yis: None. S. States, 7Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Laurie:None.R.Thompson:None.A.Roos:None.D.G. Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, MacArthur:None.A.Yaramis:None.S.Güngör:None. United States, 8Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Diyarbakir H. Lochmüller: None. S. Hiz: None. R. Horvath: None. Memorial Hospital, Diyarbakir, Turkey, 9Inonu University, Faculty of Medicine, Turgut Ozal Research Center, E-
P08 .20 Department of Paediatric Neurology, Malatya, Turkey, NRXN3 end-duplication in not sufficient to explain 10Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Insti- development delay tute,UniversityofOttawa,Ottawa,CanadaandDivisionof Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, L. Ruaud1, J. Levy2, A. Guet3, N. Couque4, M. Thaly2, S. Ottawa,ON,Canada,11DepartmentofNeuropediatricsand Grotto5,A.Maruani6,C.Dupont2,B.Keren7,A.Verloes1, Muscle Disorders, Medical Center–University of Freiburg, A. Tabet8 Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany, 12Department of ClinicalNeurosciences, University of Cambridge School of 1UFdeGénétiqueClinique,Départementdegénétique,GH Clinical Medicine, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cam- Robert Debré, APHP, Unité INSERM Neurodiderot, bridge, United Kingdom UniversitéParisDiderot,Paris, France, 2UFdeCytogéné- tique,Départementdegénétique,GHRobertDebré,APHP, Introduction: TLK2 encodes the Tousled-like kinase 2, a Paris, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, GH Louis nuclear serine/threonine kinase known to be involved in Mourier, APHP, Colombes, France, 4UF de Génétique DNA replication and chromatin assembly. TLK2 has Moléculaire,Départementdegénétique,GHRobertDebré, recentlybeenassociatedwithadistinctneurodevelopmental APHP, Paris, France, 5UF de Génétique Clinique, phenotypecharacterisedbymildmotorandlanguagedelay, Département de génétique, GH Robert Debré, APHP, behavioural problems, facial dysmorphism and gastro- Paris, France, 6Service de Psychiatrie de l’Enfant et de intestinal symptoms. All 40 individuals reported carried l’Adolescent, CH Robert Debré, APHP, Paris, France, heterozygous de novo or dominant variants in the TLK2 7Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Départe- gene; truncating variants located throughout the gene and ment de génétique, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière APHP, Centre de missense changes principally located at the C-terminal end Référence des Déficiences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, of the protein. Paris, France, 8UF de Cytogénétique, Département de Methods: Patient and family members were recruited at génétique, GH Robert Debré, APHP, Human Genetics and the Department of Paediatric Neurology, Izmir, Turkey. Cognitive Functions, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed at the BroadInstitute,USAusingIlluminaexomecapture(38Mb Neurexins are presynaptic proteins that act as synaptic target). WES data were analysed on the RD-Connect organizers,play aroleinsynapsefunctionsandconduction Genome-Phenome Analysis Platform (https://platform.rd- of nerve signals. The neurexin family consists of three connect.eu/). Likely pathogenic variants were identified genes (NRXN1, NRXN2 and NRXN3) in whom genomic applying standard filtering criteria: MAF <1%, and high to alterationshavebeenidentifiedinvariableneuropsychiatric moderate variant effect predictor. disorders. Nevertheless, regarding the incomplete pene- Results: We identified a homozygous missense variant trance and the variability of the symptoms associated with (c.163A>G; p.Lys55Glu) in TLK2 in a girl with a Lof mutation of neurexin genes, authors have suggested neurodevelopmental disorder with severe motor and implication of others genetic risks modulating the neurode- language delay, behavioural problems, facial dysmorphism velopment. We reported a patient with feeding difficulties, and gastro-intestinal symptoms, in keeping with what has psychomotor delayed, limited speech. CGH array identifies beendescribedforheterozygousTLK2patients.Ourpatient a150kbduplicationat14q31.1includingthelasttwoexons1852 ofbothalphaandbetaisoformsofNRXN3.Interestingly,in dysmorphicfeatures,suchasfrontalbossing,hypertelorism, DECIPHER database, the patient 257388 carried a similar small chin were observed. Psychomotor development has duplication inherited from an asymptomatic parent, as our been delayed since the birth. Brain MRI showed periven- patient.SuggestingthattheduplicationinterruptingNRXN3 tricular changes due to perinatal hypoxic/ischemic injury. is not enough to explain his phenotype, additional genetic ArrayCGH was normal as well as metabolic assessment. investigations were carried out and clinical exome sequen- WES showed a heterozygous pathogenic variant in the cing identified a de novo ASX
L3  nonsense mutation PP
P2 R5D gene: c.592G>A(p.Glu198Lys). This missence (p.Ser1441*) consistent with diagnostic of Bainbridge- mutation correlates with patient`s clinical findings. A Ropers syndrome. This developmental disorder has been heterozygous variant in CHD4 gene was also found, the described in around 22 patients to date. The variable clinical relevance is unknown. phenotype is associated with intellectual disability, poor Conclusion: It is important to consider mutations in the speech, autistic traits, distinct face and significant feeding PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway in the evaluation of children difficulties compatible with our patient phenotype. Our with macrocephaly and developmental delay. PP
P2 R5D- observationsuggeststhattheNRXN3end-duplicationcould related conditions are rare, so far there are about 70 contribute to modulate the phenotype of our patient but is diagnosed patients around the world. New researches likely not sufficient to explain it. This report highlights focusing on the role of the PP
P2 R5D gene in intellectual difficulties to interpret risk factor variants in neurodevelop- disability, autism, Alzheimer’s disease and cancer are mental disorder and the necessity to perform additional promising. genetic testing such as exome sequencing in order to H. Matkovic: None. M. Salamon Janecic: None. S. exclude others rare pathogenic variants. Huljev Frkovic: None. L. Ruaud: None. J. Levy: None. A. Guet: None. N. Couque: None. M. Thaly: None. S. Grotto: None. A. E-
P08 .24 Maruani: None. C. Dupont: None. B. Keren: None. A. Acute encephalopathy after head trauma in a patient Verloes: None. A. Tabet: None. with a RHOBTB2 mutation E-
P08 .22 J. Nicolai1, A. Bay2, A. Knijnenburg1, S. Stegmann2, M. Mutation in the PP
P2 R5D gene in a patient with Sinnema2, M. Vreeburg2 macrocephaly and developmental delay - Jordan´s syndrome 1Department of Neurology, MUMC, Maastricht, The Netherlands, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of H. Matkovic, M. Salamon Janecic, S. Huljev Frkovic Clinical Genetics, MUMC, Maastricht, The Netherlands, Maastricht, Netherlands Department of Pediatrics, Division for genetics and metabolism, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Background: De novo missense mutations in the Croatia RHOBTB2 gene have been described as causative for a developmental and epileptic encephalopathy. The clinical Introduction:Recentresearchesshowedhighproportionof phenotype of this disorder includes early-onset epilepsy, mutationsinthePI3K-AKT-mTORpathway(PTEN,AKT1, severe intellectual disability, postnatal microcephaly and AKT3, PIK3CA, MTOR, PIK3R2, CCND2, PP
P2 R5D, movement disorders. Three RHOBTB2 patients were PP
P2 R1A genes) in patients with macrocephaly and described with acute encephalopathy and febrile epileptic developmental delay/ autism spectrum disorder. The status. All showed severe EEG abnormalities during this PP
P2 R5D gene codes a protein called B56-delta, a subunit episode and abnormal magnetic resonance imaging with of the enzyme phosphatase 2A (P
P2 A). P
P2 A depho- hemisphere swelling or reduced diffusion in various brain sphorylates proteins in PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway and regions. plays an important role in neuronal and developmental Patient: We describe the episode of acute encephalo- regulation processes. PP
P2 R5D-related disorders are inher- pathy in a patient with a RHOBT2 mutation after head itedinanautosomaldominantmannerbutmutationsmainly trauma. Atadmissiontothehospitalheshoweda
E4 M4V1 occur de novo. Glasgow coma scale score. EEG was severely abnormal Case:Ourpatientwasbornfromoocytedonationassisted showing a non-continuous pattern with slow activity pregnancy, at term, by caesarean section due to prenataly without epileptic activity indicating a severe encephalo- evaluated macrocephaly. At birth his head circumference pathy. A second EEG on day 8 was still severely slowed was +2.2 SD, BW and BL at 90th percentile, AS were 8/9. and showed focal delta activity fronto-centro-temporal in Beside the macrocephaly, hexadactyly, hypotonia and mild both hemispheres. Gradually he recovered, and on day 11Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1853 he had regained his normal reactivity, behavior and mood. was detected in asymptomatic father. This could indicate a Twomonthsafterdischarge,anewEEGwasmadeshowing variable penetrance of the mutation since a paternal aunt a further decrease in slow activity and increase in normal and uncle have epilepsy since childhood and intellectual electroencephalographic activity. After discharge, parents disability. Unfortunately they were unavailable for genetic have noted that he shows more hyperkinetic movements testing. compared to before this period of encephalopathy. Follow- Conclusion: Here we present a possible new mutation up MR imaging showed an increment of hippocampal andphenotypeofRORBcharacterizedbypharmacoresistant atrophy. epileptic encephalopathy with CSWS, speech impairment Conclusions: Acute encephalopathy in RHOBTB2 and clear cognitive decline leading to mild intellectual patients can also be triggered by head trauma. disability. J. Nicolai: None. A. Bay: None. A. Knijnenburg: None. S.Kolbjer:None.M.Dahlin:None.B.Anderlid:None. S. Stegmann: None. M. Sinnema: None. M. Vreeburg: None. E-
P08 .26 A supernumerary marker chromosome 15 (SM
C15 ) in E-
P08 .25 8-years old boy with intellectual disability, developmen- RORB mutation in two sisters with Epileptic Encepha- tal delay and autism spectrum disorders lopathy with Continuous Spike and Wave During Sleep (CSWS) W. Bonda1, M. Lewandowska1, J. Pietrzak1, E. Siwiec1, M. Ryłów1, G. Dopierała1, E. Studniak1, K. Bernatowicz2, S. Kolbjer1,2, M. Dahlin2,3, B. Anderlid1,4 A. Kashyap2, S. Zajączek2 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karo- 1CytogeneticUnit,IndependentPublicHospitalno.2PUM, linska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Szczecin, Poland, 2Department of Genetics and Pathology, PediatricNeurology,AstridLindgrensChildren’sHospital, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Department of Women’s and Child Health, Karolinska Introduction: Deletion of 15q11.2-q13 results in either Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Clinical Prader-Willi (PWS) or Angelman syndrome (AS) depend- Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, ing upon the parent of origin. Duplications of the Prader- Sweden Willi-Angelman critical region (PWACR) are rare and associated with behavioral and neurological features and Introduction: Recent year’s access to next generations also depend on the parent of origin. According to multiple sequencing enable to detect a great number of causes to reports maternal duplications/triplications are pathogenic, genetic generalized epilepsies. RORB, located in 9q21.13, while pathogenicity of paternal duplications is still encodesthenuclearreceptorRORβ.TwoisoformsofRORβ controversial. We present an 8-years old boy with are found in humans—RORβ1 and RORβ2. RORβ1 is triplication of 15q11-13 (PWACR) of maternal origin. expressed in cerebral cortex layer IV, thalamus and Methods: We exploited methods like: array comparative hypothalamus while RORβ2 is the predominant isoform genomic hybridization (aCGH 180k+SNP), G-band kar- in retina and pineal gland and participate in control of yotyping, FISH with 15q11.2 (SNRPN/IC) and acro-p-arm circadian rhythmicity. RORβ1 is considered to play an satellite probes and methylation-specific MLPA analysis important role in thalamocortical circuitry where distur- (MS-MLPA). bance can generate generalized seizures. We report a Results:An8yearoldboywasreferredtousforgenetic previously undescribed mutation in RORB in a family with testing because of psycho-motor delay, mental retardation two sisters with epileptic encephalopathy with CSWS. and dysmorphic features. High-resolution aCGH showed a Methods: We performed whole exome sequencing and large triplication (9.5 Mbp) of PWACR (15q11.1-q13.1). analyzed a gene panel including 917 genes reported in FurtherperformedMS-MLPAdetectedthattheboyhadone epilepticencephalopathy orinborn metabolicdiseaseinthe copy of paternal while three copies of maternal PWACR. two siblings and their parents. Mutations were verified by Karyotyping with FISH carried out from peripheral blood Sanger sequencing. lymphocytesdetectedasupernumerarymarkerchromosome Results: We detected a heterozygote missense mutation 15 (SM
C15 ) in mosaic state (60%) which came out to be in RORB, c.1090T>C, (p.Ser364Pro) in both sisters. The consisted of two copies of PWACR. mutation is not previously described in healthy controls or Conclusions: Duplication or triplications of PWACR epileptic encephalopathy. Polyphen2 and SIFT predict the (15q11-q13) are associated a distinct phenotype which has mutationasbeingbenignorpathogenic.Thesamemutation somesharingfeaturesofbothPWSandAS,whileitiswell1854 knownthatmaternalinterstitialduplications/triplicationsare E-
P08 .28 pathogenic, pathogenicity of paternal duplications is still Microcephaly and intellectual disability with novel equivocal. Additionally, we conclude that a karyotyping compound heterozygous WARS mutations shouldalways beperformed inallpatientswith duplication or triplications of Prader-Willi-Angelman critical region to N.Okamoto1,F.Miya2,T.Tsunoda2,M.Kato3,S.Saitoh4, not miss any supernumerary marker chromosomes. Y. Kanemura5,6, K. Kosaki7 W. Bonda: None. M. Lewandowska: None. J. Pietr- zak: None. E. Siwiec: None. M. Ryłów: None. G. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center Dopierała: None. E. Studniak: None. K. Bernatowicz: and Research Institute for Maternal and, Osaka, Japan, None. A. Kashyap: None. S. Zajączek: None. 2Department of Medical Science Mathematics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, E-
P08 .27 Tokyo,Japan,3DepartmentofPediatrics,ShowaUniversity A case of different penetrance of FMR1 resulting in School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 4Department of varying phenotype among three brothers who are Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University offspring of a premutated mother Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan, 5Department of Biomedical Research and Innovation, A. Ikonomidis1, A. Xefteris2 Institute for Clinical Research, National Hospital Organi- zation Osaka National Hospital, Osaka, Japan, 6Depart- 1Eurogenetica Thessalias, Larissa, Greece, 2Eurogenetica, ment of Neurosurgery, National Hospital Organization Thessaloniki, Greece Osaka National Hospital, Osaka, Japan, 7Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Introduction: Fragile-X syndrome, an X-linked dominant Tokyo, Japan disorder readily manifested in affected males, is a well characterized form of inherited mental retardation. Number Introduction: Mutations in genes encoding aminoacyl- ofrepeatsofCGGinthe5′untranslatedregionofFMR1at tRNA synthetases are known to cause leukoencephalopa- Xq27.3rangesfromcommon(5–44),intermediate(45–54), thies in autosomal recessive (AR) fashion. Mutations in premutation (55–200) to full mutation (>200) and causes some aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are associated with varying cognitive, behavioral and physical phenotype. autosomal dominant (AD) inherited form of axonal Materials and Methods: A 3-year old boy showing neuropathy. WARS encodes the human cytoplasmic distinctive Fragile-X traits (global developmental delay, tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase. Tsai et al. reported a intellectual disability, hyperactive behavior, autism spec- recurrentp.His257ArgmutationinWARSinthreeunrelated trumdisorders, longandnarrow face,large ears,prominent autosomal dominant distal hereditary motor neuropathy jaw and forehead) appeared in our laboratories and was pedigrees. We identified novel compound heterozygous tested for FMR1 using FRAXA specific primers and MS- WARS mutations by Whole exome sequencing (WES) in a MLPA to test methylation status. His younger 1-year-old patient with microcephaly and intellectual disability with brother was also tested due to physical malformations only delayed myelination. while his older 5-year-old brother showing no apparent Clinical Report: The 2-year-old female was the first physical and mental abnormalities as well as the parents child of healthy and non-consanguineous Japanese parents. were also screened. She was hypotonic and her developmental milestones were Results:Themotherownedapremutatedalleleof83and markedly delayed. Brain MRI revealed delayed myelina- a normal allele of 39 repeats. The son with the severe tion. She was suspected to have congenital CMV infection phenotype had more than 300 repeats while the son or Pelizaeus-Merzbacher syndrome. But they were showing only physical malformations had more than 200 excluded. Physical examination identified microcephaly repeats. Both boys owned methylated CpG islands. The (-3SD). Independent walk was not possible. She spoke no third son as well as the father had normal alleles (<40 meaningful words.Recently, she experienced a generalized repeats). seizure at 2 years old. Conclusions: The family described is one of the least Method: With the approval of our institutional ethics reported cases that manifest the impact of genetic committee, DNA samples from the patient and her parents penetrance which in the case of Fragile-X syndrome were analyzed by WES. depends on the CGG repeats as well as the methylation Results: The patient was compound heterozygous for status of FMR1. The stochastic result of X reactivation WARS.(NM_004184:exon11:c.
C1342 T:p.R448W,exon9: resulting in normal offspring is also well shown. c.G997A:p.A333T.) Her parents were heterozygous for the A. Ikonomidis: None. A. Xefteris: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1855 mutation. Both mutations were novel and predicted to be hithertoknownWDR26missensevariantsbySkrabanetal. pathogenic in silico analyses. (AJHG 2017). Discussion: Mutations in aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases Conclusion: This first presentation of a patient with a de maycauseneuropathyinADfashionandencephalopathyin novo in-frame deletion in the WDR26 LisH domain may AR fashion. We suppose that abnormality of WARS causes substantiatefurtherinvestigationsaboutpotentialgenotype- a novel neurogenetic syndrome with microcephaly and phenotype correlations and the pathomechanisms of intellectual disability with delayed myelination. Our find- WDR26 haploinsufficiency. ings broaden the genetic and clinical spectrum associated K.Steindl:None.D.Kraemer:None.L.Gogoll:None. with WARS mutations. P. Zanoni: None. H. Sticht: None. A. Rauch: None. N.Okamoto:None.F.Miya:None.T.Tsunoda:None. M.Kato:None.S.Saitoh:None.Y.Kanemura:None.K. E-
P08 .30 Kosaki: None. AnoveldenovoframeshiftvariantidentifiedinAHD
C1  in two unrelated boys with Xia-Gibbs syndrome E-
P08 .29 Phenotype of the first patient harboring a de novo in- S.Færgeman1,P.Gregersen1,2,B.Andersen2,N.Becher1, frame deletion in the LisH (LI
S1  homology) domain of A. Bojesen1 the WDR26 gene 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University K. Steindl1, D. Kraemer1, L. Gogoll1, P. Zanoni1, H. Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Pediatrics and Adolescent Sticht2, A. Rauch1 Medicine, Centre for Rare Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark 1Institute of Medical Genetics (IMG), 8952 Schlieren- Zurich, Switzerland, 2Institute of Biochemistry, Emil- Background: Xia-Gibbs syndrome (XGS) is a neurodeve- Fischer Center, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlan- lopmental disorder characterized by intellectual disability, gen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany hypotonia, developmental delay, sleep apnoea and mild facialdysmorphism.Heterozygousloss-of-functionvariants Background: WDR26 haploinsufficiency was identified as in AHD
C1 , encoding the AT-hook DNA binding motif cause of a distinct syndromic entity associated with containing1transcriptionfactor,wasdiscoveredin2014as intellectual disability and significant language impairment, likely causative of XGS. To further delineate the complex (non-)febrile seizures, gait abnormalities, as well as a genotype-phenotyperelationshipofthisdisorderwepresent distinctivefacialphenotype(MIM#617616).Hitherto,only two unrelated cases of XGS caused by a shared novel 15 WDR26-affected individuals have been reported, among frameshift variant: c.2849del (p.(Pro950Argfs*192)) in which two patients harbored a WDR26 missense variant in AHD
C1  identified by whole-exome sequencing. the CTLH (C-terminal LIS-homology) domain, which is Case description: Following a normal pregnancy and prototypical for the WD40-protein class aside from the uneventful delivery at term, proband 1 presented at the age WD40 repeats and the LisH-domain. of 8 weeks with severe hypotonia and mild facial Case Presentation: For the first time, we identified a de dysmorphism with anteverted, narrowed nares and a tent- novo in-frame deletion [c.439_441del p.(Leu147del)] shaped, myopathic mouth. Subsequently the boy displayed within the WDR26 LisH-domain in a boy presenting with reducedmotorskillsandwasonlyabletocommunicatevia neurodevelopmental delay associated with profoundly nonverbal language. MRI demonstrated thinning of corpus impaired expressive language and similar facial features callosum and low-grade periventricular leucomalacia. The as the previously published patients. Further prominent patient had surgery for bilateral cryptoorcihdism. Interest- features were transient hyperactivity, autistic-like beha- ingly, a facial lipoma and bilateral calcaneal varus foot vioral problems, and a history of grand mal seizures and deformity was noted, which may be unrecognized mani- several drop attacks. In comparison to the literature, our festations of XGS. Proband 2 presented with hypotonia, propositus additionally shows a decreased pain sensation delayedpsychomotordevelopmentandsubtledysmorphism andahyperlordosis;atECGevaluation,amilddilatationof in early infancy. At the age of 6, he was diagnosed with the ascending aorta was found. Interestingly, unlike the infantileautism.Hewasdiagnosedwithepilepsyattheage WDR26-patients publishedbefore,hedoesnotpresentwith of 7. MRI of the cerebrum was normal. gait abnormalities. Considering new available structural Conclusion: This case report illustrates the clinical data by Ulrich et al. (Structure 2016), the detected deletion heterogeneity of two cases of XGS that share the same islikelyto interfere with the WDR26 domain structure and causative variant, which suggest that additional genetic or extrinsicinteractionsasitwaspostulatedbeforeforthefour environmental modifiers could be at play in this disorder.1856 Larger cohort studies are warranted to further disentangle Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Centogene these questions. AG. A. Alhashem: None. S. Færgeman: None. P. Gregersen: None. B. Ander- sen: None. N. Becher: None. A. Bojesen: None. E-
P09  E-
P08 .31 Neurogenetic and psychiatric disorders Recurrence risk for Xia-Gibbs syndrome caused by an apparentdenovovariantinAHD
C1 isexplainedbylow E-
P09 .01 level maternal mosaicism Copy number variants in Alzheimer’s disease A. Kdissa1, T. Alonazi2, M. Zawada1, R. Trunzo1, C. S. A. Saad, D. Grozeva, C. Bresner, A. Frizzati, M. Beetz1, P. Bauer1, A. Alhashem2 Bareford, T. Morgan, R. Raybould, E. Rees, N. Denning, T. Cushion, A. Meggy, R. Marshall, W. Nash, C. Davies, 1CentogeneAG,Rostock,Germany,2PrinceSultanMilitary J. Morgan, B. Hitchings, G. Leonenko, G. Menzies, N. Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Badarinarayan, V. Escott-Price, R. Sims, J. Williams Introduction: Xia-Gibbs syndrome is characterized by University of Cardiff, Cardiff, United Kingdom hypotonia, intellectual disability, global developmental delay, mildly dysmorphic facial features and apnea. All Introduction: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a devastating patientsreportedtodatecarrytruncatingdenovovariantsin neurologicaldisorderprimarilyaffectingtheelderlypeople, AHD
C1 . Recurrence risk for Xia-Gibbs syndrome is manifests by progressive deterioration and loss of memory. therefore considered negligible. Despite the identification of nearly 40 common genome- Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing wide significant risk loci in genome-wide association (WES) of a patient with a complex, presumably genetic (GWAS) and whole exome sequencing (WES) studies in condition was performed in a routine diagnostic setting. case-control cohorts, the marginal joint effect of all known Confirmation of a candidate causative variant as well as lociaccountsonlyforafractionoftheestimatedheritability determination of the parents’ genotype for this variant was of AD suggesting that the major genetic contributors to the based on targeted Sanger sequencing. diseaseriskhavenotbeenidentifiedyetorthatotherforms Results:Themainclinicalfindingsinourpatientinclude ofgeneticvariationsuchascopynumbervariations(CNVs) severe intellectual disability, psychomotor retardation, mightbeplayingarole.Indeed,severalstudieshaveshown stereotypic movements and autistic behavior. Global that susceptibility to neurological phenotypes of complex developmental delay and cerebral palsy were reported for disease such as autism, schizophrenia, AD and bipolar asibling,whowasnotyetavailablefordetailedclinicaland disorders is linked to the presence of CNVs. genetic work-up. WES identified the AHD
C1  frameshift Methods: The aim of this study is to identify any variant c.1338del (p.(Ser447Glnfs*5)) in the index. The potential CNVs candidate regions in AD using data from a variant was not found in the father, but Sanger sequencing unique cohort of clinically characterized and neuropatholo- traces were suggestive of very low level mosaicism in the gicallydefined5469Caucasiansporadicandhealthycontrol mother. Repeated analysis on an independent secondary participants (4386 AD cases (1911 EOAD and 2475 sample confirmed this observation. LOAD) and 1083 controls). WES data has been generated Conclusion:Ourfindingsmayrepresentthefirstinstance using Illumina TruSeq Rapid Exome Library Prep Kit and of recurrence of Xia-Gibbs syndrome. Testing of this sequencedonIlluminaHiSeq4000atamediancoverageof hypothesis has been initiated. Parental mosaicism for 20X. We will be evaluating the detection of clinically apparent de novo variants may be an underestimated cause relevant, rare de novo CNVs of varying size and copy forphenotypeswhich,atfirstglance,seemtobeinheritedin number state using both CLAMMS and WISExome tools. a recessive manner. Results: We will be presenting our first large scale copy A. Kdissa: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- numbervariantsanalysisresultsbasedontheWESdatafor cant; Centogene AG. T. Alonazi: None. M. Zawada: A. the cohort at the ESHG2019. Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;CentogeneAG. S.A.Saad:None.D.Grozeva:None.C.Bresner:None. R.Trunzo:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; A.Frizzati:None.M.Bareford:None.T.Morgan:None. Centogene AG. C. Beetz: A. Employment (full or part- R.Raybould:None.E.Rees:None.N.Denning:None.T. time); Significant; Centogene AG. P. Bauer: A. Cushion:None.A.Meggy:None.R.Marshall:None.W. Nash: None. C. Davies: None. J. Morgan: None. B.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1857 Hitchings:None.G.Leonenko:None.G.Menzies:None. for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine, Instituto de N. Badarinarayan: None. V. Escott-Price: None. R. Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar/Universidade do Porto, Sims: None. J. Williams: None. Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de Neuropediatria, Centro Materno-InfantildoNorte,CentroHospitalarUniversitário E-
P09 .02 do Porto, Porto, Portugal The frequency of microsatellite polymorphism (R
S1 ) of arginine-vasopressin gene AVPR1A in the Yakut Background:Thephenotypeofpatientswithcopynumber population variants in region Xq11.1q11.2 including the gene ARH- GEF9remainselusivegiventhescarcityofcasesdescribed. S. S. Nakhodkin1, N. A. Barashkov1,2, V. G. Pshenni- Thiscasereportdescribesanadultpatientwithadeletionon kova1,2, S. A. Fedorova1,2 Xq11.1q11.2, presenting tall stature, intellectual disability and uncontrolled seizures. 1M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Case: A male patient presented from birth macrosomia Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Yakut Scientific Centre of andhypotonia.At14monthsofage,hehadthefirstepisode Complex Medical Problems, Yakutsk, Russian Federation of seizures. His psychomotor development was delayed from the early neonatal period, starting independent Genetic variations in of the arginine-vasopressin receptor walkingatage8andneveracquiringintentionalexpressive (AVPR1A) can cause the formation of individual person- communication. At age 21, he has severe intellectual ality traits and temperament, characterized by an increased impairment, daily seizures refractory to treatment (without desire for new experiences, impulsiveness, sociability, an identifiable trigger), progressive paraparesis, multiple levels of neuroticism and extroversion. In this report, a stereotypies, polyphagia, constipation, severe scoliosis, and frequency of microsatellite polymorphism (R
S1 ) of valgus knee. His height is above the 99 percentile (P) (z= arginine-vasopressingeneAVPR1AintheYakutpopulation +3.9),andheadcircumference
P91 -98.OnhisbrainMRIit (334 healthy individuals) was carried out. Alleles of this was described abnormal hippocampal rotation, mega marker with the number of repetitions from 8 to 9 are cisterna magna and a pineal cystic formation. Now he is presentedindifferent populations.Wehaveidentifiedeight under a trial with ketogenic diet to control his seizures. On differentallelesoftheR
S1 marker(R8,R9,R10,R11,R12, the arrayCGH analysis, a de novo deletion of the R12, R13, R14, R15). Allele frequency distribution in all Xq11.1q11.2 region was detected, including the gene populations is generally characterized by single-modality ARHGEF9. Pathogenic variants causing haploinsuficiency withpredominanceofallelefrequencyR10.Shortandlong of this gene are associated with epileptic encephalopathy, alleles (R8, R14, R15) are absent in our sample in early infantile 8 (MIM 300607), a form of epilepsy with homozygous form. Due to the high frequency of allele poorlycontrolledandhyperekplecticseizures, thelatter not R10 (usually more than 40%, in our sample 45.3%) R
S1  is present in this patient. allocated the lowest level of heterozygosity among the Conclusion: The scarcity of cases described with studied loci. The Yakut population is characterized by a ARHGEF9 haploinsufficiency makes challenging the defi- pronounced deficit of heterozygotes and a low level of nition of the phenotype associated with copy number actual heterozygosity, which can be explained by the variants on this gene. founder’s effect in this population. This study was C. Azevedo Soares: None. T. Temudo: None. G. supported by the Ministry of Education and Science of Soares: None. the Russia (#6.1766.2017) and the RFBR (18-05- 600035_Arctica). E-
P09 .04 S.S. Nakhodkin: None. N.A. Barashkov: None. V.G. An atypical case of Angelman syndrome who presented Pshennikova: None. S.A. Fedorova: None. with autism spectrum disorder, identified to have uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 by chromosomal E-
P09 .03 microarray Clinical description of a male patient with tall stature, intellectual disability, and seizures with an ARHGEF9 P. Limprasert1, A. Hnoonual2, J. Worachotekamjorn2 deletion 1Faculty ofMedicine, King Mongkut’s InstituteofTechnol- C. Azevedo Soares1,2, T. Temudo3, G. Soares1 ogyLadkrabang,Bangkok,Thailand,2FacultyofMedicine, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai, Thailand 1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unit1858 Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodeve- from his healthy father a deletion involving LRR
C4 C. lopmental disorders which are etiologically heterogeneous. Heterozygous CNTNA
P2  deletions seem to cause ASD in Chromosomal microarray (CMA) is now recommended as combination with variants at other loci. LRR
C4 C deletions thefirst-tierclinicaldiagnostictestforASD.Weperformed were hypothesizedtohavea modifier effect on NDD. Both CMA in 16 Thai patients with ASD using an Illumina LRR
C4 C and CNTNA
P2  encode membrane proteins HumanCytoSNP-12 v2.1 array and found one case with involved in axon guidance and synaptic adhesion. Half uniparentaldisomy(UPD)ofchromosome15.Methylation- dosageofthesetwoproteins,duetoheterozygousdeletions, specific PCR (MS-PCR) showed abnormal methylation of couldhaveadditivelycontributedtoneurondysfunctionand thematernalSNRPNallele.Haplotypeanalysisrevealedthat phenotype appearance. The second proband is a 9-year-old the patient had received both chromosomes 15 from his malechildwithexpressivelanguagedisorder,hyperactivity, father. These results were consistent with Angelman learningdifficulties and movementimpairment. His mother syndrome (AS). However, his clinical features had no presented dyslexia and learning difficulties in her child- clinicalsignificanceforclassicAS.Hehadfirstpresentedat hood. Mother and son shared a deletion involving GLRA3, the pediatric clinic with no speech, poor social interaction glycine receptor implicated in synapse formation inhibition skills and repetitive behaviors consistent with ASD based through Gephyrin, known to play a role in ASD. The ontheDSM-IVcriteriaat2yearsofageandlaterconfirmed GLRA3 deletion could be responsible for the phenotypic by ADOS at 5 years of age. He had no dysmorphic facies, featuressharedbymotherandson.Twoadditionaldenovo seizures nor ataxia and was diagnosed as non-syndromic CNVs could have worsened the patient’s phenotype: a ASD, a diagnosis which was believed until at 10 years of deletion of MIR4465, negative expression regulator of age, his DNA was included for analysis in this current PTEN whose overexpression inhibits axon branching; a cohort study. Our findings suggest that ASD patients with duplication encompassing INP
P5 A, phosphatase of Ins unknown etiology should be considered for MS-PCR (1,4,5)
P3  controlling motor coordination by intracellular testing for AS where CMA is not available. calcium mobilization, NKX6-2, and partially ADGRA1. P. Limprasert: None. A. Hnoonual: None. J. M. Servetti: None. E. Tassano: None. M. Divizia: Worachotekamjorn: None. None.L. Pisciotta: None. G.Rosti: None. I.Serio: None. M. Lerone: None. M. Cerminara: None. E. Veneselli: E-
P09 .05 None. L. Nobili: None. P. Ronchetto: None. A. Multiple heterozygous copy number variants (CNVs) Puliti: None. with potential additive effect in patients affected by neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) E-
P09 .10 Early onset epileptic encephalopathy and choreoathe- M.Servetti1,2,E.Tassano2,3,M.Divizia2,L.Pisciotta1,4,G. tosic movements associated with a novel pathogenic Rosti1, I. Serio4, M. Lerone2, M. Cerminara1, E. variant of GABRA1 gene Veneselli1,4, L. Nobili1,4, P. Ronchetto2,3, A. Puliti5,1 A.Apetrei1,G.Burnouf-Rose2,G.Lesca3,N.Gruchy1,4,B. 1DepartmentofNeurosciences,Rehabilitation,Ophthalmol- Dupuy5, M. Gerard1,4 ogy, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health (DiNOGMI), UniversityofGenoa,Genoa,Italy,2MedicalGenetics Unit, 1Department of Genetics, Caen University Hospital, Caen, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 3Human Genetics France, 2Department of Pediatrics, Cherbourg Public Laboratory, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, Hospital, Cherbourg, France, 3Department of Genetics, 4Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France, 4Biotargen Unity Genoa, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Unit, Istituto Giannina EA7450, Normandy University, -, France, 5Department of Gaslini, GENOVA, Italy Neurology,CherbourgPublicHospital,Cherbourg,France Emerging evidences suggest that CNVs can likely interact Introduction: Early onset epileptic encephalopathies tomodulatetheindividualphenotypeinpatientsaffectedby (EOEE) are a composite group of severe infantile and neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD). We present two childhood onset epilepsies with a heterogenous genetic cases with complex NDD phenotype carrying multiple rare basis. GABRA1-related neurological phenotypes are asso- CNVs with uncertain significance identifiedbyarray-CGH. ciated with various forms of epilepsy, ranging from mild Thefirstprobandisa2-year-oldmalechildwithintellectual generalized epilepsy to severe epileptic encephalopathies. disability, mild autism spectrum disorder (ASD), critical Wereporthereina4yearsoldchildwithEOEEandsevere episodes, and two arachnoid cysts. He inherited from his choreoathetosic movements. healthy mother an intragenic deletion of CNTNA
P2  andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1859 Material and methods: The patient was referred to the included involuntary laugh and progressive mental decline, clinical genetics department for infantile epilepsy. He later associated with Parkinsonian symptoms. originally presented with choreoathetotic movements, sub- Results: An apparently homozygous AT
P13 A2: sequent severe epilepsy at five months of age, and severe c.2479G>A variant was identified in exon 22 of the global developmental delay. No significant dysmorphic AT
P13 A2 gene by Whole Exome Sequencing. The variant features were observed. Extensive metabolic investigations isanovelmissensevariantpreviouslynotdescribedinother and cerebral MRI were unremarkable. Targeted massively patients. It is classified as a variant with unknown parallel sequencing of a customized panel of 115 epilepsy significance although in silico predictions suggest genes was performed on the patient’s DNA. pathogenicity. Results: The molecular genetic study revealed a de novo Conclusions: The above mentioned homozygous muta- heterozygous variant in GABRA1 gene: chr5(GRCh37): tion confirms the diagnosis of Kufor-Rakeb syndrome, g.161317987A>G(c.787A>G).Thisvarianthasneverbeen which is a rare autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinsonism described in either pathogenic or polymorphic databases. syndrome. Through our case presentation we would like to Threeinsilicoalgorithmspredictthisvariantasdeleterious, shortlyreviewthesymptomatology,diagnosticsandtherapy and the de novo state supports the pathogeneicity. This of juvenile Parkinsonism. variant induces the substitution of the amino acid K. Hadzsiev: None. A. Till: None. J. Zima: None. R. methionine for valine, located on the first transmembrane Ripszam: None. B. Melegh: None. domain of GABA -α1 receptor. Other substitutions in this A codon have been described as deleterious. E-
P09 .14 Conclusion: Here we report a patient with a novel An atypical case of KCNH1-related epilepsy GABRA1 variant inducing EOEE and choreoathetosic movements. This association of symptoms was already M. Aubert-Mucca1, A. Siegfried1, C. Karsenty1, S. Julia1, reported for GABRA2 and GABRG2 genes in the GABA L. Villard2, O. Patat1 pathway, but had never been linked to a GABRA1 pathogenic variant. 1CHU Toulouse Purpan, TOULOUSE, France, 2CHU de A. Apetrei: None. G. Burnouf-Rose: None. G. Lesca: Marseille - Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France None. N. Gruchy: None. B. Dupuy: None. M. Gerard: None. Introduction: Mutations in KCNH1 [MIM*603305] have been involved in a spectrum of early onset syndromic E-
P09 .13 epilepsies including the well-defined Zimmermann Laband A rare case of juvenile Parkinsonism: Kufor-Rakeb syndrome [MIM#135500] and Temple Baraitser syndrome syndrome [MIM#611816]. Thumb abnormalities, defects in the development of the nails, hypertrichosis, gingival hyper- K. Hadzsiev, A. Till, J. Zima, R. Ripszam, B. Melegh plasia, craniofacial dysmorphism and intellectual disability can be considered the hallmarks of KCNH1-related Department of medical Genetics University of Pécs, Pécs, syndromic epilepsy. We describe hereby a young boy with Hungary KCNH1-related epilepsy without typical extra neurologic features. Introduction:JuvenileParkinsonismaffectspatientsbelow Case presentation: He is a 4 year-old boy, born to 21 years-of-age and the background of the disease is very unrelated parents, presenting with an epileptic myoclonic heterogeneous. It can be caused by genetical diseases, encephalopathy with lingual myoclonus starting in the first degenerative, metabolic, immune-mediated conditions, 24h of life. Hypotonia was noted from birth. He evolved infections,structuralbrainabnormalities,toxinsandadverse subsequently with a major global developmental delay, drugreactions.Themostcommongeneticalcausesincludes sensorineural deafness, gastroesophageal reflux and severe the alterations of PARK2, PINK1 and PARK7 genes. constipation. On clinical examination, his limbs are strictly Symptomatologyalsocanbeveryvariableincludingclassic normal, with some elements of craniofacial dysmorphism Parkinsonian symptoms like rigidity, bradykinesia and and slight hypertrichosis. The monogenic epilepsy gene postural instability as well as additional symptoms like panelrevealedadenovovariantinKCNH1,c.1475C>A,p. depression, sleep disturbances, memory loss, constipation (Ala492Asp), interpreted as probably pathogenic. and urinary problems. Discussion:Thelimbabnormalities,includingnailhypo/ Materials and Methods: We report a 21-year-old girl aplasia and broad thumbs associated with adductus with theonset ofsymptomsat15years. Initiallysymptoms deformities and hypoplasia of distal phalanges are usually1860 emphasizedinthecasesreportedintheliterature.However, E-
P09 .18 we report an individual lacking these classical features. Rare germline AKT3 mutation responsible for Conclusion: The association of severe constipation, megalencephaly-polymicrogyria-polydactyly- hypertrichosis and early onset epilepsy in a context of hydrocephalus syndrome in two Hungarian siblings global developmental delay should probably make clin- icians consider the diagnosis of KCNH1-related epilepsy R. Szalai1,2, J. Bene1,2, L. Magyari1,2, A. Maasz1,2, I. even in the absence of limb abnormalities. Schrauwen3, S. Leal3, K. Hadzsiev1,2, B. Melegh1,2 M. Aubert-Mucca: None. A. Siegfried: None. C. Karsenty: None. S. Julia: None. L. Villard: None. O. 1University of Pecs, Medical School, Clinical Center, Patat: None. Department of Medical Genetics, Pecs, Hungary, 2Szenta- gothaiResearchCenter,UniversityofPecs,Pecs,Hungary, E-
P09 .15 3Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of Molecular A new KCNQ2 mutation and clinical findings and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States A. Aydin Gumus1, D. Gun Bilgic1, A. Berdeli2, E. Genis1, S. Cam1 Introduction: Megalencephaly‐polymicrogyria‐polydac- tyly‐hydrocephalus (MPPH) syndrome is a developmental 1Manisa Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey, 2Ege brain disorder characterized byenlarged brain size with the University, İzmir, Turkey cortical malformation bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria and variable degree of ventriculomegaly. MPPH syndrome Introduction:TheKCNQ2geneencodesthebrainvoltage- is associated with oromotor dysfunction, epilepsy, intellec- gated potassium channel and is related to benign familial tual disability and postaxial hexadactyly. The molecular neonatalseizuresandneonatalepilepticencephalopathy.60 diagnosisofthisdisorderisestablishedtheidentificationof and 80% of probands with benign family neonatal epilepsy a pathogenic variant in one of AKT3, CCND2 or PIK3R2 may be related to the likely pathogenic variants of the genes. Previously reported AKT3 gene mutations are KCNQ2gene.PathogenicdenovoKCNQ2variantscanbe associated with various brain involvements and may lead detected in some individuals with unexplained afebrile tomegalencephaly.MostindividualswithMPPHsyndrome seizures in newborn or early childhood. The aim of this have a germline pathogenic variant in AKT3 gene; some study is to present the changes we detected in a 1-year-old have a somatic mosaic pathogenic variant cause hemi- boywhowasreferredtousforafebril-resistantconvulsions. megalencephaly, which is similar to MPPH. Methods: After the DNA was isolated from the patient’s Materials and Methods: WES analysis was performed blood sample, multigenic epilepsy panel analysis including on Illumina HiSeq (2500/4000) instrument using the 39 genes associated with epilepsy was performed by next SureSelect Human All Exon V6 kit for library preparation generation sequencing method. and the pathogenic variant was validated by Sanger Results:A1year-old-boywho wasborn 3100grweight sequencing. with C/S on his term, was referred us with afebril Results: Whole exome sequencing analysis identified a generalized tonic-clonic seizures started at the age of c.1393C>Tp.Arg465Trpproteinalteringpathogenicvariant 4 months. His parents, with no history for epilepsy, made in AKT3 gene in two affected half siblings but none in the 3rd degree consanguineous marriage. Physical examination maternal DNA sample therefore it could be a presumably revealed no abnormal findings except a 6-month delay in maternal germline mosaicism due to the literature data. neuromotordevelopment.HiscranialMRI,electroencepha- Conclusions:Sofar25caseswith10differentmutations logram, abdominal ultrasonography were normal. He has of AKT3 have been reported. The mutation demonstrated received dual antiepileptic therapy, phenobarbital and here has been described in 7 patients; however the novelty levetiracetam. Heterozygote c.459delG (p.Y154fs * 17) of our examination is that this is the first occasion, where likely-pathogenicvariantintheKCNQ2gene,absentinhis this type of mutation associated with mosaicism. Project parents, was detected in his analyse. was supported by GINOP—2.3.2-15-2016-00039 Conclusions: The mutation in our patient is not R. Szalai: None. J. Bene: None. L. Magyari: None. A. previously reported to be associated with any clinical Maasz: None. I. Schrauwen: None. S. Leal: None. K. findings,infantile-onsetseizuresrequiringdualantiepileptic Hadzsiev: None. B. Melegh: None. treatment and absence of pathogenic findings in the patient’s cranial MRI and EEG shed light on the literature. E-
P09 .19 A. Aydin Gumus: None. D. Gun Bilgic: None. A. CHD2 variants in developmental and epileptic encepha- Berdeli: None. E. Genis: None. S. Cam: None. lopathies patients (DEEs)Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1861 E.Bettella1,2,R.Polli1,2,E.Leonardi1,2,F.Cesca1,2,M.C. E-
P09 .21 Aspromonte1,2, M. Bellini1,2, F. Soli3, A. Danieli4, S. A first case of OFDVI with c.3545delA and c.7400 Sartori5, A. Murgia1,2 +1G>A mutations for CPLAN
E1  gene 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment, U.Abur,A.Sanri,C.Dogan,E.Altundag,O.S.Akar,C. Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University Gumuskaptan, G. Ogur of Padua, Padua, Italy, 2Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica (IRP), Città della Speranza, Padua, Italy, ONDOKUZ MAYIS UNIVERSITY MEDICAL FACULTY 3Department of Genetics, Santa Chiara Hospital, Trento, DEPARTMENT OF GENETICS, Samsun, Turkey Italy, 4Scientific Institute IRCCS E. Medea, Conegliano Research Center, Conegliano, Italy, 5Pediatric Neurology Introduction: Oral-facial-digital type VI syndrome Unit, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, (OFDVI)isphenotypeinthespectrumofJoubertsyndrome University of Padua, Padua, Italy (JS)andisdefinedbythepresenceofthe“molartoothsign (MTS)” with at least one of these findings:(a) tongue The term developmental and epileptic encephalopathies hamartoma and/or additional lingual frenula and/or upper (DEEs) has been recently coined to refer to conditions lip notch;(b) mesoaxial polydactyly;(c)hypothalamic where the epileptic activity itself contributes to cognitive hamartoma (1). slowing/regression or to disorders where developmental Case report: A 2 day old boy was referred because of impairment emerges before the presence of epileptic multiple congenital anomalies. Fetal ultrasound of the activityorinthepresenceofinfrequentepilepticactivity. patients revealed Dandy-Walker malformation. Soon after Indeed DEEs represent a final common pathway for a birth, breathing abnormalities and hypotonia were noticed. broad spectrum of phenotypically and genetically hetero- Clinical examination showed unilateral mesoaxial poly- geneousconditions.NextGenerationSequencingisbeing dactylyofhand,completesyndactlyinbetween4thand5th applied as a routine molecular diagnostic strategy in fingers of left hand, bilateral preaxial and postaxial individuals with DEEs. Here we report the cases of three polydactyly of feet, tongue hamartoma and lingual frenula. unrelated individuals in whom, by a targeted NGS Brain MRI revealed MTS and occipital encephalocele. He approach, we detected three likely/potentially pathogenic was suspected OFDVI. In molecular analysis compound CHD2 variants. The patients were referred for neurode- heterozygous for CPLAN
E1  frameshift mutation velopmental phenotypes characterized in all cases by c.3545delA; p.N1182I and splice site mutation c.7400 moderate intellectual disability, global psychomotor +1G>A was detected. delayandbehavioraldisorder/ASDtraits,associatedwith Results: Considering all reported CPLAN
E1  mutated variable epileptic manifestations: absences seizures, patients,overtwo-thirdsshowedapureJSphenotype,while generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and/or focal seizures only 24% has OFDVI(2).Mutations detected in our patient with onset ranging from 9 months to 5 years of age. No have been reported in pure JS previously. However, our photosensitivity was reported. The CHD2 variants case was the first reported OFDVI patient carrying these detected were a likely pathogenic novel de novo frame- mutations (c.3545delA/c.7400+1G>A). Genetic modifiers shift (c.726_727delAG, p.Ser242fs) located in a func- mayberesponsiblefromthephenotypicdiversitysuchasin tionally relevant phosphorilation site and predicted to oral-facial and digital features in patients bearing result in a premature truncated protein, and two intronic CPLAN
E1  mutations. variantsbothlocatedinsplicingregions.Thesewereade References: 1- Poretti A, Vitiello G, Hennekam RC, novo SNV (c.1719+5G>A) previously reported in Arrigoni F, Bertini E et al., (2012). Delineation and literature in 1 affected individual, and a very rare SNV diagnostic criteria of Oral-Facial-Digital Syndrome type (c.3886-10C>T), found to be paternally inherited. Both VI. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2- Romani M, Mancini F, intronic variants are currently being further characterized Micalizzi A, Poretti A et al., (2015). Oral-facial-digital and family segregation investigated and expanded. This syndrome type VI: is 
C5 orf42 really the major gene? Hum report contributes the genotypic and phenotypic char- Genet.,134(1):123-6. acterization of the expanding spectrum of CHD2 U. Abur: None. A. Sanri: None. C. Dogan: None. E. disorders. Altundag: None. O.S. Akar: None. C. Gumuskaptan: E.Bettella:None.R.Polli:None.E.Leonardi:None.F. None. G. Ogur: None. Cesca:None.M.C.Aspromonte:None.M.Bellini:None. F. Soli: None. A. Danieli: None. S. Sartori: None. A. E-
P09 .22 Murgia: None. PresenceofrarevariantsinhaplotypeinLRRK2geneas a potential risk factor for endemic parkinsonism1862 K.Kolarikova1,R.Vodicka1,R.Vrtel1,M.Prochazka1,K. Z. Iqbal1, J. Koht2,3, L. Pihlstrøm1, S. P. Henriksen1, C. Mensikova2, T. Bartonikova2, P. Kanovsky2, T. Furst3 Cappelletti1, M. B. Russel4,5, O. N. de Souza6, I. M. Skogseid1, M. Toft1,2 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Olomouc, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky 1Department ofNeurology,OsloUniversityHospital, Oslo, University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Department of Norway,2InstituteofClinicalMedicine,UniversityofOslo, Neurology, University Hospital Olomouc, Faculty of Oslo, Norway, 3Department of Neurology, Drammen Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University, Olomouc, Hospital, Vestre Viken Hospital Trust, Oslo, Norway, CzechRepublic,3DepartmentofMathematicalAnalysisand 4Head and Neck Research Group, Research Center, Applications of Mathematics, Faculty of Science, Palacky Akershus University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 55Campus University, Olomouc, Czech Republic Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 6Faculty of Informatics, Laboratory for Bioinfor- Introduction: Parkinsonism is relatively common neuro- matics, Modelling & Simulation of Biosystems, Pontifical degenerative disorder. A higher prevalence of the disease Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto was observed in the southeastern Moravian region. The Alegre, RS, Brazil study aims to assess the potential genetic risk factors of haplotypes in genes most commonly associated with DYT-TOR1A dystonia is caused by dominant mutations in parkinsonism. the TOR1A gene, most frequently a heterozygous in-frame Material and methods: We analyzed 32 patients and 12 deletion p.302/303delE. The most frequent phenotype is controls in ADH1C, EIF4G1, FBXO7, GBA, GIGYF2, childhood-onsetinalimb,spreadingtogeneralizeddystonia HTRA2,LRRK2,MAPT,PARK2,PARK7,PINK1,PLA2G6, within a few years. Other in-frame deletions and point SNCA, UCH
L1  and VP
S35  genes. Variants were acquired mutations in TOR1A have been associated with dystonia in by Next Generation Sequencing Ion Torrent workflow. a limited number of patients. Here, using gene panel Potentialcandidatehaplotypeswereassessedusingfiltering sequencing, we report two new patients with missense from a manually created matrix. We compared our mutations in TOR1A. We identified a novel likely- haplotype frequency with population data from the 1000 pathogenicmissensemutation,p.R312Ginpatient1,which Genome Project (1000GP). segregated with mild isolated segmental dystonia in the Results: We observed shared findings of four intron respective family presenting three affected individuals. variants (rs11564187, rs36220738, rs200829235, Multiplelinesofbioinformaticpredictionsindicatepossible rs3789329) and one exon variant (rs33995883) in the deleteriouseffectsonproteinfunction.However,functional LRRK2geneinsixpatients.Noneofwhichwerepresentin analyses and identification of genetic recurrence are controls. Intron variants occurred almost exclusively warranted to confirm its pathogenicity. Further, we togetherwiththeexonvariant.It canbeassumed thatthere identifiedaknownpathogenicmutation,p.R288Qinpatient should be variants in haplotype. A comparison with 2 with adolescent-onset, isolated generalized dystonia, 1000GP data revealed significant differences in haplotype marked axial and little cranial involvement. This mutation frequencies between the patients and 1000GP “controls”. was previously reported in a patient with very early Patientsclosetoconsanguinitywereexcludedbyanalyzing childhood-onset lower limb dystonia and severe general- the HVR1 mitochondrial region and Y-STR loci. ization, who at age 18 had dysphagia, dysarthria, joint Conclusion:Theco-occurrenceoffivevariantsinLRRK2 contractures, pyramidal signs and cerebellar atrophy. Most gene could be a risk factor for the development of reportedpatientswithTOR1Amissensemutationspresented parkinsonism. withadult-onset,includingthep.R312Gindexpatientinour This study was funded by grant Nr. 15-32715A, IGA LF study.Thismayindicatethatmissensemutationshavealess 2018-009, MH CZ—DRO (FNOL,00098892) 2018 and, profound effect on torsinA function than the common ENOCH“ reg. Nr. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_019/0000868 deletion. However, the phenotypic spectrum of TOR1A K. Kolarikova: None. R. Vodicka: None. R. Vrtel: mutationsisverybroad.Thecausesofthislargephenotypic None. M. Prochazka: None. K. Mensikova: None. T. variation in TOR1A mutation carriers still largely remain Bartonikova:None.P.Kanovsky:None.T.Furst:None. elusive. Z. Iqbal: None. J. Koht: None. L. Pihlstrøm: None. S. E-
P09 .23 P. Henriksen: None. C. Cappelletti: None. M.B. Russel: TOR1A dystonia and missense mutations None. O.N. de Souza: None. I.M. Skogseid: None. M. Toft: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1863 E-
P09 .24 genetic diagnosis of patient with a novel AT
P1 A3 Clinical characterisation of hypomyelinating leukody- mutation strophy 14 with founder UFM1 mutation in Roma population C. Saygı1, U. Sezerman2 M. Giertlova 1BioinformaticsCore,UniversityMedicalCenterHamburg- Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 2Department of Medical Medirex Inc, Bratislava, Slovakia Statistics and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Aciba- dem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University, Istanbul, Turkey Introduction: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy 14 (HL- 14) is recently defined autosomal recessive disorder Introduction: Different conditions mostly produce over- associated with mutations in UFM1 gene. We present lapping symptoms in rare disorders, instead of characteristi- consistentclinical characteristics ofHL-14patientswithc.- cally manifesting themselves as repeating collections of 273_-271delTCA founder mutation in UFM1 gene in stereotypical symptoms. This is the main factor of why some Slovak Roma population. patientsremainundiagnoseddespiteundergoinganexhaustive Material and Methods: Sanger sequencing of the workup. AT
P1 A3-related neurologic disorders are extremely corresponding region of UFM1 gene was performed in 8 rareandrepresentaclinicalcontinuumofthreedistinctdisease patients with clinical and/or radiological signs of early- phenotypes, namely rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism, alter- onset leukodystrophy. nating hemiplegia of childhood, and CAPOS syndrome. Results: The biallelic c.-273_-271delTCA mutation in Materials and Methods: WES is applied for the index UFM1 was confirmed in 8 patients of Roma origin from case, his healthy brother and healthy non-consanguineous Slovakia. After typically asymptomatic perinatal period (7 Turkish parents. Evidence from various sources; population from8patients)firstclinicalsymptomsappearedonaverage databases,computationalassessments,PubMed,OMIM,MGI at 2.6 month (range 0 to 4). Axial hypotony evolving to and pathogenicity estimations are gathered. Symptoms of acralspasticity,inspiratorystridoranddevelopmentaldelay affected individual and family history are reviewed to were present in all (8/8) patients. Refractory seizures were prioritizevariantswiththehighestdegreeofsymptommatch. present in 5/6 patients, in 2 patient the clinical data were The genetic diagnosis proposed for the patient is AT
P1 A3- incomplete.Secondarymicrocephalywasdocumentedin5/ related neurologic disorder. 5 and severe hypotrophy developed in 6/7 patients. Both Results:Here,wereportoneadditionalcaseofAT
P1 A3- hearingandvisualimpairmentswerepresentin6/6patients. related neurologic disorder in a fully penetrant classical Thetracheotomywasperformedin2/5patients.Theageof dominant mode of transmission. We identified a novel death ranged from 3 to 20 months (average 10). mutation in the cytoplasmic domain of AT
P1 A3. Furthermore, we confirmed the presence of c.-273_- Conclusions: Molecular testing is the most prominent 271delTCA mutation in three Roma patients of Slovenian waythatshouldbeaddedtotheroutinetestingapproachfor origin. diagnosis of undiagnosed patients with a suspected genetic Conclusions: Population isolates are characterized by disorder. We diagnose and report a new pedigree with decreased genetic heterogeneity and occurrence of specific AT
P1 A3-related neurologic disorder segregating a de novo geneticdisorders.HL-14associatedwithUFM1mutationin missense mutation of the AT
P1 A3 gene. ourgroupofpatientsshowsaphenotypicuniformitywhich C. Saygı: None. U. Sezerman: None. enables effective targeted genetic testing. Hypothesis arises about ancient origin of the mutation and its probable E-
P10 .02 presence in the Roma population in other European Sepiapterin reductase deficiency: case report with novel countries. frameshift mutation M. Giertlova: None. T. Froukh E-
P10  Philadelphia University, Amman, Jordan Neuromuscular disorders Dopa-responsive dystonia due to sepiapterin reductase E-
P10 .01 deficiency (OMIM#612716) is caused by recessive muta- Seizures, developmental delay, mild intellectual disabil- tions in the gene encoding sepiapterin reductase (SPR), ity, muscular hypotonia, and optic atrophy: About the which plays an important role in the biosynthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). One Jordanian patient from a1864 first cousin parents once-removed is reported. The parents genes associated with CMS known at that time failed to haverecognizedthesymptomsoftheirdaughterat6months explain the etiology of his condition. Exome sequencing old with motor developmental delay. The symptoms were revealed compound heterozygous missense SL
C5 A7 var- progressed after-then to include speech delay, seizure, iants, paternal c.872T>C, p.(Ile291Thr) and maternal ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, dysarthia and choreoathetosis. c.1293C>G, p.(Asn431Lys) (NM_021815.4). The maternal Despite all of these obvious symptoms, the clinicians in variant was absent from all databases. The paternal variant Jordan were unable to diagnose the case. In August 2018, hasbeendescribedinonepatient.Ourpatientconfirmsthat the case (10 years old) was presented to the department of CMS caused by SL
C5 A7 variants can be associated with a biotechnology and genetic engineering at Philadelphia widerangeofphenotypefeatures,fromisolatedmyasthenia University in Jordan for the purposes of performing whole tomyastheniaaccompaniedbysignificantcognitiveimpair- exome sequencing (WES). Analysis of WES data has ment and behavioral problems, which separates CMS type revealed novel homozygous frameshift variant in the gene 20 from most other types of CMS. Our case illustrates the SPR (NM_003124.4):c.40delG;p.Ala15Profs*100 which is strength of exome sequencing in deciphering the genetic heterozygous in the parents and in the healthy siblings. basis of diseases and contributes to the characterization of Recommendations were given tothefamily immediatelyto genotypeandphenotypeofthisraredisorder.Supportedby starttreatmentstrials.Thiscaseillustratesthedifficultiesof 17-29423A and 00064203. diagnosing sepiapterin reductase deficiency based on M. Hančárová: None. M. Vlčková: None. Š. Bendová: clinical symptoms which renders the possibilities of early None. D. Prchalová: None. V. Stránecký: None. Z. management and reinforce the importance of running WES Sedláček: None. for diagnosed cases. T. Froukh: None. E-
P10 .05 Novel homozygous DSTYK mutation causes late onset E-
P10 .04 spastic paraparesis A new patient with congenital myasthenic syndrome type 20 due to compound heterozygous missense N. Hadar SL
C5 A7 variants revealed using whole exome sequencing The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, Beer Sheva, Israel M.Hančárová1,M.Vlčková1,Š.Bendová1,D.Prchalová1, V. Stránecký2, Z. Sedláček1 Introduction: Deletions of the last two exons (12&13) of DSTYK are known to cause spastic paraplegia (SPG23) in 1Department Of Biology And Medical Genetics, 2nd children. Other mutations in the gene have been associated Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech with congenital anomalies of the kidney and the Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent urinary tract. Medicine,DiagnosticandResearchUnitforRareDiseases, Materials and Methods: clinical phenotyping, whole Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General exome sequencing, segregation analysis. University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic Results:Wholeexomesequencingofa51yearsoldmale with progressive spastic paraparesis presenting at age 44 Congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS) type 20 years, displayed a homozygous missense mutation in (MIM617146) is a rare autosomal recessive neuromuscular DSTYK (NM_015375.2, c.1840C>T, p.R614W) within an disorder caused by missense variants spread across the evolutionary conserved sequence of its 7th exon (CADD- SL
C5 A7 gene. CMS is characterized by severe hypotonia, Score 35). The frequency of the heterozygous mutation in muscle weakness (causing delayed walking), ptosis, poor gnomAD in Europeans was 0.001% while in our in-house sucking and swallowing, hypomimia, oculo-bulbar symp- databaseof362exomesandinotheropen-accessdatabases toms and generalized limb fatigability and weakness. The (1000genomes,ExAC,gnomADandNHLBIESPexomes) roleofSL
C5 A7inCMStype20wasdescribedin2016,and the frequency was 0%. Additional 100 ethnically-matched sincethenonly10patientshavebeenreported.Wedescribe DNA samples were tested, none of which harbored the an8-year-oldboyexamined since 5months ofagebecause mutation. The proband, child of consanguineous parents of ofepisodicapneaduetomuscleweakness.Hehasmoderate Jewish Moroccan ancestry, has five siblings. Only one of intellectual disability, autism, ADHD, speech delay, and his siblings was homozygous for the mutation—a 43-years weakness and fatigability worsening at the end of the day old sister, who had been limping for over a year. and after physical load. His facial phenotype is not Neurological exam of both the proband and the sibling remarkable, except ptosis. Early investigations of several pointed to bilateral upper-neuron defect, with specific MRIAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1865 findings. Urinary system abnormalities were not identified. E-
P10 .08 The other 4 siblings, not homozygous for the mutation, A late onset McArdle disease with compound hetero- were asymptomatic. genous novel PYGM mutation Conclusions:DSTYKisabundantthroughoutthecentral nervous system and is thought to be a mediator of cell T. Furushima1, Y. Morita1, Y. Osaki1, Y. Miyamoto1, E. death. Our study delineates a genotype-phenotype correla- Amano2, T. Horino2, F. Fukuda3, H. Sugie4, I. Nishino4, tion in DSTYK mutations and highlights DSTYK mutations H. Furuya1 inthedifferentialdiagnosisoflateonsetspasticparaparesis. N. Hadar: None. 1Department of Neurology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi, Japan, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical E-
P10 .06 School, Kochi, Japan, 3Department of Pediatrics, Hama- Two families having Huntington’s disease with two matsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan, different clinical presentations 4National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan B. Celtikci1, F. Kaplan2, R. Sayin1 Introduction:Herewepresentalateonsetcaseofglycogen 1Ufuk University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ministry of Health, storage disease type V (McArdle disease; MIM 232600) Ankara, Turkey with compound heterogenous novel mutation of muscle isoform of glycogen phosphorylase (PYGM, MIM 608455) Introduction: Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal mutations. (p.
E394 fs) Case: 72 years women complain of dominantlyinheritedneurodegenerativedisorder,character- myalgia in proximal muscled in extremities 2 years before. ized by choreic movements, dystonia and progressive SheshowedhyperCKinserumexaminationanddiagnosed demans. Since CAG trinucleotide repeats increase during as myositis. She visited our hospital for no improvement malegametogenesis,thediseaseoccursearlierthan30years with the prednisolone and tacrolimus treatment. In neuro- old, via a transmission through an affected father. logical examination, she shows mild muscle weakness in Psychiatric symptoms are a significant aspect of HD and proximal region of extremities with myalgia. DTRs are highly variable among patients. Their course does not fully normal and no sensory impairment. Two of her elderly correlate with motor and cognitive disease progression. sister and younger brother shows hyper CK emia without MaterialsandMethods:Wehavetwofamiliesshowing any clinical symptoms. differentclinicalpresentationsofHD.Inthefirstfamily,30 Results: Needle EMG shows myogenic abnormality and 35 years old sisters were initially diagnosed with and muscle biopsy showed mild myogenic change with depression, and then they have started having involuntary vacuole.Phosphorylaseactivityinmuscleisabsent.Also, movements, impaired coordination, and inability to walk invitroanaerobiclacticacidproducingabilityisimpaired and speak for the last few years. In the second family, 23 in glycogen, but normal in glucose-1-P. These results and 31 years old brothers have choreic movements, severe suggest this patient suffers glycogen storage disease demans, seconder epilepsy and bedridden. They had a type V. Gene analysis of PYGM revealed that she brother who has died of HD. They all inherited from their has compound heterogeneous mutations, one of affected father. which is reported (p.
P710 DEL) and the other is novel Results: All patients were diagnosed with HD by using (p.
E394 fs). DNAsequencing.Increased(>40)CAGrepeatswasshown Discussion: This is one of the very late onset case of on the exon 1 of the HTT gene (on chromosome 4p16.3). McArdle disease. Late onset McArdle disease is often The responsible abnormal protein Huntingtin, occurs via misdiagnosed as polymyositis or limb-girdle muscular CAG repeats, were shown in patients by using Western dystrophy and PYGM mutations should be looked for in Blotting. patients with very late-onset myopathy with no previous Conclusion:Overall,althoughbothfamilieshavesimilar history of muscle weakness. numberofCAGrepeats,ourpatientsinthefirstfamilywere T. Furushima: None. Y. Morita: None. Y. Osaki: diagnosed with and treated for depression for many years None.Y.Miyamoto: None.E. Amano:None. T.Horino: before clinically and genetically diagnosed with HD, while None. F. Fukuda: None. H. Sugie: None. I. Nishino: our patients in the second family were diagnosed with and None. H. Furuya: None. treated for classical symptoms of HD and seconder epilepsy. E-
P10 .09 B. Celtikci: None. F. Kaplan: None. R. Sayin: None. X-Linked congenital familial hypotonia1866 L. Morales-Garófalo1, M. Moreno-Igoa1, M. Artigas- 1Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II Uni- Lopez1,A.Bengoa-Alonso1,G.Sierra-Colomina2,A.Ruiz versity, Naples, Italy, 2Telethon Institute of Genetics and de Sabando1, M. Ramos-Arroyo1 Medicine, Naples, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania ‘Luigi Vanvi- 1Genetics Department. Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, telli’, Naples, Italy Pamplona, Spain, 2Neonatal Unit. Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain Introduction: Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) has been shown to resolve up to 50% of patients with leukodystro- Introduction:Congenitalhypotoniaisarelativelycommon phy. NDUFA2 variants resulting in complex I deficiency diagnosis in the newborn period. Centronuclear myopathy have been recently recognized as responsible of Leigh (CNM) is a rare neuromuscular disorder with autosomal- syndrome or cystic leukoencephalopathy. NDUFA2 recessive (AR), autosomal-dominant (AD) and X-linked encodes an accessory subunit of complex I. patterns of genetic transmission. CaseReport:Wereporta2-year-oldfemalechildbornto Patient and Methods: First child of a non consangui- consanguineous first cousin parents who presented with neous couple. Reduced fetal movements during pregnancy. motor and language regression at 20 months of age, Born at term with no spontaneous breathing, required hypotonia, and microcephaly. A brain MRI showed endotracheal intubation. Severe hypotonia, hypo mimic cavitating leukodystrophy with corpus callosum involve- face, and cryptorchidism were present. At 1 year of age he ment. Trio WES identified the homozygous NDUFA2 carries a tracheostomy tube and a gastrostomy. He can sit missense variant c.170A>C: p.
E57 A that was predicted to but is unable to walk without support. Family history is be damaging (CADD= 31) and was absent in ExAc and remarkable for a maternal uncle with neonatal hypotonia, GnomAD databases. cryptorchidism and ophthalmoparesis; muscle biopsy at Discussion:NDUFA2-relateddisorderisamitochondrial 4 months of age was informed as normal, repeated as an disease resulting in leukodystrophy. Only three cases with adultshowedinternallylocatednucleiclosetothecenterof NDUFA2variantshavebeenreportedsofarintheliterature, a myofiber. Genetic analysis were performed including a onepresentingwithLeighsyndromeandtheremainingtwo 60K array-CGH, CTG-expansion analysis in DMPK and with cystic leukoencephalopathy, as in our case. In NGS sequencing of MTM1 gene (X-chromosome). Sanger conclusion, our case confirms that NDUFA2 variants can sequencing was done for variant validation and familiar be responsible for cavitating leukodystrophy. segregation studies. M. Alagia: None. G. Cappuccio: None. A. Torella: Results: No cryptic genomic imbalances were found by None. A. D’Amico: None. V. Nigro: None. N. Brunetti- aCGH.CTG-expansionanalysisinDMPKgenewaswithin Pierri: None. normal range. NGS-sequencing revealed the hemyzigous variant c.1181A>C (p.Asp394Ala) in exon 11 of MTM1 E-
P10 .11 gene, not previously described. In silico predictions show TRANSLATION OF THE RESEARCH TO DIAGNO- potential pathogenicity. Sanger-sequencing was used to SISTHROUGHNEXTGENERATIONSEQUENCING establish the maternal origin of the variant, which was also present in his maternal-uncle, while absent in a maternal L. Alías1, L. González-Quereda1, M. Ballesta2, A. uncle once removed. Nascimento3, N. Bejarano4, F. Munell5, M. Tirado6, F. Conclusions:Familyhistoryandspecificclinicalfeatures March6, E. Martínez6, M. Baena6, A. Lasa1, E. F. (undescended testes, ophthalmoparesis) have been deter- Tizzano5, M. Gallano1, S. Bernal1 mining to make the correct diagnosis and offer adequate genetic counselling 1Hospital Sant Pau, CIBERER U-705, Barcelona, Spain, L. Morales-Garófalo: None. M. Moreno-Igoa: None. 2Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, CIBERER M. Artigas-Lopez: None. A. Bengoa-Alonso: None. G. GCV14/ER/1, Múrcia, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Joan de Dèu, Sierra-Colomina: None. A. Ruiz de Sabando: None. M. CIBERER CB06/07/0061, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Ramos-Arroyo: None. GeneralUniversitariodeCiudadReal,CiudadReal,Spain, 5Hospital Vall d’Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain, 6Hospital Sant E-
P10 .10 Pau, Barcelona, Spain A further case of NDUFA2-related leukodystrophy Introduction: Neuromuscular disorders show a high M. Alagia1, G. Cappuccio1,2, A. Torella2,3, A. D’Amico1, clinical and genetics heterogeneity. Often, the patients V. Nigro2,3, TUDP, N. Brunetti-Pierri1,2 affected by these pathologies show a phenotypic overlap that difficult their diagnosis, especially at early ages. ForAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1867 this reason, usually these patients haven’t got a conclusive clinical suspicion of SMA, who were referred for genetic molecular diagnosis or their diagnosis has been delayed. In testing. this work we describe our experience in the use of next Results: In the sample of 111 patients 99 were referred generation sequencing (NGS) as a key tool for the rare forpostnataland12forprenataltestingduringtheperiodof diseases diagnosis. MATERIAL AND METHODS Four 2012–2018. In 99 cases among 37 (37,4%) SMA was different patients with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) confirmed as having homozygous deletion of SMN1 exon clinical diagnose, in which the involvement of the SMN1 7. Prenatal testing was carried out in 12 pregnant women genewasruledoutasresponsiblefortheirpathology.Allof and among 2 the disease was confirmed and the pregnancy them presented a well-defined phenotype using HPO codes was terminated. Among postnatal SMA patients 59,5% evaluated by clinical experts. A clinical exome was were children within 6 months of age (SMA 1), 27% were performed in all the patients (TruSightOne/TSO,Illumina). in the range of 7–12 months (SMA 2) and 10.8% were In cases with negative results, whole exome sequencing children between 2–15 years of age (SMA 3). In Armenia, (WES) was performed by Nimblegen SeqCap-EZ- there were 280,600 live births over the period of MedExome (Roche). All variants were analysed with 2012–2018. The calculated incidence of SMA in Armenia Alamut software and confirmed by Sanger. A segregation is approximately 13,2 in 100,000 newborns which is analyses were carried out to confirm the pathogenicity of comparable with incidence observed in Eastern European the variants identified. RESULTS TSO allowed us to countries. identifyc.2362C>TvariantinIGHMB
P2 justinonepatient. Conclusion:Thisstudyshowsepidemiologicalpictureof On theother hand, WES was conclusive for theother three SMA in Armenia and suggests that practitioners should patients: i) c.614T>C de novo variant in BICD2, ii) two refer early for genetic testing. This will facilitate manage- heterozygous variants in TTN confirmed by expected ment of SMA and will help to identify patients potentially familial segregation (c.59626G>A and c.38661_38665del) ready for new therapies. and iii) c.854C>T variant in TFG identified in affected K. Hovhannesyan: None. members of the family. CONCLUSIONS—Interdisciplin- ary collaboration is mandatory to carry out an accurate E-
P10 .13 molecular diagnosis.—Segregation studies are crucial to A second case of spinal muscular atrophy with confirm the pathogenicity of the NGS findings. congenital bone fractures-2 due to rare loss of function L. Alías: None. L. González-Quereda: None. M. mutation in ASC
C1  gene in Bulgarian patient of Roma Ballesta: None. A. Nascimento: None. N. Bejarano: origin None. F. Munell: None. M. Tirado: None. F. March: None. E. Martínez: None. M. Baena: None. A. Lasa: I.Bradinova1,S.Andonova1,R.Vazharova2,S.Tomova3, None. E.F. Tizzano: None. M. Gallano: None. S. R. Raynova1, S. Bichev1, K. Kercheva1, A. Savov1 Bernal: None. 1National Genetic Laboratory UHOG “Maichin dom” E-
P10 .12 MedicalUniversitySofia,Sofia,Bulgaria,2SofiaUniversity Incidence of spinal muscular atrophy in Armenia: “St. Kliment Ohridski” Faculty of Medicine Department of 2012–2018 Biology Medical genetics and Microbiology, Sofia, Bul- garia, 3Department of Neonatology, University Hospital K. Hovhannesyan MBAL Bourgas, Bourgas, Bulgaria Center of medical genetics and primary health care, Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy with congenital Yerevan, Armenia bonefractures-2(SMABF2)isasevereautosomalrecessive condition presenting with arthrogryposis multiplex con- Background: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the most genita, multiple prenatal fractures of the long bones, and commongeneticcauseofinfantmortalityworldwide.SMA generalized muscle atrophy caused by mutations in the isnotstudiedgeneticallyandepidemiologicallyinArmenia. ASC
C1 (ActivatingSignalCointegrator1Complex,subunit Objective:Todescribeepidemiologicalcharacteristicsof 1) gene on chromosome 10q22. patients with SMA and to study incidence of genetically Materials and methods: Herein we describe a female confirmed SMA in Armenia. newborn of consanguineous parents of Roma origin with Methods: This is an observational retrospective study severemusclehypotonia(reducedspontaneousmovements, basedonanalysisofregistryofCMGinArmeniafrom2012 absentreflexes,neonatalrespiratorydistresssyndrome)and to 2018. The study population included all patients with congenital long bone fractures (initial diagnosis of1868 osteogenesis imperfecta). The patient deceased 2 months excluded. Metabolic tests results were normal. NGS assay after birth. didn’t identify known pathogenic variants that could be Results: We have previously reported a case of a correlatedtoexistentsymptoms.Homozygousdeletionof2 newbornboywithSMABF2fromaconsanguineousfamily exonsinASS
C1 genewasdetectedintwoappliedtoolsfor ofRomaoriginwhodeceased12daysafterbirth.Alossof CNV evaluation andhas beenvalidated by other molecular functiondonorsplice-sitemutationc.710+1G>AinASC
C1  method. The variant has not been previously described but gene was detected by NGS and result was validated by due to its molecular character and localization has been Sanger sequencing and segregation analysis in the affected evaluated as likely pathogenic. As only few cases of family. Based on the similar clinical data observed in the SMABF2havebeenreported,nonecausedbydeletion,our current patient we started the diagnostic process with DNA study makes a contribution to expanding its molecular and analysis for the same disease causing mutation ASC
C1 : clinicalspectrum.AswellitprovesthatNGSmethodcanbe c.710+1G>A.TheSangersequencingtestingconfirmedthe successfullyemployedtodetectCNVinrareneuromuscular diagnosis of SMABF2 due to the mutation in diseases. homozygous state. A. Pietrzyk: None. M. Kacprzak: None. D. Loska: Conclusions: The results in our two patients disclose a None.A.Kruczek:None.A.Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska: presumptive high carrier frequency of the mutation c.710 None. K. Czerska: None. +1G>AinASC
C1 geneinBulgarianRomapopulationdue to founder effect. The diagnostic difficulties are due to the rarity and the fatal outcome of the condition. Implementa- E-
P11  tionofpopulationbasedgeneticscreeningisanoptiontobe Multiple malformation/anomalies syndromes discussed. I. Bradinova: None. S. Andonova: None. R. Vazhar- E-
P11 .01 ova: None. S. Tomova: None. R. Raynova: None. S. 16p11.2recurrentrearrangements:clinicalpresentation Bichev: None. K. Kercheva: None. A. Savov: None. and molecular description of array CGH results E-
P10 .14 K. Kosma, A. K. Mitrakos, M. Poulou, M. Tzetis Detection of a homozygous deletion of ASC
C1  gene by NGS in a patient with arthrogryposis and generalized National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, hypotonia Greece A. Pietrzyk1, M. Kacprzak1, D. Loska1, A. Kruczek2, A. Introduction: Deletion 16p11.2 syndromeisa contiguous- Sobczyńska- Tomaszewska1, K. Czerska1 gene disorder associated with characteristic recognizable pattern of dysmorphic features, congenital anomalies, 1Medgen Medical Centre, Warsaw, Poland, 2Poradnia macrocephaly, developmental delay (DD), autism, hypoto- Genetyczna Kostyk i Kruczek, Cracow, Poland nia and obesity, while duplication 16p11.2 presents over- lapped features with the deletion but with more grossly ASC
C1 encodesasubunitoftheASC-1complex,whichby dysmorphicfeatures,microcephalyandunderweight.Mate- bindingwithnuclearreceptorscanaffecttranscription,both rials and Methods DNA was extracted from peripheral as repressor and coactivator. It also participates in pre- bloodfromatotalof1200pediatriccaseswithID,DD,with mRNA processing and regulation of splicing and has been or without multiple congenital anomalies. Chromosomal associated with neuro- and myogenesis. Mutations in Microarray Analysis (CMA) was done using the 4X180K ASC
C1  are correlated with spinal muscular atrophy with G3CGH+SNPmicroarrayplatform(AgilentTechnologies, congenital bone fractures type 2 (SMABF2, OMIM Santa Clara, CA, USA). Results 9 deletions and 2 #616867),whichmanifestsbyhypotonia,muscleweakness duplications of the 16p11.2 genomic region were identified caused by degeneration of motor neurons, arthrogryposis accountingfor0.9%ofallsamplessubmittedforarrayCGH andbonefractures.Wepresentacaseof2yearoldgirlwith analysis. Five deletions included proximal 16p11.2 region homozygous deletion of 2 exons in ASS
C1  gene, detected (B
P4 -B
P5 ) while four included the distal 16p11.2 region by next generation sequencing (NGS). The child was born (B
P2 -B
P3 ). The two duplications were both distal (B
P2 - in34weekofpregnancycomplicatedbyhydropsfetalisand B
P3 ).4/9patientswiththedeletion,presentedflatmidface, cardiomegaly. Massive soft tissue swelling, dysmorphia, broad forehead, hypotonia, macrocephaly, obesity and hand contractures, talipes and generalized hypotonia, developmental delay, mainly speech delay, 1/9 microce- spontaneous fracture of left femur were present after birth. phaly, 3/9 presented congenital anomalies, while none of Chromosomal aberrations and SMN1 deletion were them had seizures. One patient had inherited the deletionAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1869 fromaphenotypicallyhealthyfather.Thetwopatientswith M. L. Arenas-Sordo, S. Arenas-Díaz, M. Díaz-García, E. theduplicationhadadditionalpathogeneticaberrations(Del González-Díaz, C. Hernández-Medrano, T. Bautista- 10p.3/Del 9p24.3 and Del 1p36 respectively) resulting in Tirado, N. Leyva-García moreseverephenotype,withmultiplecongenitalanomalies, developmental delay and seizures. Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitacion LGII, Mexico City, Conclusions: Our clinical and molecular findings for the Mexico deletion supports the so far distinct phenotypic conse- quencesofthesyndrome,howevertheduplicationseemsto Introduction: The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is consid- be more severe for certain phenotypic features (i.e. speech ered the most frequent chromosomal microdeletion. The delay, dysmorphic features), which may be due to the incidence and prevalence is quite variable. Some studies additional imbalances. estimatetherangeof1:3000to1:6000livebirths,butthis K. Kosma: None. A.K. Mitrakos: None. M. Poulou: depends on the diagnostic clinical suspicion to carried out None. M. Tzetis: None. the chromosomal and FISH studies. Material and methods. 22 patients were recruited in the Department of Genetics. E-
P11 .02 Thechromosomeanalysiswasperformedwiththestandard Afurther case with 16q12.1q21 deletionand refinement GTG bands technique. FISH studies were carried out using of critical region theeliminationprobeoftheVCFSregionTUPL
E1 (Visys) that covers the entire TUPL
E1  gene. A total of 20 D. Apuzzo metaphases and 200 nucleous from each patient were examined. Department of Translational Medicine, Section of Paedia- Results:Ofthe22patients,12weremenand10women. trics, University Federico II, Naples, Italy The average age was 13 years. Only 1 patient had IUGR and 8 had short stature. They also frequently had Introduction: Interstitial centromeric deletions of 16q submucosal cleft palate (13), facial dysmorphism (22), chromosome including 16q12.1q21 region are rare with conductive type hearing loss (8) and absence of cardiovas- only 3 cases reported to date. Main clinical features cular disease in 11 patients. Sixteen of the 22 patients had include dysmorphisms, short stature, microcephaly, eye some degree of mental retardation. abnormalities (myopia and strabismus), epilepsy, devel- Other findings found in our patients, mentioned as less opment delay, intellectual disability, and autismspectrum frequent in the literature, were: epilepsy (11), hypotonia disorder (ASD). (11), malformations of the extremities (18). Case report: We report a 12 year and 4 month-old boy Conclusions: It is very important to pay attention to the with dysmorphic facial features including depressed nasal characteristics that are not very frequent and also to those root, long philtrum, cupid’s bow shaped upper lip, short mentioned as frequent that patients might not have. We stature,microcephaly,developmentaldelay,severemyopia, think there is a bias due to the patients attended in our strabismus, and aggressive behaviours but not ASD. A institution. For this reason we find absence and / or less minimalregionofoverlapspanning1.7Mbonchromosome serious cardiovascular malformations. 16includingGNAO1andaclusterofmetallothioneingenes M.L. Arenas-Sordo: None. S. Arenas-Díaz: None. M. was found among the case described here and those Díaz-García: None. E. González-Díaz: None. C. Her- previously reported in the literature. nández-Medrano: None. T. Bautista-Tirado: None. N. Conclusions: Our case suggest a more precise definition Leyva-García: None. ofthecontributionofgenesinthe16q12.1q21regiontothe phenotype of affected individuals carrying deletions of this E-
P11 .04 region.Interestingly,thisminimaldeletedregionofoverlap Genotype-phenotype analysis in 22q11.2 deletion/dupli- includes GNAO1 and genes encoding metallothioneins cation groups which have been implicated in various diseases of the central nervous system. E. M. Blažytė1,2, K. Šiaurytė2, A. Matulevičienė1,3, L. D. Apuzzo: None. Ambrozaitytė1,3, B. Aleksiūnienė1,3, B. Burnytė1,3, E. Preikšaitienė1,3, E. Dagytė1,3, B. Tumienė1,3, V. Mik- E-
P11 .03 štienė1,3, E. Benušienė1,3, N. Krasovskaja1,3, L. Cimbalis- Del 22q11 phenotypic delineation from a group of tienė1,3, A. Utkus3 patients. Differences between our patients clinical findings and the literature 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, Vilnius, Lithuania,1870 2FacultyofMedicine,VilniusUniversity,Vilnius,Lithuania, J.F.Mazzeu,A.S.deFaria,A.Vaqueiro,B.R.Versiani, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Department of Human and Medical R. S. Bonadio, P. N. Silva-Moretti, S. F. Oliveira, A. Pic- Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Taylor Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, Vilnius, Lithuania Universidade de Brasília (UnB), Brasilia, Brazil Introduction: Genomic rearrangements of 22q11.2 region Introduction: 2q37 microdeletion syndrome is one of the are common and demonstrate variable phenotype of most common subtelomeric deletions, characterized by microdeletions/microduplications. We studied genotype- intellectual disability, facial dysmorphisms, obesity and phenotype correlations in 22q11.2 deletion (del22q11.2)/ brachydactyly. Mutations in HDA
C4 , a gene coding a duplication (dup22q11.2) prenatal and postnatal cohorts histonedeacetylasemappedto2q37.3,wereassociatedwith focusing on clinical and molecular findings and compared intellectual disability, obesity and brachydactyly. The gene results with previously described in the literature. HDA
C4 , has been suggested as the main gene responsible Materials and Methods: A retrospective study enrolled for the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome phenotype. Lithuanian patients with del22q11.2/dup22q11.2 identified Materials and Methods: We studied a mother and two by SNP-CGH and FISH analysis from 2011 to 2018. Data sons with short stature, mild intellectual disability, facial of 22 patients with del22q11.2 and 6 with dup22q11.2 was dysmorphisms, microcephaly and congenital heart defects. included. No limb abnormalities were identified. Chromosome Results:In21patientsidentifiedbySNP-CGHthesizeof microarray analysis was performed using Cytoscan 750K deletions ranges from 2.26 to 2.62 Mb, duplications— (Affymetrix). 1.5–4.14Mb.Alldeletionsand5/6duplicationsencompass Results: Chromosome microarray analysis revealed a TBX1 gene. At the time of diagnosis patients in postnatal 2,2Mb terminal deletion at 2q37.3 (arr[hg19]2q37.3 del22q11.2 group exhibited developmental delay/intellec- (240,541,780–242,782,256)x1). The proximal breakpoint tualdisability (13/18),congenitalheartdefects(12/18),and is located immediately downstream of HDA
C4 . All three recurrent infections (7/18); most frequent phenotypic individuals carried the deletion. features were small, low-set, deformed ears (13/18), small Conclusion:Thedeletionreportedinthisfamilyincludes mouth(8/18),minoranomaliesofhandandfeet(6/18each). all genes in the critical region for 2q37 microdeletion The postnatal dup22q11.2 group demonstrated develop- syndrome but not HDA
C4 . Though the role of HDA
C4  in mental delay/intellectual disability (4/5), hypotonia (4/5), brachydactyly and obesity is clear, our results show that impairedfluencyofspeech(3/5);mostcommonphenotypic deletion of the remaining genes is also responsible for a features were high forehead (3/5), synophris (2/5), minor syndromic phenotype and thus significantly contribute to anomalies of hands (2/5). In the prenatally diagnosed cases the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome. 3/4 fetuses with del22q11.2 presented with cardiac Financial support: FAPDF, CAPES and CNPq. anomalies and facial dysmorphism, while fetus with J.F.Mazzeu:None.A.S.deFaria:None.A.Vaqueiro: dup22q11.2 showed no distinguishable features. None. B.R. Versiani: None. R.S. Bonadio: None. P.N. Conclusion: We observed high prevalence of develop- Silva-Moretti: None. S.F. Oliveira: None. A. Pic- mental delay/intellectual disability in del22q11.2/dup22q11.2 Taylor: None. cohorts.TBX1isknowntobeoneofthecausesofintellectual disability in these syndromes. However, specific del22q11.2 E-
P11 .08 features were not characteristic to dup22q11.2 patients and Aarskog-Scottsyndrome:follow-upof2relatedpatients distinct phenotype associated with dup22q11.2 remains challenging to establish. S. Calapod1, R. Popescu1,2, C. Rusu1,2 E.M. Blažytė: None. K. Šiaurytė: None. A. Matule- vičienė: None. L. Ambrozaitytė: None. B. Aleksiūnienė: 1”St.Mary”Children’sHospital-MedicalGeneticsCentre, None. B. Burnytė: None. E. Preikšaitienė: None. E. Iasi, Romania, 2”Gr. T. Popa” University of Medicine and Dagytė:None.B.Tumienė:None.V.Mikštienė:None.E. Pharmacy-DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Iasi,Romania Benušienė: None. N. Krasovskaja: None. L. Cimbalis- tienė: None. A. Utkus: None. Aarskog-Scott syndrome (AAS) is a rare genetic disorder thatprimarilyaffectsmaleswhilewomenpresentattenuated E-
P11 .06 phenotypic features. AAS is characterized by growth 2q37 microdeletion, not including HDA
C4 , in a family deficiency, dysmorphic features, digital and genital anoma- with intellectual disability, microcephaly, facial dys- lies. Mutations in the FGD1 gene are the known cause of morphisms and congenital heart defects AAS (Xq11.22).Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1871 We describe a family with AAS (2 cousins and their Methods:IntenpatientswithARMandCLParray‐based mothers) diagnosed in Iasi Medical Genetics Centre, to molecular karyotyping was performed using the Illumina illustratetherelevanceofclinicalfeaturesforthediagnosis, GSA-1.0. CNVs were calculated from raw intensity data. differences between individuals and their long-time evolu- Common CNVs were excluded by filtering against 4168 tion.ThecaseswereconfirmedusingDNAsequencingthat healthycontrolsusingPLINK1.07.RemainingCNVswere identified a deletion in the FGD1 gene. evaluated manually using GenomeStudio2.0 genotyping Case 1 (male, 12 years): growth deficiency (recovered module, filtered for gene content (UCSC) and for their under GH replacement therapy), microcephaly, typical presenceintheDatabaseofGeneticVariants.Everypatient dysmorphic face, myopic astigmatism, nasal voice, short has been inspected visually at the 22q11.2 locus using neck, mild pectus excavatum, brachydactyly with inter- GenomeStudio. digital webbing, bilateral camptodactyly of the 4th and 5th Results: In one patient with ARM, CLP and ventricular finger, short/wide feet with mild brachydactyly, shawl septal defect a 3Mb deletion of 22q11.2 was identified scrotum, bilateral cryptorchidism (surgically corrected), (chr22:19,241,624–22,323,048 (hg19)). In the genome- minor heart defects, enuresis, delayed bone age, mild wide analysis we detected four novel possibly disease- intellectual disability. causingCNVsinthreepatients.Thesefindingsarecurrently Case 2 (female, 8 years old): growth deficiency, studied for validation, familial segregation and content of microcephaly, dysmorphic face, right eye divergent stra- possible candidate genes. bismus, nasal voice, bilateral single transverse palmar Conclusions: Our investigation of a small cohort of crease, brachydactyly, mild interdigital webbing, bilateral familieswiththecombinationofARMandCLPsuggestsa camptodactyly of the 4th and 5th finger, mild bilateral high prevalence of 22q11.2 aberrations. However, sample clubfoot in infancy, functional systolic murmur, mild sizeislimitedandtheanalysisoflargercohortsisnecessary intellectual disability and ADHD. to obtain reliable figures. The evaluation of four novel Both mothers have a very mild phenotype. CNVs containing possible candidate genes is currently The long-term follow-up of our patients revealed a ongoing. Grant BONFOR O-120.0001 and O-2018-4-01 changing of their clinical particularities that will be L.M. Schierbaum: None. K.U. Ludwig: None. E. illustrated more with pictures in the poster. Mangold: None. A.C. Hilger: None. H. Reutter: None. In conclusion, we present a familial case of AAS with G.C. Dworschak: None. particular features, to discuss long-term evolution and multidisciplinary approach. E-
P11 .10 S. Calapod: None. R. Popescu: None. C. Rusu: None. Deletion and duplication syndromes: Four cases of atypical chromosomal rearrangements E-
P11 .09 Copy number variation analysis in patients with V.Cejnova,L.Vancova,V.Harmas,L.Liskova,M.Stara, anorectalmalformationandcleftlipandpalateinorder J. Lastuvkova to determine the frequency of 22q11.2 CNVs and identify rare disease-causing CNVs Regional Health Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem, Department of Medical Genetics, Usti nad L. M. Schierbaum1,2, K. U. Ludwig1, E. Mangold1, A. C. Labem, Czech Republic Hilger1,2, H. Reutter1,2, G. C. Dworschak1,2 Objectives:Partialchromosomaldeletionsandduplications 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, —copy number variations—are a major contribution to the Germany, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, genome variability among individuals and can be either Children’s Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany pathogenic or without clinical consequences. Methods:Wepresentclinical,cytogenetic,molecularand Introduction: Microdeletions and-duplications of22q11.2 genotype-phenotype analysis of four cases representing are common aberrations causing various congenital mal- atypical forms of syndromes. Microarray-based compara- formations. 22q11.2 deletions are rare (0.3%) in patients tive genomic hybridization (array CGH; Agilent 8x60K) with cleft lip and palate (CLP) and also rarely found in was used for characterization of atypical forms of patients with anorectal malformation (ARM). In order to syndromes. All findings were confirmed by FISH and we determinethefrequencyof22q11.2aberrationsandidentify also investigated the parental origin of rearrangements. novelaberrationsinfamilieswiththecombinationofARM Results: In the first case, we report diagnosis of an andCLP,weperformedasystematicgenome-wideanalysis atypical form of Williams-Beuren syndrome due to a de of copy number variations (CNVs). novo 3,7 Mb 7q11.23 deletion detected in a one-year-old1872 girlwithpsychomotordelayandfacialdysmorphism.The arr[GRCh37] 7q11.21q11.23(62030284_72401145)x1, secondcasepresentsa4,5Mbduplicationat7p12.2p11.2 7q11.23q21.11(75061927_83488169)x3. in a fetus with omphalocele. Duplications of 7p11.2-p13 Cytogenetic studies in the parents showed a paracentric have been described in some cases of Silver-Russell inversion in the long arm of chromosome 7: 46,XX,inv(7) syndrome. Array CGH analysis in the parents was (q11.21q21.1) in the mother, whilst in the father no performed only in the mother and showed a 1,2 Mb structural or numerical chromosome abnormalities were distal22q11.2duplication.Inthethirdcase,wefoundade observed. novo15Mbduplicationat14q32.12q32.33relatedto14q Conclusions: Array CGH has allowed identifying the distal duplication syndrome in a fetus with cerebral aetiology of the patient: 7q11.21q11.23 interstitial dele- ventricular dilatation and karyotype: 46,XX,der(5) tion and 7q11.23q21.11 interstitial amplification. The (5pter→5q35.3::22q13.1→22qter),der(22) existence of paracentric inversion in the mother comple- (22pter→22q13.1::14q32.12→14qter). A girl with short tely changed the risk of recurrence for the parents in case stature, hand and foot abnormalities and congenital of future pregnancies, getting personalized genetic duodenal atresia represents the last case. In this case, we counselling. identifieddenovo2,9Mband2,0Mbdeletionsassociated C. Garrido: None. D. Escué: None. M. Caamaño: with 13q deletion syndrome and also de novo t(2;13). None. A. Morales: None. M. Naharro: None. D. Visus: Conclusions: Some deletion and duplication syndromes None. S. Sánchez: None. D. Trujillano: None. N. (including atypical forms) continue to be a huge challenge Guerrero: None. P. Carrasco: None. E. Geán: None. when it comes to clinical interpretation. V. Cejnova: None. L. Vancova: None. V. Harmas: E-
P11 .12 None. L. Liskova: None. M. Stara: None. J. Thefirstreportofanapparentlybalancedtranslocation Lastuvkova: None. t(1;2)(q42.1p25.3) responsible for abnormal offspring E-
P11 .11 E. Papadopoulou1, N. Selenti2, C. Perdikogianni1, M. Adeletionandaduplicationinthesamechromosomeby Moudatsaki1, E. Galanakis1, H. Fryssira2 array CGH 1University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece, 2University of C. Garrido1, D. Escué1, M. Caamaño1, A. Morales1, M. Athens, Athens, Greece Naharro1, D. Visus1, S. Sánchez1, D. Trujillano1, N. Guerrero2, P. Carrasco3, E. Geán1 Introduction: we report a female patient 5 years old of Hungarian and Syrian origin that was referred to the 1Reference Laboratory, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barce- Department of Medical Genetics due to macrocephaly, lona), Spain, 2Hospital Juan Ramón Jiménez, Unidad de prominent forehead, dysmorphic facial features, congenital Neuropediatría, Huelva, Spain, 3Hospital Juan Ramón anomalies, severe developmental delay, intellectual dis- Jiménez, Unidad de Genética, Huelva, Spain ability, stereotypic movements, absent speech, poor eye contact and disability of walking alone. She was born at Introduction: Partial duplications and deletions on the 39 weeks gestation, by normal uneventful delivery, after a same chromosome are very rare and usually a sporadic pregnancy without medical care. event.Theycouldbeduetoaparentalparacentricinversion Methods: cytogenetic analysis was performed on GTG- ofthatchromosome,non-allelichomologousrecombination banded metaphases at a resolution of 500 bands (NAHR) or to an abnormal cross-linking during meiosis. approximately. Also,thephenotypicexpressionofbothaneuploidiescould Results:cytogeneticanalysisrevealedthatthepatientwas be highly variable and the etiological mechanism is a carrier of a derivative chromosome 2, characterized from complex. the addition of supplement material of unknown origin in Methods:Herewepresenta6-years-oldgirlwithgrowth the area p25.3, der(2)(?::p25.3). Parental karyotype indi- delay and autism spectrum disorder (ADS). Normal cated that the mother carried an apparently balanced cytogenetic study was conducted two years ago. We translocation: 46,ΧX,t(1;2)(q42.1p25.3). performed array CGH in peripheral blood. Cytogenetic Conclusion: this is the first report of an apparently studieswerecarriedoutintheparentsafterthechildresults. balanced translocation t(1;2)(q42.1p25.3) contributing to Results: The patient shows a deletion and a contiguous the etiology of abnormal phenotype. Τimely diagnosis of duplication in chromosome 7, at the region adjacent to the parental balanced chromosomal rearrangements can reduce ELN gene without affecting it: the risk of abnormal offspring.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1873 E. Papadopoulou: None. N. Selenti: None. C. Perdi- M. Kenis3, A. N. Kozhevnikov3, Z. V. Gesheva4, Y. P. kogianni: None. M. Moudatsaki: None. E. Galanakis: Chasovskih5, S. A. Ushakova6, O. Y. Khalidulina6, E. N. None. H. Fryssira: None. Imyanitov1,2 E-
P11 .13 1St.-Petersburg Pediatric Medical University, St.-Peters- Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome: approach to increase burg, Russian Federation, 2N.N. Petrov Institute of rate Oncology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Turner Institute for Children’s Orthopedics, St.-Petersburg, Rus- A. M. Cueto-González, A. Plaja-Rustein, P. Fernández- sian Federation, 4Medical center “Mado”, Nalchik, Álvarez, L. Domènech Salgado, T. Vendrell-Bayona, I. Russian Federation, 5Siberian State Medical University, Valenzuela-Palafoll, F. López-Grondona, E. Tizzano- Tomsk, Russian Federation, 6Tyumen State Medical Uni- Ferrari versity, Tyumen, Russian Federation Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain Introduction: CACP syndrome (Camptodactily—Arthro- pathy—Coxa Vara—Pericarditis) is a rare autosomal- Introduction: Within the differential diagnosis of patients recessive condition. It is caused by mutations in PRG4 who present hemihypertrophy/hemyhyperplasia, macroso- gene,whichaffectviscosityofsynovialandpericardialfluid mia, macroglossia and neonatal hypoglycemia, one of the due to impaired lubricin production. CACP syndrome entities that should be discarded, due to the implications in patients are often misdiagnosed as having juvenile idio- thefollow-upthatmaysubsequentlyhave,istheBeckwith- pathic arthritis and receive improper immunosuppressive Wiedemann syndrome (BWS). therapy. The disease leads to joint contractures and early- Material and Methods: We retrospectively analyzed all onset arthrosis. While the condition has been reported in patients who undergone MLPA methylation 15q13 (Beck- many ethnically diverse populations, the data on its with-Wiedemann)andCDKN1Csequencingduringthelast prevalence in Russia are scarce. Here we describe clinical 12 years in our Department of Clinical Genetics. We and molecular characteristics of Russian patients with analysed results obtained according to the diagnostic suspected CACP syndrome. suspicion,clinicalcriteriathatfulfilled,aswellasthetissue Materials and methods: 11 patients from 8 unrelated that was analyzed. families with clinical signs of CACP syndrome were Results: In total we performed 69 MLPA of methylation subjected to Sanger sequencing of PRG4 gene. for BWS, of these, 18 cases presented clinical suspicion of Results:Pathogenicmutationsaffectingbothalleleswere BWS and in 31 cases was hemihypertrophy. Of all these found in 4 of 11 children (36%); 2 variants have not been MLPA studies,12 were pathological: 6 I
C2  hypomethyla- reported previously. Another 4 patients carried heterozy- tion,1hypermethylationI
C1 ,5uniparentaldisomymosaic. gous PRG4 alteration. The remaining 3 patients had had 4ofthemwerenegativeinperipheralbloodbutpositiveina normal sequence of PRG4 gene. The molecular analysis sample taken from affected tissue. Two patients had was compromised by the presence of multiple repeats in a mutations in CDKN1C. part of exon 6. Conclusions: It is important to cover all aspects of Conclusions: This report extends current data on the samples for analysis in search of a possible mosaic and spectrum of molecular alterations related to CACP perform the study in an affected tissue (not only to keep a syndrome. This work has been supported by the Russian peripheral blood study), given that the rate of diagnosis FoundationforBasicResearch(RFBRgrant17-29-06069). increase. E.N. Suspitsin: None. M.M. Kostik: None. G.A. A.M. Cueto-González: None. A. Plaja-Rustein: None. Yanus: None. T.A. Akhapkina: None. N.T. Garipova: P. Fernández-Álvarez: None. L. Domènech Salgado: None. M.M. Gharabaghtsyan: None. V.M. Kenis: None. None.T.Vendrell-Bayona:None.I.Valenzuela-Palafoll: A.N. Kozhevnikov: None. Z.V. Gesheva: None. Y.P. None. F. López-Grondona: None. E. Tizzano- Chasovskih: None. S.A. Ushakova: None. O.Y. Khali- Ferrari: None. dulina: None. E.N. Imyanitov: None. E-
P11 .15 E-
P11 .16 Clinical and molecular characteristics of Russian An apparently balanced complex chromosome rearran- patients with CACP syndrome gement involving eight breaks and five chromosomes in a healthy female and segregation/recombination to her E. N. Suspitsin1,2, M. M. Kostik1, G. A. Yanus1,2, T. A. affected son Akhapkina2,N.T.Garipova1,M.M.Gharabaghtsyan1,V.1874 E. Perrone1,2, A. M. Palumbo1, J. M. Fernandes1, P. M. E-
P11 .17 Monfredini1,M.R.Cochak1,A.P.S.Paes1,V.F.Lopes1, Identification of two novel BCOR mutations with V.Nakano1,T.Vertemati3,M.Migliavacca1,F.Milanezi1, de novo occurrence J. S. Silva1, C. Rosenberg1,4 L. Dudakova1, F. Malinka1,2, P. Liskova1,3 1GeneOne, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Clinical Genetics Depart- ment, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 1ResearchUnitforRareDiseases,Prague,CzechRepublic, 3PrivateGeneticClinics,SãoPaulo,Brazil,4Departmentof 2Department of Computer Science, Czech Technical Uni- Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Bioscience, versity inPrague,Prague,CzechRepublic,3Departmentof University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles Uni- versityandGeneralUniversityHospitalinPrague,Prague, Introduction: Complex chromosome rearrangements Czech Republic (CCRs) are structural alterations involving 3 or more chromosomes. We report on a healthy female carrying a Introduction: Congenital cataract (CC) is defined as an balanced CCRs involving at least 8 breaks and 5 opacificationofthelenspresentatbirthorappearingshortly chromosomes;theaffectedsoninherited3ofthederivatives thereafter. The etiology is diverse and includes genetic, and one recombinant chromosome. infectious and nutrition causes. A considerable amount of Patient and Methods: chromosome microarray analysis isolatedCCisinheritedasamonogenictraitwithmutations (CMA) was performed using the Illumina 850K platform. inmorethan 330genesimplicated todate. Asapartofour FISH was performed using whole-chromosome libraries ongoingstudy,wehaveinvestigatedtwoprobandswithCC. and selected BACs. MaterialsandMethods:Weperformedexomesequencing The propositus is a 2 months old male, referred for using Agilent SureSelect XT_V5_PostCap. Reads were evaluationduetopreandpostnatalgrowthrestriction,atrial aligned to the GRCh37/hg19 human reference sequence with septum defect, neurodevelopmental delay and minor Novoalign.Annotatedvariantswithaminorallelefrequency≤ morphologicalanomalies.Hismotherhadtwomiscarriages 0.005aspergnomADingenesimplicatedinthepathogenesis and one healthy daughter. ofCCwereprioritizedforfurtheranalysis.Sangersequencing Results: CMA on the affected proband revealed gains of wasusedtoconfirmthepresenceofthedetectedmutationsand 20,3Mband11,8Mbsegmentsfrom1qand4p,respectively for segregation analysis. (arr[GRCh37] 1q41q43(219,446,253–239,755,240)x3;4p15. Results: Two novel mutations in the BCOR gene 2p14(25,803,830–37,653,656)x3).G-banded karyotype from c.3914dupA; p.(Gln1306Alafs*20). c.2382delG; p. the mother revealed 46,XX,t(1;14;18;4)(q?41;q?24;q?21;p? (Lys795Argfs*12) were identified. In both instances the 15). FISHin the mother’s metaphase usingchromosomes 14 parents did not carry the mutation indicating a de novo and18 librariesconfirmeda 14;18 translocation.FISH using occurrence. BCOR mutations cause an x-linked oculofacio- BAC probes showed that the duplicated 1q41q43 and cardiodental syndrome manifesting as a variable combina- 4p15.2p14 segments were inserted on 1p and 13q, respec- tion of CC, facial dysmorphism, cardiac, dental and toe tively. The rearrangement in the mother can be described anomalies. Both probands denied any other symptoms, as:46,XX,ins(1p?32q41q43),ins(13;4)(13q?21;4p15.2p14),t however marked teeth anomalies could be readily noted. (14,18)(?q24,?q21) The son inherited the balanced t(14,18), Conclusion: A considerable number of sporadic patients twonormalchromosomes4,thechromosome13withthe4p withCCharbourdenovomutationstransmittedasanx-linked insertion, and a recombinant between the rearranged and the or autosomal dominant trait. Exome sequencing can have a normal chromosomes 1 from the mother, resulting in extra significant impact as establishing molecular diagnosis of material from 1q. severe syndromic disease has further implications for clinical Conclusion: CCR population frequency may be under- management and preconception counselling. estimated, since some CCRs may not elicit a phenotypic This work was supported by AZV 17-30500A. effect. The case presented shows a balanced CCRs L. Dudakova: None. F. Malinka: None. P. uncovered in a healthy female after investigation of an Liskova: None. affected offspring carrying an unbalanced karyotype. E. Perrone: None. A.M. Palumbo: None. J.M. Fer- E-
P11 .18 nandes: None. P.M. Monfredini: None. M.R. Cochak: Prenatal diagnosis of Costello Syndrome by exome None. A.P.S. Paes: None. V.F. Lopes: None. V. Nakano: sequencing None. T. Vertemati: None. M. Migliavacca: None. F. Milanezi: None. J.S. Silva: None. C. Rosenberg: None. G. Christopoulou1, A. Oikonomaki1, S. Samara1, V. Velissariou2, A. Stavrou3, P. Constantoulakis1Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1875 1Genotypos Science Labs, Athens, Greece, 2Bioiatriki SA, Cardiology, Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medi- Athens, Greece, 3“Mitera” Maternity Hospital, Athens, cine, Prague, Czech Republic Greece Introduction: Central deletions 22q11.21 are quite rare, Introduction: We present a prenatal case where clinical only limited numbers of individuals have been reported. exome sequencing allowed for the diagnosis of Costello Deletions are nested at the distal end of the most syndrome (CS), a rare, multiple anomaly congenital common ~3 Mb region resulting in DiGeorge (DGS)/ syndrome. velocardiofacial syndrome but do not contain the DGS Materials and Methods: Second trimester ultrasound critical genes HIRA or TBX1. These “atypical” deletions investigation revealed a fetus with bilateral camptodac- exhibit a highly variable clinical phenotype. They are tyly, hydramnios and relative macrocephaly. Amniocent- challenging to recognize, share many features with the esis was performed at 22 weeks gestation age and “typical” DGS and show high level of inheritance. chromosomal abnormalities were ruled out by conven- Case presentation: Here we present a 9-year old girl tionalandmolecularkaryotyping.Clinicalexomesequen- referred to genetic counselling for inflammatory bowel cing was performed on the DNA extracted from amniotic disease and short stature. Array CGH analysis was fluid,usingSophiaGenetics’ClinicalExomeSolutionv2, performed and identified a deletion in 22q11.21 region which includes 4,493 clinically important genes. Follow- located between low copy repeats blocks LCR22-B and ing preparations, according to the manufacturer’s proto- LCR22-D, spanning 35 genes including CRKL. Neither col, DNA libraries were sequenced on an Illumina TBX1 nor HIRA were deleted. This same microdeletion NextSeq-500 genetic analyser. Data processing, variant was detected in apparently phenotypically normal father calling and pre-classification were conducted by SOPHiA who has a history of recurrent infections and DDM® bioinformatics pipelines. basaliomas. Results: A pathogenic variant, c.34G>A (p.Gly12Ser) Conclusions: Patients with DGS may not be severely (rs104894229/NM_001130442) was identified in the affected. Sometimes it is hard to recognize their HRASgene,previouslyreportedinCSpatients.Following phenotype.ClinicalfeaturesofDGSareingeneralmilder clinical genetic counselling, the pregnancy was termi- inrelatedfamilymembersthanindenovocases.Affected nated. Post mortem pathology findings were consistent parents can demonstrate extremely mild phenotype or no with the syndrome. features at all. Due to mild demonstration of clinical Discussion: Recognition of CS, a rare congenital features numbers of affected individuals remain anomaly, in utero is very important because of the undiagnosed. neonatal risk of cardiac mortality and morbidity. Ultra- Supported by MZ 0064203, NF-CZ11-PDP-3-003-2014 soundfindingsareunspecificandappearlateinpregnancy and AZV 17-29423A making genetic investigations challenging. Clinical T.Rašpličková:None.M.Schwarz:None.H.Zůnová: exome sequencing deciphered the genetic abnormality None. D. Novotná: None. M. Macek: None. A. thus allowing timely healthcare decisions. This is a Krebsová: None. paradigm of exome sequencing’s contribution to the field of prenatal diagnosis. E-
P11 .20 G. Christopoulou: None. A. Oikonomaki: None. S. The potential of array- and NGS-based diagnostics: a Samara: None. V. Velissariou: None. A. Stavrou: None. FOX
P1  mutation, a 16p11.2 microdeletion and 45,X/46, P. Constantoulakis: None. XXmosaicismexplainingthephenotype,andapre-CLL as an incidental finding E-
P11 .19 A girl with an inherited central deletion 22q11.21 S. Berland1, C. Rabben2, H. Eid3, T. H. A. Tvedt1, L. F. resulting in DiGeorge syndrome without typical con- Engebretsen3, G. Houge1, S. Johansson1, R. Hovland1 genital anomalies 1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2Hitra T. Rašpličková1, M. Schwarz1, H. Zůnová1, D. Novotná1, Legekontor,Hitra,Norway,3St.OlavHospital,Trondheim, M. Macek1, A. Krebsová2 Norway 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles Introduction: About 6% of patients with intellectual University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University disability (ID) have more than one genetic condition, but Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of finding more than two genetic aberrations is rare. We present a 55-year old female with severe ID, no speech,1876 shortstatureandmacrocephaly,andfourimportantfindings de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 6Service d’ophtalmo- upon routine genetic laboratory work-up. logie, Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital civil, Results:Firstly,aSNP-arrayrevealedaclassical~0.6Mb Strasbourg, France, 7Service de pédiatrie, Hôpitaux uni- 16p11.2 microdeletion. In addition, copy-number ratio versitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Stras- suggested >six mosaic chromosomal aberrations, including bourg, France loss of T
P53  and 13q14.3, consistent with chronic lymphatic leukemia (CLL). Secondly, a routine karyotype Frank-ter Haar syndrome (FTHS) is a rare autosomal wasdone,andasinglelikelyCLLprecursorcellmetaphase recessive syndrome resulting from mutations in the was found in addition to 45,X[4]/46,XX[31] mosaicism. In SH3PXD2B gene, involved in the formation and function a follow-up unstimulated 24 h blood culture, interphase- of podosomes. FTHS is characterized by facial dys- FISH confirmed T
P53  deletion in 44% of cells. Flow morphism,megalocornea,inconsistentglaucoma,skeletal cytometry confirmed circulating monoclonal B-cells, but andcardiacanomalies,anddevelopmentaldelay.Todate, duetolownumber(<5x109/L)andtheabsenceofsystemic 36 patients have been reported in the literature, including features of lymphoproliferative disorder, this was classified 17 with identified mutations, only. Among the latter, 6 as monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL) and not CLL. have congenital glaucoma and 4 died in early childhood Finally, an NGS-based 1165-gene panel revealed hetero- from cardiac failure or unknown cause. We present a zygosity for a recurrent pathogenic FOX
P1 -mutation: review of the 17 patients previously described in the NM_001244808.1 c.1538G>A p.(Arg513His). literature and report on the first girl born to consangui- Conclusion: FOX
P1  mutations correlate with severe ID neous parents, with prenatal hypotrophy, hypotonia, without speech, and 16p11.2 microdeletions with ID, congenital glaucoma, caudal appendix, camptodactyly obesity and macrocephaly. This combination explains her andcraniofacialfeaturessuggestiveofFHTS.Thepatient phenotypic traits except short stature, possibly caused by also had ventricular septal defect, dorsolumbar scoliosis, 45,X/46,XX mosaicism. The most unexpected finding was and thin corpus callosum. Clinical evolution resulted in her monoclonal B-cell expansion, which may develop into buphtalmos worsening, coarsening of the facial features CLL.WhileMBLandclonalaberrationsarenotuncommon and respiratory failure with ventilatory dependence in the healthy population (reported in ~5% in her age leading to death at 5 months of age. Diagnosis of FTHS group), an incidental finding of MBL on SNP-array is very was confirmed by the identification of a deleterious rare, and clinical follow up is recommended. homozygous mutation in SH3PXD2B (c.969delG), S. Berland: None. C. Rabben: None. H. Eid: None. T. already described in the literature. This is the first H.A. Tvedt: None. L.F. Engebretsen: None. G. Houge: description of very severe phenotype with non- None. S. Johansson: None. R. Hovland: None. infectious and lethal respiratory impairment in FTHS, confirming the clinical heterogeneity of this rare condi- E-
P11 .21 tion. We were not able to determine a genotype- Description of a severe form of Frank-ter Haar phenotype correlation since very few patients are syndrome and literature review described in the literature. In addition, 2 out of the 3 patients carrying this mutation had a favorable clinical B. Durand1, C. Poulain2, C. Stoetzel2, E. Schaefer1,2, N. course.However,morecasesareneededinordertobetter Calmels3,N.Kempf3,C.DeMelo4,L.Donato5,D.Astruc5, characterize the phenotype and establish genotype- A. Sauer6, C. Speeg-Schatz6, M. Abi Warde7, D. phenotype correlation. Timbolschi1, H. Dollfus1,2, S. El Chehadeh1,2 B.Durand:None.C.Poulain:None.C.Stoetzel:None. E. Schaefer: None. N. Calmels: None. N. Kempf: None. 1Service de génétique médicale, Institut de génétique C.DeMelo:None.L.Donato:None.D.Astruc:None.A. médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), Hôpitaux Universitaires de Sauer: None. C. Speeg-Schatz: None. M. Abi Warde: Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, None. D. Timbolschi: None. H. Dollfus: None. S. El 2Laboratoire de génétique médicale U1112, Faculté de Chehadeh: None. médecine, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique, Hôpitaux Universi- E-
P11 .23 taires de Strasbourg, Hôpital civil, Strasbourg, France, The Clinical features of individuals of Hypotonia, 4Service de réanimation pédiatrique, Pôle médico-chirur- ataxia, and delayed development syndrome (HADDS) gical de pédiatrie, Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, with recurrent EBF3 mutations Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 5Médecine et réanimation du nouveau-né, Pôle médico-chirurgical de E. Nishi1, T. Uehara2, K. Kosaki2, N. Okamoto1 pédiatrie, Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, HôpitalAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1877 1Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Women’s exhibited minor craniofacial dysmorphism, muscular and Children’s Hospital, Osaka, Japan, 2Center for hypotonia and a delayed motor development. Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, In conventional chromosome analysis a deletion of the Tokyo, Japan long arm of chromosome 13 was suspected. Array CGH analysis uncovered an interstitial 16.3 Mb deletion of Hypotonia, ataxia, and delayed development syndrome 13q21.33-q31.1 encompassing 29 genes, including the (HADDS) is a neurodevelopmental syndrome caused by endothelin-B receptor-gene EDNRB. The deletion was heterozygous mutation in the EBF3 gene (MIM; 607407) confirmed in the child and excluded in both parents on chromosome 10q26. The EBF3 gene encodes one of a by FISH. family ofhighlyhomologous transcription factors. EBF3 is HSCR may occur isolated or with associated features itself a downstream transcriptional target of ARX (MIM; (syndromic). About 12% of HSCR are due to chromoso- 300382), and thought to be transcriptionally repressed by mal abnormalities, mainly trisomy 21. In a few cases, ARX [Chao et al., 2017]. HADDS is characterized by deletions have been described (2q, 4p, 10q, 13q, 17q). congenital hypotonia, delayed psychomotor development, Additionally, mutations in a number of genes have been variable intellectual disability with speech delay, variable found in association with HSCR. dysmorphicfacialfeatures,andataxia,oftenassociatedwith Upto7%ofpatientswithisolatedHirschsprungdisease cerebellar hypoplasia [Sleven et al., 2017]. Some patients have EDNRB mutations. Moreover, mutations in the have urogenital abnormalities. We reported the clinical functionally related genes EDN3 and EC
E1  are known detailsoftwoindividualswithHADDScausedbyrecurrent causes of HSCR. The pathway is involved in migration mutations in EBF3. Individual 1 is a 5 years old Japanese and differentiation of neural crest derivatives. Interest- girl with nonconsanguineous parents. She showed hypoto- ingly, biallelic or monoallelic mutations in EDNRB may nia, developmental delay, microcephaly, cerebellar hypo- also cause a subtype of Waardenburg syndrome, which is plasia, strabismus, neurogenic bladder, and vesicoureteral clinically characterized by additional pigmentary changes reflux.Weidentifiedadenovomissensemutation,c.471C> and sensorineural deafness. A: p. (His157Gln) by trio whole exome sequence. The Our case illustrates the particular importance of integrat- mutation located at the highly conserved DNA binding ing array CGH analysis in the diagnostic procedures in domain. Individual 2 is a 2 years old girl with nonconsan- HSCR, especially in children with additional findings like guineous parents. She also showed hypotonia, develop- developmental delay. mental delay, microcephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, C.B. Mueller-Hofstede: None. U. Siebers-Renelt: strabismus, neurogenic bladder, vesicoureteral reflux, and None. P. Wieacker: None. A. Röpke: None. clubfoot. We identified a recurrent missense mutation, c.625C>T:p.(Arg209Trp)bySangersequence.Ourreport E-
P11 .25 further supports the notion that EBF3 mutations cause Expanding the phenotype of cerebellar-facial-dental phenotype of cerebellar hypoplasia and urogenital abnorm- syndrome: two siblings with novel homozygous muta- alities in patients with HADDS. tion in BRF1 E. Nishi: None. T.Uehara:None.K.Kosaki: None.N. Okamoto: None. M.Codina,I.Valenzuela,I.Paramonov,M.Benjumea,S. Siso, E. Garcia-Arumi, E. Tizzano, I. Cusco E-
P11 .24 Hirschsprung disease caused by a de novo interstitial Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain deletion of 13q21.33-q31.1 Introduction: In 2015, Borck et al. identified a novel C. B. Mueller-Hofstede, U. Siebers-Renelt, P. Wieacker, syndrome caused by bialellic mutations in the BRF1 gene. A. Röpke Clinical characteristics of patients reported to date include: intellectual disability, microcephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany dysmorphic features (sparse eyebrows, wave-shaped pal- pebral fissures, low-set ears, malocclusion and prominent We report on a ten months old girl presented with upper incisors) and short stature. suspected mosaic trisomy 21. Birth-weight, length and MaterialandMethods:Herewereporttwosiblingsofa head circumference were in the normal range. On day 2, consanguineous family with congenital microcephaly, she showed severe agitation, vomiting and failure to pass growth retardation and prenatal cardiopathy. Severe global meconium. Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) was suspected developmental delay was soon detected after birth. Brain and proven by rectum biopsy. Furthermore the girl MRI detected microcephaly with gyral simplification and1878 Mondinidysplasia. Both siblings also presentedhorse-shoe Provean) and was already described as developmental kidneyandneurosensorialhypoacusis.Molecularkaryotype disorder causing (McRae,J.F. et al., Nature 542, 433–438 ofbothsiblingswasnormal.Exomesequencingwasusedas (2017)). a diagnostic tool for the older sibling and Sanger KCNQ3 is widely expressed in the brain and encodes a sequencing for familial segregation. subunit of a voltage-gated potassium channel, which Results: Exome sequencing identified a homozygous regulates neuronal excitability. KCNQ3-related disorders missense variant (p.Trp103Cys) in BRF1. Sanger sequen- include intellectual disability with or without seizures and/ cing detected the same variant in homozygous state also in or cortical visual impairment, benign familial neonatal/ the affected brother. Each variant was inherited from both infantile epilepsy. Recently, additional phenotypes, includ- healthy parents and a healthy sister was also carrier of one ingepilepticencephalopathyanddevelopmentaldelayhave variant. No other candidate variants have been found. been described in few patients showing other missense Conclusions:Weidentifiedanovelmissensemutationin mutations in KCNQ3 (Fusco et al., EJPN 19.1, 102-103 BRF1intwosiblingswithphenotypicfeaturesofcerebellar- (2015)). facial-dental syndrome. Growth, developmental delay, Sincelittleclinicalinformationontheaffectedindividuals microcephaly and dysmorphic features are consistent with is available, the clinical presentation of patients carrying patients reported to date. We expand the phenotype of KCNQ3 pathogenetic variants remains to be fully defined. BRF1 patients by adding Mondini dysplasia, hypoacusis Our report expands of the clinical spectrum related to and also kidney malformation. KCNQ3 mutations, including mild DD, Dandy-Walker M.Codina:None.I.Valenzuela: None.I. Paramonov: anomaly and epileptic anomalies. None. M. Benjumea: None. S. Siso: None. E. Garcia- J. Costanza: None. E. Corsetti: None. G. Moresco: Arumi: None. E. Tizzano: None. I. Cusco: None. None. M.F. Bedeschi: None. V. Fergnani: None. B. Beltrami: None. C. Santaniello: None. P. Colapietro: E-
P11 .28 None. S. Tabano: None. M. Miozzo: None. A de novo mutation in KCNQ3 gene associated with developmental delay and Dandy-Walker anomaly E-
P11 .29 Kleefstra syndrome: a case report of a rare genetic J. Costanza1, E. Corsetti2, G. Moresco2, M. F. Bedeschi3, disorder with an uncommon presentation V. Fergnani3, B. Beltrami3, C. Santaniello1, P. Colapie- tro2, S. Tabano2, M. Miozzo2,1 R. Gomes, C. Correia, A. Freitas, A. Almeida, L. Morais, C. Reis, C. Mota 1UOS Research Laboratories, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, Centro Materno Infantil do Norte, Porto, Portugal 2Medical Genetics, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Introduction: Kleefstra syndrome (Ks) is characterized by Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia and Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy distinctive facial features. A complex spectrum of other findings can be observed including cardiovascular and We describe the case of a 23 years old girl, born from genitourinary anomalies, severe respiratory infections and healthy, non-consanguineous parents, presenting with seizures. developmentaldelay(DD),borderlineintellectualdisability Case Report: A female neonate was born to a 40-year- (IQ tot 76, evaluated at 12 years of age by WISC-R), old mother at 37 6/7 weeks gestation with somatometry Dandy-Walkeranomaly,epilepticseizuresduringsleep,and within the normal range. On physical examination, facial other minor signs. Karyotype, Fragile X and array-CGH dysmorphic features were noted (arched eyebrows, investigations were negative. upslanted palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, short nose, Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) was performed on anteverted nares, thin vermilion of the upper lip with patient, her parents and her healthy brother, using the Sure cupid’s bow, protruding tongue and macroglossia) in Select QXT Whole Exome kit (Agilent Technologies) on addition to discrete axial hypotonia and III/VI systolic NextSeq 550 instrument (Illumina). ejectionmurmur.Shehadfeedingdifficultiesandpresented The analysis revealed the presence of the de novo c.680 with multiple self-limited episodes of hyporeactivity, G>AmissensevariantintheKCNQ3gene,leadingtothep. perioral cyanosis and desaturation during meals (minimum R227Q aminoacid substitution in the transmembrane SpO2levelof70%).Nochoking,cough,stridor,respiratory domain. This variant is classified as damaging by several difficulty signs or hyperhidrosis were present. Septic in silico prediction tools (such as Mutation Taster, Sift, screening and transfontanellar ultrasound were normal.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1879 Cerebral MRI showed a thin corpus callosum with short pregnancy, leading to interruption. Ultra-sound scan anteroposteriorlength.Echocardiogramshowedadysplastic identifiedIUGR andcleft lip andpalate.Pathologyshowed pulmonaryvalveandaninterauricularseptaldefect.Indirect contracture ofjointsand extremities, cerebral abnormalities signs of gastroesophageal reflux were evident on nasolar- withhypopolasticbrain stemand cerebellum. Whole-exome ingofibroscopy and respective treatment was initiated in sequencing (WES) trio was launched and identified KLH
L7  association with speech therapy. Array-CGH identified a compositeheterozygousvariantsc.1124A>G;p.(His375Arg) 754.07 Kb deletion at 9q34.3 comprising the EHMT1 gene andc.907C>T;p.(Arg303*).Bothcasesconfirmthepossible associated to Ks (OMIM #610253). overlap of BOPS and CS/CIS
S1  features in patient with Conclusions: The first signs of Ks patients can be biallelicvariantsinKLH
L7 .Thereportimprovesdelineation incrediblydiversemakingthediagnosischallenging.Inthis of PERCHING with the description of prenatal and fetal case, the early diagnosis allowed prompt evaluation by a features of the condition. multidisciplinary team including paediatricians and geneti- A. Chaillou: None. C. Vincent-Delorme: None. C. cists. Early referral to speech, physical and occupational Thuillier: None. P. Brunelle: None. S. Manouvrier: therapyisalsoanessentialpartofongoingpaediatriccareof None. J. Ghoumid: None. T. Smol: None. these children. R. Gomes: None. C. Correia: None. A. Freitas: None. E-
P11 .31 A. Almeida: None. L. Morais: None. C. Reis: None. C. Uterine and ovarian agenesis in a girl with Mota: None. LIG4 syndrome E-
P11 .30 J. COURSIMAULT1, A. GOLDENBERG1, G. VERA1, T. KLH
L7  variants causing PERCHING: one additional FREBOURG1, C. HOUDAYER1, V. MICHE
L2 , N. family and delineation of the fetal phenotype BUCHBINDER2, A. MARIE-CARDIN
