P5 , and CYFI
P1  genes. It is a multisystemic disease affecting mostly the nervous 
P01  Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics system (intellectual deﬁcits, delayed psychomotor devel- opment, ataxia, epilepsy, behavioral problems, etc.), fol- 
P01 .001.A lowed by congenital heart defects and various Prenataldiagnosticsof15q11.2microdeletionsyndrome- dysmorphisms. This microdeletion was found in 0.57- the possibilities and challenges 1.27%ofpediatricpatientstargetedformicroarrayanalysis, mainly with developmental delay and intellectual deﬁcits. K. Belemezova1,2, P. Chaveeva1, V. Stratieva3,4, M. However, not all of the deletion carriers have a clinical Yankova3,5, V. Peycheva6, R. Bozhilova6, M. Rizov1, S. manifestation - it is found in 0.25% of the population of Yovinska1, M. Hristova-Savova1, R. Kaneva6, I. Dimova1,6 healthycontrols.Thepenetranceof15q11.2microdelection syndrome is estimated at 10.4%, which is signiﬁcantly 1SAGBAL „Dr Shterev“, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2University higher in de novo occurrence. We report 4 cases of pre- Hospital “St. Ivan Rilski”, Department of Immunology, natally established 15q11.2 microdeletion, in3 of thecases Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3O.S.С.A.R. the microdeletion was inherited from clinically healthy Clinic, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4First Specialized Hospital of mothers.TheindicationsforaCGHprenataldiagnosiswere: Obstetrics and Gynecology „St. Soﬁa”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 1) ultrasound data for unilateral cleft lip and palate in 5UniversityHospital"Lozenetz",Soﬁa,Bulgaria,6Centerof combination with an increased nuchal translucency of 3.3 Molecular medicine, Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, mm- mother was the carrier; 2) second pregnancy after the Bulgaria ﬁrst case; 3) increased risk from the biochemical screening (1:6) and tricuspid regurgitation, brother with neu- Microdeletion in 15q11.2 has been described as a distinct ropsychiatric disability - mother was a carrier; 4) Increased syndromeencompassinganareabetweentwofragilesitesin NT of 7.3 mm. Our results highlight the importance of 15q (B
P1  and B
P2 ), with approximately 500 bp size, microarray analysis in the diagnostic reﬁnement of142 J.delPicchia pregnancieswhichareabnormalinearlyfetalscreening.We difﬁcult. Among genetic etiologies, only chromosomal emphasize the difﬁculties of genetic counseling in the anomalies are investigated during the prenatal period while inheritance and the incomplete penetrance of the ACC is due to single gene mutation in most cases and aberrations. neurodevelopmental prognosis depends on the K. Belemezova: None. P. Chaveeva: None. V. Stra- underlying cause. tieva: None. M. Yankova: None. V. Peycheva: None. R. Methods: In order to evaluate the feasibility and Bozhilova:None.M.Rizov:None.S.Yovinska:None.M. contribution of prenatal exome sequencing (pES) during Hristova-Savova: None. R. Kaneva: None. I. the pregnancy, we included 66 fetuses with ACC for trio Dimova: None. analysis. Only pathogenic variants in known ACC and/or ID genes were considered. 
P01 .002.B Results:pESresultswereavailablewithinamediandelay Improvementofprenatalcareincaseoffetalanomalyof of 22 days. A pathogenic SNV was identiﬁed in 12 cases the corpus callosum using exome sequencing during the (18%). Moreover, a pathogenic CNV was identiﬁed in 4 pregnancy cases. Thus, the genetic cause was determined in 22% of cases. In all cases with diagnoses, pES results enlightened S. Heide1, M. Spentchian1, S. Valence2, J. Buratti3, C. the neurodevelopmental prognosis of the fetus and enabled Mach3,E.Lejeune3,V.Olin3,M.Massimello1,C.Garel4,E. the parents to choose to continue with or terminate the Blondiaux4, G. Quenum-Miraillet5, S. Chantot-Bastaraud5, pregnancy knowingly. M. Milh6, V. des Portes7, M. Spodenkiewic8, V. Layet9, R. Conclusions:ThisistheﬁrststudyofpESfocusing ona Dard10,S.Moutton11,M.Gorce12,M.Nizon13,S.Mercier13, single malformation characterized by an uncertain prog- M.Vincent13,C.Beneteau13,J.Jouannic14,M.Moutard2,B. nosis. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of pES in Keren3, D. Héron3 fetuseswithprenataldiagnosisofACC.pEShasanevident clinical impact. The impact of pES when negative remains 1UF de Génétique Médicale et CRMR « Déﬁcience to be evaluated intellectuelle », Département de Génétique, Groupe Hospi- S. Heide: None. M. Spentchian: None. S. Valence: talier Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP Sorbonne Université, Paris, None. J. Buratti: None. C. Mach: None. E. Lejeune: France, 2Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital None. V. Olin: None. M. Massimello: None. C. Garel: Armand Trousseau, APHP Sorbonne Université, Paris, None. E. Blondiaux: None. G. Quenum-Miraillet: None. France, 3UF de Génomique du Développement, Départe- S. Chantot-Bastaraud: None. M. Milh: None. V. des ment de Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Portes: None. M. Spodenkiewic: None. V. Layet: None. APHP Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, 4Service de R. Dard: None. S. Moutton: None. M. Gorce: None. M. RadiologiePédiatrique,HôpitalArmandTrousseau,APHP Nizon: None. S. Mercier: None. M. Vincent: None. C. Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, 5Service de Cytogéné- Beneteau: None. J. Jouannic: None. M. Moutard: None. tique,HôpitalArmandTrousseau,HUEP,APHPSorbonne B. Keren: None. D. Héron: None. Université, Paris, France, 6Service de Neurologie Pédia- trique, Hôpital La Timone, APHM, Marseille, France, 
P01 .003.C 7Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hospices Civils de Genetic management of a small deletion in the PWS/AS Lyon, Bron, France, 8Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU imprinting center in a prenatal case de Reims, Reims, France, 9Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital du Havre, Le Havre, France, 10Service de C.Pérez1,E.Pestaña2,C.Rivera2,M.Augé1,L.Barranco1, Génétique Clinique, Hôpital de Poissy, Poissy, France, A. Canellas1, M. Costa1, C. de la Iglesia1, D. Fernández1, 11Centre de Référence des anomalies du développement, N. Palau1, B. Méndez1, M. Piqué1, M. Herrero1, D. Yeste1, Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, L.Puig1,R.Ferreti1,M.Punzón1,S.Martín1,J.Mendoza1, France, 12Service de génétique clinique, CHU d’Angers, N. Pinedo1, M. Rodríguez1, L. Linares1, E. Lloveras1 Angers, France, 13Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 14Service de Médecine Fœtale, 1Synlab, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 2Synlab, Madrid, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, HUEP, APHP Sorbonne Spain Université, Paris, France Introduction: Imprinted genes involved in PWS and AS Purpose: Anomalies of the corpus callosum (ACC) are are under control of an imprinting center comprising two usually diagnosed by prenatal ultrasound. This malforma- regulatory regions, PWS-SRO (around the SNRPN pro- tion is characterized by its uncertain prognosis especially moter) and the AS-SRO (35 kb upstream). A very few AS when isolated which makes the prenatal counseling patients have small and/or atypical deletions in AS-SRO.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 143 Patient and Results: Pregnant patient (13 weeks) was and economists with research themes including fertility referredbecauseadaughterof4yearsoldwithdevelopment problems and intergenerational transmission of health. delayandpeculiarphenotypeanda62Kbcopynumberloss The START project aims to understand the causes and at15q11.2,arr[GRCh37]15q11.2(25119854_25177138)x1. health consequences of subfertility and how genetic inﬂu- In extended familial studies, mother (pregnant) and grand- ences and epigenetic differences are associated with sub- father have both the same deletion. MS-MLPA was fertility and Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART). performed in the daughter and the pregnant. The 15q11.2 ARTmayintroduceepigeneticchangesintheembryosince deletion was conﬁrmed in both and an altered methylation the procedures are during a period of extensive epigenetic patterninthedaughterwasdetectedcorrelatingwithanAS repatterning. It is unknown which genes may be affected diagnosis. ArrayCGH analysis (CytoSure™ Constitutional and the potential health consequences for the children. v3 8x60k, OGT, UK) was performed in chorionic villus START uses data from the Norwegian Mother, Father and sampleandthesamedeletionof62KbinvolvingU5exonof Child Cohort Study (MoBa; https://www.fhi.no/en/studies/ AS-SRO(exon4accordingNMsequenceofSNRPNgene) moba/),whichfollowsmorethan110000childrenandtheir was detected. MS-MLPA (PW/AS MS-MLPA Kit, MRC parents.Wehavecollectedgeneticandepigeneticdatafrom Holland)wasperformedinamnioticﬂuidwithalterationof 1000 trios with children born after ART, and 1000 trios the methylation pattern, compatible with hypomethylation from naturally conceived children analyzed with the Illu- of the probes located in the CpG islands region of SNRPN mina EPIC array and theIllumina HumanCoreExome chip. gene was detected. Considering all the results, a prenatal Investigations are focussed on the effect of ART treatment diagnosis of AS was performed. on imprinted genes and fertility genes, and how epigenetic Comments: IC deletion have been described in a small age acceleration interacts with fertility and ART treatment. fraction of AS patients with ID, with no disease-causing Our results show DNA methylation changes due to both variantsdetectedtodate.DeletionsinvolvingAS-SROarea parental subfertility and ART procedures. molecular defect that must be determined as the recurrence R. Lyle: None. C. Page: None. Y. Lee: None. K.L. risk in case of a familial IC deletion. Caution should be Haftorn:None.A.Jugessur:None.J.Bohlin:None.H.K. made in prenatal diagnosis and is appropriate recommend- Gjessing: None. P. Magnus: None. S. Håberg: None. ing MS-MLPA analysis. C.Pérez:None.E.Pestaña:None.C.Rivera:None.M. 
P01 .006.C Augé: None. L. Barranco: None. A. Canellas: None. M. BeckwithWiedemannSyndrome:aprenatalcasereport Costa:None.C.delaIglesia:None.D.Fernández:None. with a novel CDKN1C mutation N. Palau: None. B. Méndez: None. M. Piqué: None. M. Herrero: None. D. Yeste: None. L. Puig: None. R. P. Maia Almeida1,2, S. Moreira Ribeiro1, L. Abreu3, A. Ferreti: None. M. Punzón: None. S. Martín: None. J. Isabel Rei3, M. Branco3, E. Galhano3, J. Saraiva1,4,5, F. Mendoza: None. N. Pinedo: None. M. Rodríguez: None. Ramos1,3 L. Linares: None. E. Lloveras: None. 1Medical Genetics Unit, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário 
P01 .005.B de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Faculty of Health START: Thestudy of assistedreproductive technologies Sciences, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal, 3Prenatal Diagnostic Center, Maternidade Bissaya Bar- R.Lyle1,C.Page2,Y.Lee2,K.L.Haftorn2,A.Jugessur2,J. reto, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Bohlin2, H. K. Gjessing2, P. Magnus2, S. Håberg2 Coimbra, Portugal, 4University Clinic of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Norwegian Portugal,5ClinicalAcademicCenterofCoimbra,Coimbra, Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway Portugal In the last few decades there have been marked changes in Introduction:BeckwithWiedemannSyndrome(BWS)isa patterns of fertility and family structure in rich countries. genomicimprintingdisordertypicallydiagnosedafterbirth. These include increasing age at childbirth, a lower number Some ultrasound features that include polyhydramnios, of children born to each woman or man, greater use of omphalocele, and visceromegaly may raise the clinical assisted reproductive technology (ART), higher frequency suspicion in prenatal. Most reported BWS cases are of family disruptions and increasingly complex family sporadic, but around 15% may be familial. Delineation of structures. The Centre for Fertility and Health (CeFH; the molecular defects can predict familial recurrence risks www.cefh.no) consists of a multidisciplinary research team and make invasive prenatal diagnosis possible. of epidemiologists, geneticists, demographers, sociologists144 J.delPicchia CaseReport:Wereportacaseofa41-year-oldpregnant gestational age (n = 44, 1.13 ± 0.61 MoM, p < 0.001), woman in whom ultrasound revealed at 24-weeks corpus and αFP (1.52 ± 0.80 MoM, p = 0.003), uEstriol callosumhypoplasia,macroglossia,omphalocele,shortlong (1.41 ± 0.37 MoM, p < 0.001) and total hCG (2.10 ± 2.17 bonesandenlargedkidneys.Thepregnancywasterminated MoM,p<0.001)at15-18weeks(n=27).MorphologyUS and autopsy conﬁrmed the ultrasound ﬁndings and also scan (available in 64) revealed abdominal and head enlarged ovaries and pancreas, cytomegaly of the adrenal circumferences higher than normal (1.41 ± 1.10 SD, cortex and a placental mesenchymal dysplasia. Family p < 0.001 and 0.44 ± 1.04, p = 0.003, respectively) with history was irrelevant. normal femur lengths. Fifty-eight patients (66%) had a Materials and Methods: Clinical and molecular char- various combination of pathologic US ﬁndings, including acterization of a prenatal case with diagnosis of BWS. We enlarged abdominal circumference at 20 weeks’ scan performed array-CGH, methylation analysis at 11p15.5 (n = 17), macrosomia at a subsequent scan (n = 35, of BWS locus and Sanger sequencing of CDKN1C gene. The these 14 normal at 20 weeks’ scan), omphalocele (n = 12), presenceofthevariantidentiﬁedinthefoetuswastestedin enlargement of abdominal organs (n = 6), macroglossia the parents. (n = 15), adrenal cysts/masses (n = 2), nephroureteral Results: Array-CGH and 11p15.5 methylation analysis anomalies (n = 11), polyhydramnios (n = 24), placental (MS-MLPA) were normal. CDKN1C Sanger sequencing enlargement (n = 2) or mesenchymal dysplasia (n = 4). foundaheterozygousnovelprobablepathogenicframeshift Thirty cases had no detected anomaly at any US. variant: NM_000076.2:c.479del p.(Pro160Argfs*112) of Conclusions:onthebasisoftheseﬁndings,weproposea maternal origin. new embryo-fetal BWSp scoring system, mirroring the Conclusions: This case demonstrates that search for a post-natal one, that will implement the prenatal clinical clearspeciﬁcmoleculardiagnosisiskeynotonlytoconﬁrm approach of this developmental syndrome. thediagnosisbutalsotoprovidepropergeneticcounselling. D. Carli: None. C. Bertola: None. S. Cardaropoli: Althoughpresentinonly5%ofthepatients withnofamily None. V.P. Ciuffreda: None. M. Pieretto: None. G.B. history the identiﬁcation of a CDKN1C pathogenic variant Ferrero: None. A. Mussa: None. of maternal origin increases the recurrence risk to 50%. P. Maia Almeida: None. S. Moreira Ribeiro: None. L. 
P01 .008.B Abreu: None. A. Isabel Rei: None. M. Branco: None. E. Prenatal diagnosis of a severe form of BICD2-opathy : Galhano: None. J. Saraiva: None. F. Ramos: None. further evidence of an extreme phenotypic spectrum 
P01 .007.A E. Marchionni1, E. Agolini2, G. Mastromoro1, D. Prenatal phenotype in Beckwith-Wiedemann spectrum Guadagnolo1,F.DiPalma1,C.Pajno3,V.D’Ambrosio3,M. Roggini4, A. Giancotti3, A. Novelli2, A. Pizzuti1 D. Carli, C. Bertola, S. Cardaropoli, V. P. Ciuffreda, M. Pieretto, G. B. Ferrero, A. Mussa 1Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza Univer- sityofRome,Rome,Italy,2LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics, Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 3Depart- Torino, Torino, Italy ment of Maternal and Child Health and Urologic Science, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 4Pediatrics and Introduction: the prenatal phenotype of Beckwith- Child Neuropsychiatry Department, Sapienza University of Wiedemann spectrum (BWSp) is not well characterized. Rome, Rome, Italy Here we investigate the prenatal features of large series of BWSp patients. Introduction: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) Methods: postnatal phenotype, genotype, prenatal ultra- is characterized by the development of multiple joint con- sound (US) features, pregnancy course and biochemical tractures. Neurogenic and myogenic-types have been screeningtestsof88patientswithBWSp(51females)were described, resulting in complete or partial movement reviewed. restriction. In prenatal diagnosis decreased fetal movement Results: molecular tests had been performed in 86 is observed, the most severe forms being lethal in utero or patients, 80 resulted positives for BWSp-related anomalies, afterbirth.Wereportacaseofamalefetusat22gestational 6negativewithaclinicaldiagnosis.Seventeen(19.3%)were weeks with evidence of AMC on ultrasound, presenting conceived through artiﬁcial reproductive techniques. Twin- ﬁxed extended legs and ﬂexed arms, bilateral clubfoot and ning occurred in 9 pregnancies and resulted in 13 BWSp absentfetalmovements.Frontaloedemawasalsoobserved. newborns. Pregnancy biochemical screening tests showed After amniocentesis, karyotype and SNParray resulted increased serum markers: PAPP-A at 10-13 weeks of normal.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 145 Materials and Methods: Trio-based Whole Exome intron-exon boundaries, associated with 229 autosomal Sequencing (WES) was performed on fetus genomic DNA recessive and X-linked conditions. The sensitivity and and his unaffected parents. speciﬁcity for single nucleotide variant (SNV), indel and Results:WESanalysisdisclosedadenovoheterozygous copy number variant (CNV) detection was ascertained in a pathogenic deletion (NM_015250.3: c.1636_1638delAAT; blind validation study. p. Asn546del) in BICD2 gene, associated with autosomal Results: SNVs and indels were detected at high dominant spinal muscular atrophy, lower extremity- sensitivity (>99.0%) and speciﬁcity (>99.9%). The algo- predominant 2 (SMALED2). The couple decided to rithmwasalsodesignedtodetectCNVstoasingleorafew terminate the pregnancy. Babygram showed bilateral genu exons with high sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Each positive recurvatum, bilateral clubfoot and clubhand and multiple call was conﬁrmed with an orthogonal method. joints contractures. Conclusions: We have developed and validated an Conclusions: BICD2 mutations are associated with expanded pan-ethnic carrier screening test which includes severe prenatal-onset forms of spinal muscular atrophy, 229 autosomal recessive and X-linked conditions. The test lower extremity-predominant 2B (SMALED2B) or milder provides individuals and prospective parents with clinical forms with childhood-onset (SMALED2A). In literature information, helping them understand and evaluate their few prenatal cases are reported, mostly with early lethal reproductive options. outcome.Thesamevariantwaspreviouslydescribedintwo S. Kyriakou: A. Employment (full or part-time); children with a severe postnatal phenotype but belated or Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. A. Achilleos: A. Employment milder prenatal signs. This observation expands BICD2 (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. M. Geor- phenotypic spectrum, with further evidence of early-onset giadou: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; extreme prenatal forms. To date, the localization of the NIPD Genetics. C. Loizides: A. Employment (full or part- disease-causing mutations does not seem to correlate with time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. M. Nicoalou: A. disease severity, other molecular mechanisms should be Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. investigated to elucidate genotype-phenotype correlations. V. Soteriou: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- E. Marchionni: None. E. Agolini: None. G. Mastro- cant;NIPDGenetics.C.Kkoufou:A.Employment(fullor moro: None. D. Guadagnolo: None. F. Di Palma: None. part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. L. Constantinou: C. Pajno: None. V. D’Ambrosio: None. M. Roggini: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD None. A. Giancotti: None. A. Novelli: None. A. Genetics. G. Billioud: A. Employment (full or part-time); Pizzuti: None. Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics.K.Tsangaras:A.Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. E. Kypri: 
P01 .010.A A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Development and validation of an expanded pan-ethnic Genetics. M. Ioannides: A. Employment (full or part- carrier screening test time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. G. Koumbaris: A. Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. S. Kyriakou, A. Achilleos, M. Georgiadou, C. Loizides, M. P.C. Patsalis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Nicoalou, V. Soteriou, C. Kkoufou, L. Constantinou, G. niﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. Billioud, K. Tsangaras, E. Kypri, M. Ioannides, G. Koumbaris, P. C. Patsalis 
P01 .014.B CGH-array as ﬁrst-tier test in all undergoing invasive NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus prenatal samples: an experience for a reference Centre. Introduction:Carrierscreeningincreasinglybecomesmore M. A. Mori1, J. Nevado1, E. Mansilla1, F. A. Garcia- prevalent as prospective parents become more aware that Santiago1, E. Antolín2, C. Peña1, C. Adam1, P. D. the cumulative risk of having an affected child with an Lapunzina1 autosomalorX-linkedconditioncanbehigherthanthatfor common aneuploidies. The changing admixture of popula- 1INGEMM-IdiPaz,Madrid,Spain,2SºFisiopatologíaFetal, tions, and the increase in gamete donation in assisted HULP, Madrid, Spain reproductive technologies have led professional organiza- tions and professional bodies to recommend expanded Introduction: In the last years microarrays (CMA) has carrier screening to the general population. demonstrated to be a signiﬁcant tool useful in the prenatal Materials and Methods: The test was developed using area, mainly in fetuses with sonography anomalies. How- targeted in-solution hybridization enrichment followed by ever, using array-CGH in an invasive prenatal context is next generation sequencing covering all gene exons, and still under a signiﬁcant and controversial debate especially146 J.delPicchia regarding the use of CMA in advance maternal age or amniocytesintwoﬂasks.Then,karyotypigwasdoneonthe maternal anxiety samples. Previous studies supported the basis of G-Banding for the parents. evidence on the feasibility of introducing a-CGH as a ﬁrst- Result: In this study, we described a paternal chromo- line diagnostic testing routine prenatal diagnosis practice somal aberration of twins. Through a combination of (1). Indeed, others and our laboratory have reported sig- cytogeneticassessmentoffetusandparents46,XY,der(9) niﬁcant diagnostic yields also in low-risk pregnancies, t(2;9) (p23;p22)pat was shown. Mother’s karyotype was between 1.6-4% (2,3). 46XX but father’s karyotype revealed an abnormal Methods:WeusedcustomizedKaryoarray®v3.0platform chromosome complement in all cells with balanced 46, (4) to study consecutive invasive prenatal samples along XY,t(2;9)(p23;p22). two-year period. QF-PCR positive cases were excluded. Conclusions: Paternal chromosomal balanced transloca- Results:Weanalyzed800samplesandwefoundglobally tion can explain repeated abortions in this family. On the 6% of pathogenic CNVs and 2% of VUS. We segregated other hand, unbalanced chromosomal translocation result- low-risk pregnancy samples (positive biochemical screen- ingfrompaternalinheritanceleadtodevelopmentaldelayin ing, soft markers, maternal anxiety, and antenatal death his son. This study was highly emphasized the priority of without sonographic anomalies). Diagnostic yield in this genetic counseling and attention to the family history and group was 4.5% (17/379). genetic basis of parents in evolution of repeated sponta- Discussion: In conclusion, the use of the array-CGH in neous abortion. Legal abortion was recommended to the prenatal context demonstrated a greater diagnostic unbalance chromosomal abnormalities. capacity not only in fetuses with ultrasound abnormalities M. Kadkhoda zadeh: None. S. seyedhassani: None. F. but also in low-risk pregnancies. Therefore, we deﬁnitively harrazi zadeh yazdi: None. A. danafar: None. M. recommend the possibility of using the array-CGH in all mirjalili: None. F. saeb: None. those gestations that undergo invasive prenatal diagnosis, afterexcludingbyQF-PCRthemostcommonaneuploidies. 
P01 .017.B (1)KanAS.etal.,2014.PLoSOne.9(2):e87988.(2)Wapner Karyotype analysis of 8531 pregnancies in prenataly RJ.etal.,2012.NEnglJMed.367:2175-2184.(3)Armengol identiﬁedcaseswithamniocentesisfromsouthofTurkey L. et al. 2012. Hum Genet. 131:513-523. (4)Vallespin E. et al,. 2013. Am J Med Genet A.161A:1950-60. A.Pazarbasi1,D.Alptekin1,N.S.Ilgaz1,I.N.Uslu1,G.Ay1, M.A.Mori:None.J.Nevado:None.E.Mansilla:None. S. Kocaturk-Sel1, O. Demirhan1, U. Luleyap1, M. B. F.A. Garcia-Santiago: None. E. Antolín: None. C. Peña: Yilmaz1,N.Çetinel1,G.Evyapan1,G.Comertpay-Tufan1,S. None. C. Adam: None. P.D. Lapunzina: None. Buyukkurt2 
P01 .016.A 1Çukurova University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of DERIVATIVE(9)T(2;9)(
P23 ;
P22 ) IN HIGH RISK Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey, 2Çukurova University, TWIN PREGNANCY Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Adana, Turkey M. Kadkhoda zadeh, s. seyedhassani, f. harrazi zadeh yazdi, a. danafar, m. mirjalili, f. saeb Amniocentesis is a very crucial diagnostic procedure for preventingthebirthofgeneticallydefectivefetusesinorder yazdgenetic, yazd, Iran, Islamic Republic of to decrease the prevalence of genetic diseases in popula- tions.Aretrospectivereviewofouramniocentesisdatabase Introduction:A 39- year- old mother was referred with for the period from January 2000 to February 2020 was GA=16w+5dandhighriskpregnancyscreeningtestfor carriedout.Thekaryotypingof8531fetuseswascarriedout T 21. The ﬁrst child of this patient was a 14- years old in Department of Medical Biology from the samples of sufferingfromdevelopmentaldelayandmentalretardation. amniotic ﬂuids which were sent from Department of On the other hand, this family had two spontaneous abor- Gynecology and Obstetrics of Balcali Hospital. A standart tion. These evidences revealed enough reasons for prob- nomenclature has beendeveloped to describe each oftypes ability of chromosomal abnormalities such as Down of abnormality found in human chromosomes. A total of syndrome, monosomy X, and other chromosomal disorder 8531 amniocentesis specimens were processed during the in fetus. Amniocentesis was suggested for complementary studyperiod.620fetuses(7.26%)hadvariouschromosomal investigation. abnormalities. 54.51% of abnormal karyotypes (338 cases) Methods and materials: Twenty metaphases cells were were numerical and 43.38% (269 cases) were structural. studiedonthebasisofG-Bandingtechniquefromcultureof Both numerical and structural chromosomal aberrations were observed in 13 cases (2.09%). The ratios were as:Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 147 trisomy 21 (49.70%), trisomy 18 (17.75%), monosomy X above3mm.Inaddition,asseveraloftheCMAﬁndingsin (9.46%),trisomy13(6.80%),Triploidy(4.73%),Klinefelter thesepregnanciesarenotassociatedwithmajorsonographic Syndrome (3.25%), Trisomy X (1. 18%), XYY Syndrome anomalies,itseemsthatNIPSwithlatersonographicsurvey (0.88%), and the others in all numerical abnormalities. The cannot adequately replace NT measurement. frequent structural abnormalities were as: 46,XX/XY, inv L. Sagi-Dain: None. I. Maya: None. A. Singer: None. (9) (p11;q12)/(p11;q13)(28.25 %), 46,XX/XY, 1qh(+) (11.89%), 46,XY, Yqh(-)(7.43%), 46,XX/XY, 16qh(+) 
P01 .020.B (7.06%), 46,XX/XY, 9qh(+)(4.46%) and 46,XY, Yqh(+) Three fetuses with achondrogenesis type 2 explained by (4.08%).Balancedandunbalancedtranslocations,deletions maternal mosaicism andduplicationswerealsofoundinlessratio.Accordingto the literature and our results, advanced maternal age is the S. Z. Jan1, R. F. Suijkerbuijk1, Y. J. Vos1, P. M. main cause of fetal chromosomal abnormalities. Fetal Grootscholten1, L. Zijlstra1, K. Bouman1, M. T. M. chromosomal abnormality ratio that we found was 7.26%. Franssen2, M. H. Schoots3, N. Corsten-Janssen1, B. This ratio emphasize the importance of prenatal diagnosis. Sikkema-Raddatz1 A. Pazarbasi: None. D. Alptekin: None. N.S. Ilgaz: None. I.N. Uslu: None. G. Ay: None. S. Kocaturk-Sel: 1Univeristy Medical Center Groningen, Department of None. O. Demirhan: None. U. Luleyap: None. M.B. Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Univeristy Medical Yilmaz: None. N. Çetinel: None. G. Evyapan: None. G. Center Groningen, Department of Obstetrics, Groningen, Comertpay-Tufan: None. S. Buyukkurt: None. Netherlands, 3Univeristy Medical Center Groningen, DepartmentofPathologyandMedicalBiology,Groningen, 
P01 .018.C Netherlands Microarray testing in pregnancies with nuchal translu- cency 3-3.4 mm - time to change the cut-off. Background: Adding whole exome sequencing (WES) to thestandarddiagnosticprocedureinfetuseswithultrasound L. Sagi-Dain1, I. Maya2, A. Singer3 anomalies improves the diagnostic yield. Identifying a diagnosis is important for parental choice and informed 1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Rabin Medical reproductive decision making, amongst other factors. Here Center, Petach Tikva, Israel, 3Sheba Medical Center, we describe three fetuses in whom a diagnosis of achon- Ramat Gan, Israel drogenesis type 2 (CO
L2 A1 variant) due to maternal mosaicism was made using WES. Objective:Toexaminetheriskforchromosomalmicroarray Materials & Methods: A couple expecting dichorionic analysis (CMA) aberrations in fetuses with nuchal translu- diamniotictwins,bothwithseverelimbshorteningandfetal cency (NT) of 3 to 3.4 mm. Methods: The results of all hydrops, was referred to our department. A previous CMA tests performed due to an NT of 3 to 3.4 mm were pregnancy had been terminated for the same reasons. QF- retrospectively retrieved from the Ministry of Health com- PCR and SNP array were performed on DNA of chorionic puterized database. The rates of clinically signiﬁcant villi from both fetuses of the current pregnancy. WES was (pathogenic and likely pathogenic) microarray ﬁndings performed on parental DNA (extracted from blood) and were compared to a previously published local control fetal DNA. population, encompassing 5541 fetuses with normal ultra- Results: QF-PCR and SNP-array showed no abnormal- sound.Results:Overall,619CMAanalyseswereperformed ities for both fetuses. WES revealed a pathogenic, due to a sonographic indication of NT of 3 to 3.4 mm. Of apparently de novo, CO
L2 A1 variant c.3062_3079del p. these,29(4.7%)clinicallysigniﬁcantcopynumbervariants (Pro1021_Gly1026del) in both samples, which explained were detected, a considerably increased risk compared to the ultrasound abnormalities. Retrospective analysis con- control pregnancies. Fetal karyotyping would have missed ﬁrmed the presence of the same CO
L2 A1 variant in the 31% of the abnormal cases, while non-invasive prenatal previous pregnancy. Re-analysis of parental WES data screening (NIPS) would have overlooked 31-49% of the revealed the variant in less than 1% of maternal reads, anomalies, depending on the method. Conclusions: The implying an extremely low grade of mosaicism, which was outcomes of our study, representing the largest number of conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. CMAresultsinfetuseswithNTof3to3.4mm,suggestthat Conclusions: This case study highlights the added value the rate of abnormal CMA ﬁndings in these pregnancies is of WES in prenatal diagnostics, including the capacity to signiﬁcantly higher compared to pregnancies with normal identify extremely low-grade parental mosaicism that ultrasound.Ourresultssupporttheconsiderationtoperform profoundly impact the recurrence risk of a genetic disease. invasive prenatal testing for CMA in pregnancies with NT It also suggests that the possibility of very low-grade148 J.delPicchia parental mosaicism should be closely investigated when an Results: We found the ﬁrst trimester detection rate 94%, apparently de novo variant is identiﬁed. 100% and 100% for trisomies 21, 18 and 13, respectively, S.Z. Jan: None. R.F. Suijkerbuijk: None. Y.J. Vos: with false-positive rate of 3.1%. The diagnostic yield of None. P.M. Grootscholten: None. L. Zijlstra: None. K. CMA was overall 3.6% (1.7% in Group A and 6.0% in Bouman: None. M.T.M. Franssen: None. M.H. Schoots: GroupB).InNGSanalysisgroupwereportdiagnosticyield None. N. Corsten-Janssen: None. B. Sikkema- of17.9%.Combiningthesethreemethods,overalldetection Raddatz: None. rate of all genetic anomalies was 101 (0.7%). Conclusions: the use of CMA and NGS in high-risk 
P01 .021.C pregnancies after cFTS is justiﬁed and increase diagnostic Prenatal diagnostics in Estonia: a 2-year prospective yield.Funding:EstonianResearch CouncilgrantsPUT355, study assessing the performance of combined ﬁrst- PRG471, and PUTJD827. trimester screening, chromosomal microarray analysis, K. Ridnõi: None. K. Muru: None. M. Keernik: None. and next-generation sequencing S.Pajusalu:None.E.Ustav:None.P.Tammur:None.T. Mölter-Väär: None. T. Kahre: None. U. Šamarina: K. Ridnõi1,2, K. Muru1,3, M. Keernik1, S. Pajusalu1,3,4, E. None. K. Asser: None. F. Szirko: None. T. Reimand: Ustav5, P. Tammur1, T. Mölter-Väär1, T. Kahre1,3, U. None. K. Õunap: None. Šamarina1, K. Asser5, F. Szirko2, T. Reimand1,3,6, K. Õunap1,3 
P01 .023.B Higher incidence of congenital anomalies in children 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, born after assisted reproduction in the Czech Republic: Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Centre for Population based study Perinatal Care, Women’s Clinic, East-Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 3Department of Clinical Genet- A.Sipek Jr1,2,3,V.Gregor2,4,J.Klaschka5,6,M.Maly5,7,A. ics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Sipek Sr2,4,8 Tartu, Estonia, 4Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Genetics, New Haven, CT, United States, 1InstituteofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,FirstFacultyof 5Women’sClinic,TartuUniversityHospital,Tartu,Estonia, Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 6Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine 2Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer Hospital, and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Estonia Third Faculty of Medicicne, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Prona- Introduction: The implementation of cell-free fetal DNA tal Sanatorium, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Institute of (cff-DNA) testing in maternal blood opened possibilities to Computer Science of the Czech Academy of Sciences, improve performance of combined ﬁrst trimester screening Prague, Czech Republic, 6Institute of Biophysics and (cFTS). On the other hand, use of new molecular methods, Informatics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, suchaschromosomalmicroarrayanalysis(CMA)andnext- Prague, Czech Republic, 7National Institute of Public generation sequencing (NGS), have shown beneﬁts in Health,Prague,CzechRepublic,8GENNET,Prague,Czech diagnosis of chromosomal and genetic diseases, which are Republic notdetectablewithcff-DNAscreening,butrequireinvasive procedure. We prospectively evaluated performance of Introduction: The number of children conceived by cFTS in Estonia during 2 years using national guidelines assisted reproduction techniques (ART) is increasing in the with application of CMA and NGS in high-risk Czech Republic. The main goal of this study was to eval- pregnancies. uate the incidence of congenital anomalies in ART con- Materialandmethods:Weinvestigated14,566singleton ceived children. pregnancies (60% of all pregnancies). We selected 334 Methods:Theretrospectiveepidemiologicalanalysiswas high-risk pregnancies for CMA diagnostic performance performed using data from the National Registry of evaluation and 28 cases of highly dysmorphic fetuses for Congenital Anomalies and National Registry of Newborns, NGS analysis. CMA study group was divided into two run by the Institute of Health Information and Statistics of groupsbasedontheindicationsfortesting:groupApatients the Czech Republic. All diagnoses of congenital anomalies with high-risk for trisomies after cFTS, but normal (Q00-Q99) were included. We compared the incidences of ultrasound and group B patients who met criteria for congenital anomalies in naturally conceived children and CMA as a ﬁrst-tier diagnostic test. ARTconceivedchildrenbornintheCzechRepublicduringAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 149 5 years period (2013-2017). Statistical analysis was L. Torres-Juan1, M. Coll-Ferrer1, M. Prado-Farnos1, R. performed by Fisher’s exact test. Martorell-Riera1, E. Amengual-Cloquell1, A. Perez- Results: During the selected period there were 547 675 Granero1, A. Tubau2, M. Juan2, J. Rosell1, I. Martinez- children born in the Czech Republic (531 064 were Lopez1, D. Heine-Suñer1 naturally conceived children and 16 611 were ART conceivedchildren).Theincidenceofcongenitalanomalies 1Institute of Health Research of the Balearic Islands was3.90%innaturallyconceivedchildrengroupand4.35% (IDISBA) and Hospital Son Espases, Palma, Spain, 2Insti- in ART conceived children. This difference is statistically tute of Health Research of the Balearic Islands (IDISBA) signiﬁcant (p = 0.003). Analyzing different subgroups of and Hospital Son Llatzer, Palma, Spain congenital anomalies we have found a signiﬁcantly increased incidence of anomalies in two subgroups: Congenitalheartdefects(CHD)arethemostcommonform Congenital malformations of the circulatory system (Q20- of birth defects and affect 1% of newborns and an even Q28) and Congenital malformations of the respiratory higher percentage of unborn fetuses. CHDs are a frequent system (Q30-Q34). ﬁnding during routine ultrasound prenatal screening. Once Discussion:Theincreasedriskofcongenitalanomaliesin detected, it is important to determine their etiology. The ART conceived children was highlighted in many studies 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2 DS) is the most fre- however the results are often diverse. In our population- quentknowngeneticcauseofCHDs(1.9%prevalence).We based study, we conﬁrmed a signiﬁcantly higher general present a multiplex marker PCR kit to detect 22q11.2 incidence of congenital anomalies in ART conceived deletions and duplications which we prospectively used in children. 1630individualsand450fetalcaseswithacongenitalheart The study is supported by the RVO project: “Thomayer- defect referred by an obstetrician. Important features: 1) ova nemocnice - TN, 00064190”. Low cost (there are 2 mixes of 11 pairs of primers and 2 A. Sipek Jr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, conventional PCR reactions). 2) Fast, results can be given collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as within hours of receiving the sample (DNA extraction -> grants already received); Modest; Research grant provided PCR 1.5hours->automatic sequencer). 3)Safely rulesout byMinistryofHealthoftheCzechRepublic,RVOproject: sample contamination by maternal DNA. 4) Uses small “Thomayerova nemocnice TN, 00064190”. V. Gregor: B. amounts of DNA (10 ng) and can be performed starting Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or from amniotic ﬂuid or non-cultured chorion biopsy or any consultant and pending grants as well as grants already other tissue. 5) In prenatal samples, it would be com- received); Modest; Research grant provided by Ministry of plementary to the QF-PCR (negative samples for trisomy HealthoftheCzechRepublic,RVOproject:“Thomayerova 13, 18 or 21). 6) The parental origin of the deletion/dupli- nemocnice TN, 00064190”. J. Klaschka: B. Research cation is determined when the fetus is analyzed with the Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand parents.7)Detectsatypicalandtypicaldeletions,extending pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; the analysis far beyond that given by the FISH probe that ResearchgrantprovidedbyMinistryofHealthoftheCzech has been historically used (TUPL
E1 ). 8) We have devel- Republic, RVO project: “Thomayerova nemocnice TN, oped a panel of 31 additional markers, not included in the 00064190”. M. Maly: B. Research Grant (principal multiplex, to be used in case of lack of informativity. investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants L. Torres-Juan: None. M. Coll-Ferrer: None. aswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;Researchgrant M. Prado-Farnos: None. R. Martorell-Riera: None. provided by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, E. Amengual-Cloquell: None. A. Perez-Granero: None. RVO project: “Thomayerova nemocnice TN, 00064190”. A. Tubau: None. M. Juan: None. J. Rosell: None. A. Sipek Sr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, I. Martinez-Lopez: None. D. Heine-Suñer: None. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Research grant provided 
P01 .026.B byMinistryofHealthoftheCzechRepublic,RVOproject: The effects of the CFTR genotype on the reproductive “Thomayerova nemocnice TN, 00064190”. system in adult male patients with cystic ﬁbrosis 
P01 .024.C S. Repina1, S. Krasovskiy1,2, M. Shtaut1, G. Shmarina1, Alow-costmicrosatellitemarkermethodforquickandA T. Adyan1, V. Chernykh1 low-cost microsatellite marker method for quick and reliable prenatal 22q11.2DS screening and detection in 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian fetuses with suspected congenital heart defects Federation, 2Pulmonology Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation150 J.delPicchia Background: Commonly male patients with Cystic Fibro- suggesttheirabilitytopredictpregnancycomplications.We sis(CF)isinfertileduetoobstructiveazoospermia(OA),at sought to evaluate whether screening tests have value for thataninﬂuenceofCFTRgenotypeonreproductivesystem this purpose. is poor understood. Methods: Our cohort included all women who had ﬁrst Materials and methods: We examined 93 Russian male and/or second trimester screening from 2015-2018 and CF patients (17-45 y.o., mean - 24.9 ± 5.7 y.o.). Physical subsequentlydeliveredinourcenter.Datawascollectedon examination, scrotal ultrasonography, hormonal, biochem- demographics, medical history, biochemical screening and ical, and semen analysis were done. Standard and maternal-fetalpregnancyoutcomes.Logisticregressionwas biochemical semen examination were done according to performed to examine correlations between biochemical the WHO’s (2010) recommendations. The CFTR gene markers and pregnancy complications using SPSS version variants were analyzed using by AFPL, MLPA and DNA 25.0 (SPSS, Inc). sequencing (Sanger’s method and MPS). Results:Over3.5years,5400womenhadscreeningtests Results: CFTR mutations were detected in 100% CF and later delivered in our center. Decreased PAPP-A was alleles. Folowing genotypes were found: F508del/F508del associated with preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, IUGR (20.4%); F508del/3849+10kbC>T (15.1%); F508del/2789 and preterm delivery (PTD), OR=1.792, 1.364, 1.403 and +5G>A (4.3%); F508del/CFTRdele2.3 (4.3%); F508del/ 1.277,respectively,p<0.005.ElevatedAFPwasassociated 
E92 K (3.2%); F508del/
L138 ins (3.2%); F508del/3272- withPTD,maternalbloodadministration,IUGRandlow5- 16T>A (2.2%); F508del/W1282X (2.2%); others (45.3%). minute Apgar-score, OR=2.044, 1.95, 1.452 and 1.22, The spectrum of CFTR gene pathogenic variants and respectively,p<0.033.DecreasedHCGinsecondtrimester genotypes showed high frequency of “mild” pathogenic was correlated with IUGR, OR=1.346, p < 0.05. Elevated variants (25.8%) and genotypes (50.5%), as well as a HCG in second trimester was correlated with PTD and relatively high frequency of 3849+10kbС>T variant newbornNICU admission, OR=1.192, 1.285, respectively, (12.4%), which was identiﬁed in 8.2% patients with OA p<0.015.Inbothﬁrstandsecondtrimesters,elevatedHCG and 94.4% with no OA (p < 0.00001). Statistically was associated with preeclampsia, OR= 1.169, 1.309, signiﬁcant difference was found between patients with respectively, p < 0.05. Low estriol was correlated with F508del/3849+10kbC>T and F508del/F508del genotypes IUGR, OR=3.597, p < 0.001. After controlling for foraprevalenceofOA/seminalductsobstruction(14.3%vs confounders (age, ethnicity,IVF, parity, etc.) most associa- 100%,p<0.05)andtesticularhypoplasia(26.9%vs66.7%, tions remained signiﬁcant. p = 0.03). Discussion: Despite superiority of NIPS for Down Conclusions: CF dramatically affects reproductive Syndromescreening,biochemicalscreeningisstillvaluable organs, male fertility and semen parameters in CF patients, for prediction of pregnancy complications. Identifying at that 3849+10kbС>T mutation in the CFTR genotype is women with high-riskpregnancies hasclinicalimplications major genetic factor of male fertility. for prenatal care and risk-reducing management strategies. S. Repina: None. S. Krasovskiy: None. M. Shtaut: R. Michaelson-Cohen: None. A. Lahad: None. None. G. Shmarina: None. T. Adyan: None. V. Chernykh: None. 
P01 .034.A Use of prenatal exome sequencing in fetuses with 
P01 .029.B ultrasound anomalies First and second trimester biochemical screening: additional value in the era of NIPS M. Segura-Puimedon, B. Campos, J. Luna, C. Sintas, M. de Castro-Miró, H. Díez, S. B. Estruch, R. Garcia, R. Michaelson-Cohen1,2,3, A. Lahad3,4 L. Quintana, J. Rodríguez, L. Armengol 1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecol- Barcelona, Spain, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain ogy, Shaare Zedek Medcial Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Clalit Health Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) is an Services, Jerusalem, Israel established diagnostic tool in postnatal settings for indivi- duals with a suspected genetic condition. Recently, it is Background: Since implementation of NIPS, ﬁrst and increasinglyusedasadiagnostictoolinprenatalsettingsas second trimester biochemical tests may no longer be well. We present here ourexperienceusing thistechnology necessaryforDownSyndromescreening.However,studies in fetuses with ultrasound anomalies.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 151 MaterialandMethods:WESwasperformedin166fetal Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative sampleswithultrasoundanomalies.104sampleswerefrom Genomic Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics, Barcelona, evolutive pregnancies and 62 were from legal interruptions Spain. or stillbirths. In 61 samples, previous prenatal CGH-array was performed with negative result. Segregation studies 
P01 .035.B were performed in cases with a candidate variant when AnDDI-Prenatome:TheFrenchexomesequencingstudy possible. in prenatal diagnosis: causal diagnosis identiﬁed in Results: Common reasons for referral were skeletal nearly half of fetuses anomalies, polymalformated fetuses, cerebral anomalies or speciﬁc syndrome suspicion. Pathogenic or likely patho- F. Tran Mau Them1,2, A. Bruel1,2, A. Vitobello1,2, genic variants were identiﬁed in n = 42 (25%) of samples. S. Nambot3, S. Moutton3, A. Sorlin1,2,3, J. Delanne3, In n = 40 (24%) cases, variants of unknown signiﬁcance A. Ziegler4, E. Colin4, A. Guichet4, M. Legendre5, were identiﬁed, and in 13 of them inheritance was C. Colson6,7, C. Abel8, A. Putoux9, J. Amiel10,11, consistent with expected pattern, including a probable A. Lavillaureix12, C. Quelin12, A. Guerrot13, A. Brehin13, mosaicism case. In half of the cases (50,6%) no candidate L.Faivre3,2,C.Philippe1,2,V.Couturier1,2,Y.Duffourd2,C. variant was identiﬁed. Diagnostic yield was higher in Thauvin-Robinet1,2,14 fetuses with skeletal anomalies, where pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in (n = 10) 31% of 1Unité Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique des mala- cases, and in fetuses with increased nuchal translucency or diesrares,FHU-TRANSLAD,Dijon,France,2Inserm–UB hidrops (Noonan syndrome suspicion), where a pathogenic UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique des Anomalies du Dével- variant was found in 24% (n = 6) of the samples. No oppement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 3Centre de pathogenic variants were found in fetuses with cardiovas- Référence Maladies rares « Anomalies du Développement cular anomalies (n = 9). et syndromes malformatifs », Centre de Génétique, FHU- Conclusions:Exomesequencingisavaluablediagnostic TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 4Biochemistry and Genetics tool in fetuses with ultrasound anomalies, especially when Department, University Hospital of Angers, Angers, skeletalanomaliesarepresentorwhenNoonansyndromeis France,5ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,CHUdeBordeaux suspected. – Hopital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 6CHU Lille, M. Segura-Puimedon: A. Employment (full or part- Clinique de Génétique Guy Fontaine, Lille, France, time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine Labora- 7EA7364, RADEME, Université de Lille, Lille, France, tories, qGenomics, Barcelona, Spain. B. Campos: A. 8Service de génétique et centre de diagnostic anténatal, Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Lyon, France, 9Service de Génétique, Centre de Référence Genomic Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics, Barcelona, Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Spain. J. Luna: A. Employment (full or part-time); Lyon,France,10ServicedeGénétiqueMédicaleetClinique, Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 11Equipe qGenomics, Barcelona, Spain. C. Sintas: A. Employment "Embryologie et Génétiques des malformations congéni- (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic tales", Institut Imagine - INSERM U1163, Paris, France, Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics, Barcelona, Spain. M. 12Centre de Référence Maladies Rares CLAD-Ouest, CHU de Castro-Miró: A. Employment (full or part-time); Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 13Normandie Univ, UNI- Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, ROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, qGenomics, Barcelona, Spain. H. Díez: A. Employment Department of Genetics and Reference Center for Devel- (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic opmental Disorders, F 76000, Normandy Center for Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics, Barcelona, Spain. S. Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, B.Estruch:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; 14Centre de Référence « Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics, causes rares », Centre de Génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Barcelona, Spain. R.Garcia: A. Employment (fullor part- Dijon, France time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine Labora- tories, qGenomics, Barcelona, Spain. L. Quintana: A. Introduction:Exomesequencing(ES)isthemostpowerful Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative and current test for patients with developmental abnormal- Genomic Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics, Barcelona, ities (DA). It has considerably been deployed in postnatal Spain. J. Rodríguez: A. Employment (full or part-time); indicationswithadiagnosticyieldrangingfrom30to40%. Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, Several prenatal studies report a diagnostic yield ranging qGenomics, Barcelona, Spain. L. Armengol: A. from15%to35%,dependingontheexomestrategyandthe inclusion criteria. The French national network for rare152 J.delPicchia diseases with AD deployed a pilot project of feasibility for cases and one de novo heterozygous variant. Out of 20 rapid prenatal exome sequencing. causal variants, 18 were classiﬁed as pathogenic or likely Materialsandmethods:Weaimedtoinclude61fetuses pathogenic and two as unknown signiﬁcance, which were andbothparents. Themaininclusioncriteria were:2major reclassiﬁed as likely pathogenic because of highly speciﬁc malformations or, 1 major and 1 minor malformation or, 1 phenotype.Basedonourresultsandconsideringdiagnostic malformationandastronggeneticsuspicion.Thefeasibility yield and variant classiﬁcation, causative pathogenic aim was to emit a diagnostic report in 5-6 weeks. Array- recessive mutations would have been detected in at least CGH and ES-trio were concomitantly performed. ES-trio 60% of consanguineous couples by preconception exome- was captured with the TWIST-v2 kit and sequenced on a sequencing. Most of these conditions (16/20) would not NovaSeq6000 device with a 70X average depth. have been detected in PCS panels for most prevalent dis- Results: We included 23 patients. The turnaround time eases considering a carrier frequency of 1/250. Most of the from receipt of samples to the diagnostic report was on patients were carriers of one additional heterozygous average of 27daysfor thenegative patients andof 40days recessivemutation(70%,21/30)andasmallernumberwere for the positive patients. The diagnostic yield was of 44% carriers of two (17%, 5/30) or more (13%, 4/30). The with7SNVand3CNV,includingatetrasomy12p.Array- average carrier burden of autosomal recessive conditions CGH allowed a diagnosis in 13% and exome in 44%. was of 1.7 pathogenic mutations per patient. PCS by Resultswereconcordant for CNV detectionbetweenarray- exome-sequencing increases the detection rate of rare CGH and ES-trio. recessive conditions in consanguineous couples and could Discussion: Prenatal trio-ES appears feasible in a useful potentially increase their reproductive autonomy and facil- time and strongly helpful for decision in 65 % and genetic itate informed decision making. counseling was impactful in at least 44%. A.Abulí:None.I.Valenzuela:None.M.Codina:None. F. Tran Mau Them: None. A. Bruel: None. E. Rovira: None. D. Palau: None. S. Ourani: None. A.Vitobello:None.S.Nambot:None.S.Moutton:None. A. Cueto-González: None. I. Paramonov: None. A. Sorlin: None. J. Delanne: None. A. Ziegler: None. E. García-Arumí: None. E. Tizzano: None. E. Colin: None. A. Guichet: None. M. Legendre: None. I. Cusco: None. C. Colson: None. C. Abel: None. A. Putoux: None. J. Amiel: None. A. Lavillaureix: None. C. Quelin: None. 
P01 .037.A A. Guerrot: None. A. Brehin: None. L. Faivre: None. Does maternal blood exosomal DNA effective for the C. Philippe: None. V. Couturier: None. Y. Duffourd: fetal RHD and SRY genotyping? None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. B. Yaşa1, O. Şahin2, S. Sözer1 
P01 .036.C Preconception carrier screening in consanguineous 1Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine, Istanbul, couples by whole exome sequencing Turkey, 2Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Okmeydanı Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey A.Abulí,I.Valenzuela,M.Codina,E.Rovira,D.Palau,S. Ourani, A. Cueto-González, I. Paramonov, Introduction: Recent advances have led to the develop- E. García-Arumí, E. Tizzano, I. Cusco ment of important techniques in extracellular fetal DNA derived from maternal blood for prenatal diagnosis. Exo- Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain somes’DNAcontentisnotaffectedstructurallybynuclease activity and have a potential clinical application. Determi- Consanguineous couples have an increased risk of severe nation of fetal Rhesus D(RhD) and sex is important for abnormalities and mortality in offspring due to autosomal prenatal diagnosis in some diseases. recessive disorders. Exome-sequencing provides the possi- Material And Method: Fetal RHD and SRY genotyping bility of wide preconception carrier screening (PCS) in was performed using exosomal DNA(exoDNA) from consanguineous couples who may be at risk of rare genetic peripheralblood of81RhD negativepregnantwomen with disorders. The efﬁcacy of this strategy has been poorly exosomeisolationkit.Speciﬁcprimerswereappliedforthe explored. We retrospectively analyzed exome sequencing SRY and RHD genes ampliﬁcations by Real-Time poly- data from 27 affected children and 3 fetuses (after termi- merase chain reaction. The average age of the cases in the nation of pregnancy) of consanguineous couples. We study was 28.5 ± 5.5(year ± SD). The mean gestational explored diagnostic yield and carrier status for recessive week of the cases was 25.81 ± 9.02. The exoDNA disorders. Overall diagnostic yield was 67% (20/30 concentrations obtained were between 1.8-21.9 ng/μL with patients).Wedetectedhomozygouscausativevariantsin19 an average of 11.65 ± 8.08 ng/μL.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 153 Results: The results were conﬁrmed with the hospital’s Results: 190 couples were included. 130 (approximately New Born Follow Up System. After analysis of the 81 15% of the eligible population) accepted the test-offer cases, no ampliﬁcation was observed in 16 samples, within one month and attended pre-test counselling. 117 including the GAPDH gene. 100% accuracy was achieved (90%) proceeded with testing. More than 90% of test- in the RHD and SRY detection from the remaining participantsmadeaninformed-choice.GPsfeltconﬁdentto 65 samples. conduct counselling, although having to make a GP- Conclusions: It was determined that fetal RHD and SRY appointment with both partners was a barrier. Most genotyping could be performed with exoDNA from participants reported low anxiety and decisional conﬂict; maternalplasma.TheisolationtechniqueofexoDNAcould this was relatively higher in test-offer decliners than be enhanced and improved for high concentration with acceptors. moresensitivedetectioncoveringearlypregnancyage.This Conclusions: Population-based preconception ECS for a technique might provide a new perspective to the prenatal speciﬁcsetofsevere conditionsprovidedbymotivatedand diagnosis as well as to the treatment options all which trained GPs is feasible. We will discuss how responsible require more detailed studies. The present work was implementation can best be facilitated. The possibility of supported by the Research Fund of Istanbul University. prenatal ECS, ECS to high-risk couples or which HCPs Project No. 29083 should offer this (e.g. midwives, fertility clinics) should B. Yaşa: None. O. Şahin: None. S. Sözer: None. now also be investigated. J. Schuurmans: None. M. Plantinga: None. E. Birnie: 
P01 .038.B None. K.M. Abbott: None. A.D. Diemers: None. D.M. Population-based preconception expanded carrier VanderKolk:None.L.M.VandenHeuvel:None.M.Y. screening for severe recessive disorders: Does a GP- Berger: None. M. Verkerk: None. A. Fenwick: None. A. provided test offer with couple results meet criteria for V. Ranchor: None. A. Lucassen: None. I.M. Van responsible implementation? Langen: None. J.Schuurmans1,2,M.Plantinga1,E.Birnie1,K.M.Abbott1, 
P01 .041.B A. D. Diemers1, D. M. Van der Kolk1, L. M. Van den Donor oocyte pregnancies and fetal fraction: managing Heuvel1, M. Y. Berger1, M. Verkerk1, A. Fenwick2, A. V. patientexpectationsandprovidingaccurateinformation Ranchor1, A. Lucassen2, I. M. Van Langen1 M. Pastrick, M. K. Maisenbacher, G. Goldring, 1UniversityMedicalCenterGroningen,Groningen,Nether- W. DiNonno, A. Ryan lands, 2University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom Natera, Inc, San Carlos, CA, United States Introduction: Expanded carrier screening (ECS) enables Objective: Retrospective analysis to determine if differ- the identiﬁcation of couples who are at increased risk of ences in fetal fraction (FF) are observed in donor oocyte having children with recessive conditions. Based on pre- pregnancies compared to the general population. liminary research, we conducted a pilot study of GP- Methods: Noninvasive prenatal testing samples from providedpopulation-basedpreconceptionECS(2016-2018) singleton pregnancies were analyzed at a single reference to evaluate whether this approach would meet criteria for lab. NIPT was performed using a SNP-based method with responsible implementation as speciﬁed by Henneman FFmeasuredaspreviouslydescribed.1FFfrom1611donor et al., EJHG, 2016. The free test-offer consisted of oocytes was analyzed and compared to a large set of 50 severe early-onset childhood conditions. Only couple- reference cases matched for maternal weight (MW) and results were reported. We discuss key insights to guide gestational age (GA). A z-score was calculated for each large-scale implementation. donoroocytecomparedtoitsreferencedata.Ifnoimpactto Methods: We used a mixed-methods approach. Trained FF from the use of donor or in vitro fertilization (IVF), the GPs from nine practices invited their female patients (n = average z-score is expected to be zero. Statistical analysis 4295, aged 18-40) and partners. We addressed uptake, was performed using a z-test to establish if this was feasibility(e.g.pre-testcounsellingpossiblewithin20min- the case. utes), informed-choice, psychological outcomes (e.g. anxi- Results: The average z-score for the donor oocyte cases ety, decisional conﬂict) and reproductive intentions using a was-0.4.Az-testdeterminedthisdeviationfromnormalto longitudinal survey (couples) and semi-structured be signiﬁcant (p < 0.00001), indicating lower FF in donor interviews (GPs). oocyte cases vs. corresponding reference data.154 J.delPicchia Conclusions:Previousstudieshavereported lowerFFin and different CGG-repeat-length. FMR1/FMRP was detec- patientsundergoingIVFandindonoroocytepopulations.2,3 tedinalargeramountinGCsthaninleukocytes,sinceitis Lower FF has also been associated with increased MW, amajorregulatoroffolliculogenesis.Wethereforestarteda early GA, certainmaternal health conditions, and abnormal pilot project investigating if variable expression-levels of fetal results (T18/T13/triploidy).2,3,4 Our results reveal FMRP and FMRpolyG detected by WB can be related to statistically signiﬁcant lower FF in donor oocyte pregnan- women with different ovarian reserve parameters and vari- cies compared to matched reference data. able CGG repeats including “normal” and premutated ran- References 1. Zimmerman et al., Prenatal Diagnosis ges. Preliminary data already showed, in a PM patient 2012; 32: 1-9 2. Revello R. et al., Ultrasound Obstet undergoing oocytes cryopreservation because of her risk of Gynecol. 2016 Jun;47(6):698-704. 3. Yanaihara A. et al., J developing FXPOI, a decreased level of FMRP, even Assist Reprod Genet. 2018 Mar;35(3):431-434. 4. Ebbing though theFMR1transcriptionlevelwas withinthenormal C. et al., PLoS One. 2013 Jul 30;8(7):e70380. range,ﬁttingtothehypothesisofkindofaperturbedprotein M. Pastrick: A. Employment (full or part-time); production in this patient. We plan to further evaluate if Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. M.K. Maisenbacher: A. Employ- results made in GCs can be translated to leukocytes. This ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. G. would offer prospectively a predictive tool or marker of Goldring: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; progression. Natera, Inc. W. DiNonno: A. Employment (full or part- X.Nguyen:None.B.Messmer:None.K.Hinderhofer: time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. A. Ryan: A. Employment None. T. Strowitzki: None. J. Rehnitz: None. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. 
P01 .045.C 
P01 .042.C Investigation of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in a Repeat Associated Non-AUG (RAN)-Translation in fertilepopulationinassociationwithoocyteandembryo fragile X associated Premature Ovarian Insufﬁciency quality (FXPOI): FMRpolyG as predictive tool? G. Kakourou1, T. Mamas1, C. Vrettou1, E. Tsorva2, S. X. Nguyen1, B. Messmer1, K. Hinderhofer2, T. Strowitzki3, Zacharia2, C. Oraiopoulou3, E. Chatzi4, G. Kourlaba5, J. Rehnitz1,3 D. Christopikou2, M. Mastrominas2, M. Moisidou3, A. Chatziparasidou3, I. Georgiou4, J. Traeger-Synodinos1 1Division of Reproduction Genetics, Department of Gyne- cologicalEndocrinologyandFertilityDisorders,University 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,National&Kapodistrian Women’s Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Institute of University of Athens, St. Sophia’s Children’s Hospital, Human Genetics, University Heidelberg, Laboratory of Athens, Greece, 2Embryogenesis, Assisted Reproduction Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Departmentof Unit, Athens, Greece, 3Embryolab SA, IVF Unit, Thessalo- Gynecological Endocrinology and Fertility Disorders, niki, Greece, 4Genetics and IVF Unit, Department of University Women’s Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany ObstetricsandGynecology,FacultyofMedicine,University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 5Center for Clinical Fragile-X-associated-primary-ovarian-insufﬁciency Epidemiology and Outcomes Research (CLEO), Athens, (FXPOI) is characterized by oligo/amenorrhea and hyper- Greece gonadotropic hypogonadism by reason of the expansion of CGG-repeats in the 5′UTR of FMR1, called permutation Introduction: Human and animal studies have provided (PM) (n: 55-200). RAN-translation depending on variable information on a number of genes potentially impacting CGG-repeat length is also hypothesized to cause FXPOI gamete quality and preimplantation development (with a due to the production of a polyglycine-containing FMR1- role on meiosis, mitosis, DNA repair etc.). SNVs in these protein, FMRpolyG. FMRpolyG expression in granulosa genes have been investigated in mostly infertile couples cells (GCs) of FXPOI-model-mice leads to perturbed undergoing IVF, in search of potential biomarkers of IVF ovarianfunction.However,theexpressionofFMRpolyGin success. Recently, maternal SNVs in infertile women leukocytes and GCs of women with different ovarian (rs1801133/rs1801131 in MTHFR, rs2305957 on chromo- response and variable CGG repeat length has not been some 4 linked to INTU-SL
C25 A31-HSPA4L-PLK4- investigated yet. We performed Western-blot (WB) to MFSD8-LAR
P1 B and PGRM
C2 ) were associated with analyze the expression of FMRP and FMRpolyG in patient embryo quality or chromosomal status. We investigated ´s leukocytes and GCs in parallel with FMR1-gene- thepotentialassociationofSNVsin26selectedgeneswith expressionanalysis. Firstly, we detected FMRP, both in a possible role in preimplantation development, with leukocytesandGCsofwomenwithvariableovarianreserve oocyte/embryo quality in fertile women undergoingAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 155 Preimplantation Genetic Testing for Monogenic Disorder United Kingdom, 6Bioinformatics Support Unit, Newcastle (PGT-M). University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 7New- Materials/Methods: Maternal DNA was genotyped castle Fertility Centre, Newcastle University, Newcastle using exonic NGS (QiaseqTM-Targeted Custom Panel, Upon Tyne, United Kingdom Miseq) for 18 genes (AIRE-AMH-AURKA-AURKB- AURKC-FSHR-HSPA4L-HUW
E1 -INTU-KHD
C3 L- Infertility affects 1 in 6 couples worldwide and in LAR
P1 B-MFSD8-MTHFR-PGRM
C2 -PLK4-SEN
P7 - approximately 50% of these cases the infertility can be SL
C25 A31-WB
P1 ) and 9 selected SNVs in a further 8 attributed to a male factor. Whilst causes such as Kline- genes: rs175080(MLH3), rs1799963(F2), rs6025(F5), felter’s and Y chromosome microdeletions have been well rs5918(ITGB3), rs5985(F13A1), rs1805087(MTR), distinguished, the genetic causes behind severe spermato- rs1801394(MTRR), rs28756992(MLH3), rs2305957 genic failure are largely unknown, with around 40% of all (HSPA4L). The study involved 85 women and 107 PGT- male infertility cases remaining idiopathic. De novo muta- M cycles performed between 2013-2019. Maternal geno- tions (DNMs) arise spontaneously in the germline or post- typing was investigated in association with number of zygotically,andareknowntobeassociatedwithearlyonset oocytes collected/fertilized and blastocyst formation. disorders with reduced reproductive ﬁtness. These muta- Results: A 20x coverage was achieved in all regions tions, however, are vastly understudied in the ﬁeld of male investigated, identifying 121 variants. Signiﬁcant associa- infertilityduetothedifﬁcultyinobtainingparentalsamples. tions(p<0.05)wererevealedfor16SNVsin:AIRE-AMH- Herewereportonthecontinuationandexpansionofexome AURKB-HSPA4L-KHD
C3 L-MTHFR-PLK4-SEN
P7 -MLH3. sequencing in our cohort of infertile patients in order to Nosigniﬁcantassociationswererevealedforrs1801131and identifynovelgenesinvolvedinmaleinfertility.Theroleof rs2305957. DNMs was investigated in a total of 194 patients suffering Conclusions: Our understanding of genes that may from non-obstructive azoospermia or severe oligozoos- impactthepreimplantationstageandthesearchforgenomic permiaandtheirfertileparentsbyadding95additionaltrios biomarkers predicting IVF-success may beneﬁt by investi- to the previously reported 99 cases. In these additional 95 gating a fertile population, minimizing many confounding trios, we have identiﬁed and validated 75 protein-altering variables. This study was supported by the State Scholar- DNMs, of which 19 are likely to affect normal gene func- ships Foundation (IKY), co-funded by national grants and tion. Genes of particular interest are PP
P1 R7, RBM5 and the European union (ESPA 2014-2020). MSH5, all of which are involved in spermatogenesis and G. Kakourou: None. T. Mamas: None. C. Vrettou: linked to infertility in mice. At this moment, none of these None. E. Tsorva: None. S. Zacharia: None. C. Oraio- geneshavebeenrecognisedashumanmaleinfertilitygenes. poulou: None. E. Chatzi: None. G. Kourlaba: None. Our data further indicates that DNMs may play an impor- D. Christopikou: None. M. Mastrominas: None. tant role in severe male infertility and emphasises the need M. Moisidou: None. A. Chatziparasidou: None. for further replication studies in larger cohorts. I. Georgiou: None. J. Traeger-Synodinos: None. H.E. Smith: None. M.S. Oud: None. P.F. de Vries: None. B. Alobaidi: None. A. Virdi: None. B.J. Houston: 
P01 .047.B None.R.M.Smits:None.L.Batty:None.M.K.O’Bryan: Further indication of a role for de novo mutations in None. J. Coxhead: None. S. Cockell: None. J. Green- cases of severe idiopathic male infertility wood: None. G. van der Heijden: None. K. McEleny: None. L. Ramos: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. M.J. H. E. Smith1, M. S. Oud2, P. F. de Vries2, B. Alobaidi1, Xavier: None. J.A. Veltman: None. A. Virdi1, B. J. Houston3, R. M. Smits4, L. Batty1, M. K. O’Bryan3,J.Coxhead5,S.Cockell6,J.Greenwood7,G.van 
P01 .049.A der Heijden2,4, K. McEleny7, L. Ramos4, L. E. L. M. AcasereportofararenonsenseZ
P1 variantinapatient Vissers2, M. J. Xavier1, J. A. Veltman1,2 with oocyte maturation defect 1Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle E.G.Berkay,B.Karaman,G.Toksoy,B.OzsaitSelcuk,Z. Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department of Human O. Uyguner, S. Basaran Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3School Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Turkey Australia, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Genomics Core Introduction: Oocyte maturation defect (OOMD) is a rare Facility, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, condition causing female infertility that can be diagnosed156 J.delPicchia during assisted reproduction techniques (ART). OOMD recipient chromosomes. To date, only ten prenatal cases related genes are Z
P1 , Z
P2 , Z
P3 , PANX1, PAT
L2 , TUBB8, have been described. WE
E2  (OMIM, 2020). We report a case of a 31-year-old Patient: This pregnancy was a second spontaneous woman who had four ART failures diagnosed as empty pregnancy ofanon-consanguinouscouple.Aﬁrst trimester follicle syndrome and OOMD. She has short stature (-3 ultrasound showed an increased nuchal translucency SD), bilateral limited extension-ﬂexion on elbows. persisting at 18 gestational weeks (GW) along with Materials and Methods: Chromosome analysis and retrognatia,cleftpalateandfemoralshortening.Choriocent- ﬂuorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) using X chromo- esis was performed at 14 GW. somecentromericandSHOX-probeoninterphasenucleiof Results: Direct examination on cytotrophoblast found a lymphocytes and mucosal cells was investigated. Whole- der(18)t(18;18) whereas the cultured karyotype on exome sequencing (WES) performed via the Illumina mesenchyme showed a der(18)t(2;18). Due to tissue platform. Conﬁrmation and familial segregation analysis discordance, an amiocentesis was performed at 18 GW. were performed by Sanger sequencing. Surprisingly, we found, neither of the two previously Results: Karyotyping and FISH resulted in normal, identiﬁedcelllines,butamosaicder(18)t(12;18)witharing possible mosaicism was excluded. WES analysis revealed 18. In addition, array CGH provided breakpoints for a known, rare, pathogenic homozygous variant in exon 3 chromosomes 2 and 12 in REE
P1  gene (2p11.2) and (c.628C>T; p.Q210*) of Z
P1  gene, and her parents being TAOK3 gene (12q24.23) respectively. Whole genome ﬁrst degree cousins were carriers for this variant. sequencing on minION (Nanopore) was conducted to Conclusions:Z
P1 withautosomalrecessiveinheritanceis clarify breakpoint in chromosome 18. Using data obtained relatedtoOOMD-1(MIM_615774).Zonapellucida(ZP)is by array CGH, a long read with hard clipping showed a aglycoproteinstructuresurroundingoocytesandisessential breakpointinrepeatedsequencewithabout90%homology for oocyte development. ZP contains four types of receptor with D18Z1 alpha satellite. Finally, all identiﬁed cell lines proteins(Z
P1 -4).OurvariantinZ
P1 isnonsense,premature carried a 18p monosomy which could explain ultrasound stopcodoncausestotruncateZ
P1 receptorproteins.Thisis abnormalities. The pregnancy was terminated. Following the ﬁrst homozygous occurrence of this variant associated fetal autopsy, FISH analysis was performed on blood, with OOMD. WES ﬁndings were also analyzed for known thymic,lungandlivertissueandconﬁrmed18pmonosomy genes related toshort stature andno pathogenic varianthas in all tissues. been observed. WES is a valuable method to identify the Conclusion: We report here a new case of jumping genetic origin in complex, multigenic conditions like in translocation with precise molecular characterization of infertility. Istanbul University Project-Number:TSA-2018- breakpoints:D18Z1asdonorregionandatleast3recipient 32135 chromosomes : 2p11.2, 12q24.3 and 18q21. E.G. Berkay: None. B. Karaman: None. G. Toksoy: J.B. Gaillard: None. T. Guignard: None. J. Puechb- None. B. Ozsait Selcuk: None. Z.O. Uyguner: None. S. erty: None. A. Schneider: None. V. Gatinois: None. M. Basaran: None. Duport-Percier: None. J.M. Faure: None. F. Fuchs: None. F. Pellestor: None. P. Blanchet: None. C. 
P01 .051.C Wells: None. Prenatal diagnosis and molecular characterization of a jumping translocation leading to 18p monosomy 
P01 .052.A Molecularbiomarkers ofageinginmenwithKlinefelter J. B. Gaillard1, T. Guignard1, J. Puechberty2, A. syndrome Schneider1,V.Gatinois1,M.Duport-Percier3,J.M.Faure3, F. Fuchs3, F. Pellestor1, P. Blanchet4, C. Wells4 E. Pohl1, S. Muschal2, S. Kliesch3, M. Zitzmann3, J. Rohayem3, J. Gromoll2, S. Laurentino2 1Génétique Chromosomique, CHU, Montpellier, France, 2Maladies Génétiques de l’Enfant et de l’Adulte, CHU, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Münster, Montpellier, France, 3Médecine Maternelle et Foetale, Münster, Germany, 2Centre of Reproductive Medicine and CHU, Montpellier, France, 4Génétique Prénatale et Andrology (CeRA), Institute of Reproductive and Regen- Foetopathologie, CHU, Montpellier, France erative Biology, University Hospital Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany, Münster, Germany, 3Centre of Repro- Jumping translocations are rare events in cytogenetics, ductive Medicine and Andrology (CeRA), Department of characterised by a donor chromosome and multiple Clinical and Surgical Andrology, University HospitalAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 157 Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany, Münster, Germany Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Depart- Introduction: Males with Klinefelter syndrome (non- ment of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboudumc, Nijme- mosaic karyotype 47,XXY), the most common sex chro- gen, Netherlands, 4Newcastle Fertility Centre, Newcastle mosome aneuploidy, exhibit increased rates of ageing- University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 5Bioin- related morbidities and mortality. Associated with that, a formatics Support Unit, Newcastle University, Newcastle signiﬁcantly reduced life span has been observed. The aim upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Department of Human ofthisstudywastoinvestigatewhether Klinefelterpatients Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, show molecular signs of premature ageing. Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Genomics Core Patients and Methods: We assessed age-associated Facility, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, DNAmethylationpatterns(bypyrosequencing)andrelative United Kingdom telomere length (TL; by quantitative polymerase chain reaction) as molecular ageing biomarkers in blood from Severe cases of infertility such as azoospermia and oligo- Klinefelterpatients(n=178and266forDNAmethylation zoospermia often have genetic causes, with Klinefelter and TL, respectively) aged 18-71 years. Age-matched syndrome and chromosome Y microdeletions being the healthy males (n = 184 and 196 for DNA methylation most common. However, of all infertile men, 40% have and TL, respectively) and females (n = 50) served as unknown aetiology after being tested for all known causes. controls. In this study, we explored for the ﬁrst time the role of Results: Age-associated DNA methylation patterns did maternally inherited copy-number variations (CNVs) on a not indicate accelerated ageing/premature ageing in men large scale, sequencing the exome of 160 patient-parents withKlinefeltersyndrome.InyoungKlinefelterindividuals trios, a methodology primarily used to detect single aged 18-24 years, we observed signiﬁcantly longer nucleotide variants (SNVs) but also robust for CNV telomeres compared to controls (mean = 1.51 vs. 1.09 detection. Among all rare maternally inherited CNVs and 1.26 in female and male controls, respectively). detected,3wereconsideredofpotential pathogenicity.One Telomere length in subsequent age groups, however, were is a large duplication (~1.7 Mb) involving, among others, not signiﬁcantly different to controls. VCX gene, an X-linked multi-copy gene that leads to Conclusions: We did not ﬁnd molecular hints for apoptosis and cell growth inhibition when duplicated in premature ageing in Klinefelter patients based on DNA murine germ cells in vitro. A second case carried a ~80 kb methylation patterns. However, we observed higher base- duplication involving two genes, one of which was FAS, a line TL at adolescent age but comparable TL with knownregulatoroftesticulargermcellapoptosis.Thethird progressive age in other age groups. Whether this is due CNV, instead, was a deletion of ~200 kb affecting, among to an accelerated TL attrition, putatively related to the others, PSM
E4 , a gene required for normal fertility in male observedco-morbiditiesinKlinefeltersyndrome,remainsto mice but dispensable in females. The results of this study, be addressed in a further longitudinal study. although preliminary, provide a ﬁrst indication that mater- Funding: German Research Foundation (DFG No. nally inherited CNVs may explain cases of severe sper- GR1547/19-1;CRU326No.GR1547/25-1),IZKFMünster matogenic failure. Currently, additional 35 patient-parents (Grant CRA03/09) triosand149patientsarebeingscreenedtodetectvariations E.Pohl:None.S.Muschal:None.S.Kliesch:None.M. affecting the same genes and additional rare variations. Zitzmann: None. J. Rohayem: None. J. Gromoll: None. Genome sequencing data will soon be available for all the S. Laurentino: None. trios, which will improve CNV detection and clarify the contribution of these variations to the disorder. 
P01 .055.A F.K. Mastrorosa: None. M.J. Xavier: None. A. Maternally inherited copy-number variations may Mikulasova: None. M.S. Oud: None. R.M. Smith: None. explain cases of severe idiopathic male infertility G.Astuti:None.B.Alobaidi:None.J.Greenwood:None. S.J.Cockell:None.C.Gilissen:None.J.Coxhead:None. F. K. Mastrorosa1, M. J. Xavier1, A. Mikulasova1, M. S. H.Sheth:None.G.vanderHeijden:None.K.McEleny: Oud2, R. M. Smith3, G. Astuti2, B. Alobaidi1, J. None. L. Ramos: None. J.A. Veltman: None. Greenwood4, S. J. Cockell5, C. Gilissen6, J. Coxhead7, H. Sheth1,G.vanderHeijden2,3,K.McEleny4,L.Ramos3,J.A. 
P01 .056.B Veltman1,2 Improved classiﬁcation of testicular histopathology to promote uniform diagnosis and discovery of genetic 1Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle causes for male infertility upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department of Human158 J.delPicchia G. W. van der Heijden1, M. J. Wyrwoll2, L. Ramos1, J. S. Kane1, D. Lester1, S. Cameron1, C. Barratt2, S. Martins Veltman3, F. Tüttelmann4 da Silva2, S. Brown1 11. Division of Reproductive Medicine, Department of 1School of Science, Engineering & Technology, Abertay Obstetrics and Gynecology, Radboud University Medical University, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2Reproductive and Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Centre of Reproductive Developmental Biology, School of Medicine, Ninewells Medicine and Andrology, Department of Clinical and Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, Surgical Andrology, University of Münster, Münster, Dundee, United Kingdom Germany, 3Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle Uni- versity, Newcastle, Netherlands, 4Institute of Human Introduction: Idiopathic infertility affects 15% couples Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany globallyandrecentevidencesuggestsgeneticabnormalities are a causative factor in a signiﬁcant number of cases. With the availability of Next Generation Sequencing the Hence, we conducted whole exome sequencing of men genetic causes of male infertility are increasingly being undergoing assisted conception to identify genetic lesions. chartered. A genetic diagnosis combined with a clear The β-defensin 126 (DEFB126) and β-defensin 128 unambiguous description of accompanying testis histology (DEFB128), are genes preferentially expressed in the epi- will hugely beneﬁt interpretation of the function of identi- didymis, where these proteins may help protect the matur- ﬁed genes. However, a universal ontology for testis histo- ing sperm cells and play a vital role during sperm pathology is lacking. The Human Phenotype Ontology capacitation. (HPO) is a formal ontology, which describes phenotypes Materials and Methods: DNA extracted from the blood encounteredinhumandiseases.TheHPOallowsphenotype of 26 unrelated, sub-fertile men were sequenced using driven differential diagnostics in clinical routine and whole exome sequencing. Pathogenic rare variants were research. The current hierarchy of terms regarding azoos- identiﬁed using bioinformaticsanalysisand validated using permia,isnotasystematicalone.Moreover,themajorityof Sanger sequencing. testicular phenotypes are not annotated yet. Building on Results: A novel and rare homozygous pathogenic 1-bp whathasbeenpublishedpreviouslyandourownexperience frame-shift insertion causing a premature stop codon was we propose a framework for testis histopathology that identiﬁed in DEFB128 gene from one patient. Six patients consists of ﬁve main categories. Four of these are sub- showed a previously reported homozygous 2bp deletion, divided to obtain information on the timing of a germ cell causing a frame-shift mutation in the DEFB126 gene (p. arrestor theseverityof overallloss of spermatogenesis. To Pro106ArgfsTer?). All patients ascertained with the establish a lower threshold for complete spermatogenesis DEFB126/DEFB128 mutations were unable to naturally wedeterminedthenumberoftubulescontainingelongating conceive and hence were sub-fertile. spermatids in a collection of samples of men with an Conclusions: The DEFB128 mutation (rs11396059), is obstructive azoospermia due to a previous vasectomy rare and has not been associated with any disease to date. (N=117). This analysis suggested 50% to be a reasonable As the patient with the DEFB128 mutation has no other cut-off to distinguish hypospermatogenesis from complete medical condition we predict that it is the cause of spermatogenesis. The framework is easy to understand and infertility. The DEFB126 mutation (rs140685149), is a straightforward in its application. It gathers most relevant commonvariant,andthishomozygousvariantinsub-fertile informationtostudytheimpactofanidentiﬁedmutationon men has previously been implicated in facilitating sperm spermatogenesis. We conclude that once this framework is movement in the female reproductive tract. These results incorporated in the HPO, the standardized vocabulary will suggestthat,β-defensingenesplayasigniﬁcantroleinmale facilitatecommunicationandinterpretationinbothaclinical reproduction. routine and research. This work was supported by the R-LINCS studentship, G.W. van der Heijden: None. M.J.Wyrwoll: None. L. Abertay University. Ramos: None. J. Veltman: None. F. Tüttelmann: None. S.Kane:None.D.Lester:None.S.Cameron:None.C. Barratt: None. S. Martins da Silva: None. S. 
P01 .057.C Brown: None. Identiﬁcationoftwohomozygousmutations,inthemale reproductive tract speciﬁc β-defensin 126/128 genes, 
P01 .058.A potentially underlie a severe sperm dysfunction. The sperm epigenome does not display recurrent epimutations in patients with severely impaired spermatogenesisAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 159 E. Leitao1, S. Di Persio2, S. Laurentino2, M. Wöste3, 
P01 .059.B M. Dugas3, S. Kliesch4, N. Neuhaus2, B. Horsthemke1,5 miR-200 family inhibits trophoblast invasion through regulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Centre of Reproductive Medicine and M. Su1, H. Tsai1, C. Wang2 Andrology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Ger- many, 3Institute of Medical Informatics, University Mün- 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National ster, Münster, Germany, 4Centre of Reproductive Medicine Cheng-Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan, and Andrology, Department of Clinical and Surgical 2Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, National Andrology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Ger- Cheng-Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan many, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a biologi- cal process that epithelial cells lose cell polarity and cell- Introduction: Previous studies have identiﬁed aberrant cell adhesion, and gain migratory and invasive abilities to DNAmethylationofimprintedgenes(e.g.MESTandH19) become mesenchymal cells. In human placenta, the chor- in the sperm of infertile patients, but the prevalence and ionic villi gradually transform from proliferative cyto- genomicextentoftheseabnormalmethylationpatternshave trophoblastsandextravilloustrophoblastsintoamigratory remained unknown. andinvasivetrophoblastphenotype.Failureinalteringthe Material and Methods: We collected swim-up sperm behavior and morphology of trophoblasts in placenta may samplesfrom40normozoospermicand93oligoasthenoter- result in insufﬁcient trophoblast invasion, which leads to atozoospermic patients and determined H19 and MEST placental dysfunction and the diseased placenta. MiR-200 methylation levels by deep bisulﬁte sequencing. Based on family, including miR-200a and -141, were highly this screening, we deﬁned three groups: normal controls expressed in human placenta and were upregulated in (NC), abnormally methylated infertile (AMI; n = 7) and patients of preeclampsia. miR-200a and miR-141 were normallymethylatedinfertile(NMI;n=86),andperformed demonstrated to inhibit the formation of primary clila in whole genome bisulﬁte sequencing of ﬁve NC, ﬁve AMI trophoblasts and therefore have a less ability for cell and six NMI samples. invasion. In this study, miR-200a and miR-141 were Results: Whole-genome comparison of NC and AMI shown to inhibit trophoblasts (HTR-8/SVneo) invasion samples revealed that each AMI sample had abnormal and migration by a transfection assay. In western blotting methylation levels of all 50 imprinting control regions and and qRT-PCR, miR-200a and miR-141 stimulated epi- >2,000 germ cell-speciﬁc genes with distinct DNA thelial markers, such as E-cadherin and ZO-1, whereas methylation differences in blood and germ cells. This is suppressed mesenchymal and transcriptional factors, such consistent with the presence of somatic cell DNA in AMI as ZEB1, MM
P2 , MM
P9  and TGF-b1. These results samples.ThecomparisonofNCandNMIsamplesrevealed suggest trophoblast migration and invasion mediated by 19 differentially methylated regions, none of which could miR-200familymaythroughthemechanismofEMT,and be validated in an independent cohort of 40 men. Analysis may therefore predispose to develop preeclampsia in of the H19 CTCF-binding region 6 in samples without human pregnancy. somatic cell DNA revealed an association between DNA M. Su: None. H. Tsai: None. C. Wang: None. methylation levels and genotype (rs2071094), but not fertility phenotype. 
P01 .060.C Conclusions: Our results suggest that somatic DNA Identiﬁcation of plasma miRNAs associated with endo- contamination and genetic variation confound methylation metriosis in Bulgarian patients studies in sperm of infertile men and that the prevalence of aberrant methylation in infertile men has been over- V. Spasova1, V. Karamisheva1,2, O. Antonova1, Z. estimated, which is reassuring for patients undergoing Hammoudeh1, L. Koleva3, R. Staneva1, M. Ganev1, D. assistedreproduction.FundedbyDFGgrantsHO949/23-1 Nesheva1, A. Nachev1,2, D. Toncheva1, S. Hadzhidekova1 and NE 2190/3-1. E. Leitao: None. S. Di Persio: None. S. Laurentino: 1Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2University None. M. Wöste: None. M. Dugas: None. S. Kliesch: obstetrics and gynecology hospital “Maichin dom, Soﬁa, None. N. Neuhaus: None. B. Horsthemke: None. Bulgaria, 3University Hospital “Pirogov”, Soﬁa, Bul- garia160 J.delPicchia Introduction: Diagnosis of endometriosis still poses a 5Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hannover, signiﬁcant challenge for it usually requires surgery. Germany The need of invasive procedure signiﬁcantly contributes to late diagnosis and less effective treatment. The aim Müllerian anomalies include formation, fusion or absorp- of this study is to screen for changes in miRNAs tion defects of the Müllerian ducts such as unicornuate, expression in peripheral blood that could be further didelphys,bicornuate or septate uterusandvaginalsepta as researched as potential non-invasive diagnostic tool for well as the Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome endometriosis. (MRKHS)whichischaracterizedbythecongenitalabsence Materials and methods: 15 patients with surgically ofuterusandvagina.TheincidenceofMRKHSisestimated conﬁrmed advanced endometriosis and 15 healthy controls tobe1:4.500and1:250inotherMülleriananomalies.Most were included in the study. Peripheral blood samples were cases of Müllerian anomalies are sporadic; familial cases collected after signed informed consent. Plasma RNA was seem to be autosomal dominant inherited with reduced isolated with miRNeasy-Serum/Plasma Kit in conjunction penetrance. Until now the knowledge about the etiology of with Plasma Spike-in-Control (Qiagen®). Equimolar anomalies of the Müllerian ducts is very limited. In amounts of RNA were used to prepare two pools: 1)late approximately 1% of patients with Müllerian anomalies stage endometriosis and 2)healthy controls. Reverse recurrent deletions in 16p11.2 encompassing TBX6 were transcription of the pool samples was performed by found as causative in these patients. Moreover, in previous miScript II RT Kit (Qiagen®). Expression spectra of 84 studies,weandothersfoundpossiblypathogenicvariantsin miRNAs (miScript miRNA-PCR-Array-Human Serum & patients with Müllerian anomalies in TBX6. Since TBX6 Plasma, Qiagen®) by real-time PCR quantiﬁcation via encodes a conserved transcription factor playing an essen- miScript-SYBRGreenPCRKit(Qiagen®)wereanalyzedon tial role in developmental processes like mesoderm forma- Applied Biosystems™7500 instrument. tion and speciﬁcation, we suggested TBX6 as strong Results: The preliminary results revealed 65 upregulated candidate gene. Thus we performed analysis of the TBX6 miRNAsandnodownregulatedmiRNAsbetweencasesand gene (NM_004608) in additional 126 patients with Mül- controls.Thefoldchangebetween5and10wasdetectedin lerian anomalies. We detected 4 possibly pathogenic var- 21 miRNAs and fold change above 10 was detected in 44 iants (c.358A>G p.(Met120Val), c.704G>A p. miRNAs. The most signiﬁcantly overexpressed miRNAs (Gly235Asp), c.815G>A p.(Arg272Gln), c.1146C>A p. were miR-106a and miR-17-3p which are associated with (Tyr382*))inTBX6in5/126patientsandcouldexcludethe cell proliferation and apoptosis. previously reported variant c.484G>A p.(Gly162Ser) as Conclusions: MiRNA expression level differences were being causative for disorders of the Müllerian ducts in the found in blood between endometriosis patients and healthy European non-Finnish population. In summary, we present controls. This may lay the foundations for future in-depth increasing evidence for the association of variants in TBX6 research on novel non-invasive biomarker for endometrio- with malformations of the Müllerian ducts. sis. Acknowledgements: Contract Д-212/12.12.2018 A. Tewes: None. J. Hucke: None. T. Römer: None. K. V. Spasova: None. V. Karamisheva: None. O. Anto- Kapczuk: None. C. Schippert: None. P. Hillemanns: nova:None.Z.Hammoudeh:None.L.Koleva:None.R. None. A. Bohring: None. P. Wieacker: None. S. Staneva: None. M. Ganev: None. D. Nesheva: None. A. Ledig: None. Nachev: None. D. Toncheva: None. S. Hadzhidekova: None. 
P01 .062.B CirculatingfetaltrophoblasticcelleligibleforNIPD:the 
P01 .061.A exception rather than the rule SequencevariantsinTBX6areassociatedwithdisorders of the Müllerian ducts - an Update L. Cayrefourcq1, M. C. Vincent2, S. Pierredon2, C. Moutou3, M.Imbert-Bouteille2,E. Haquet4, J.Puechberty4, A. Tewes1, J. Hucke2, T. Römer3, K. Kapczuk4, C. M.Willems4,C.Liautard-Haag2,N.Molinari5,C.Zordan6, Schippert5, P. Hillemanns5, A. Bohring1, P. Wieacker1, S. V. Dorian6, A. Chaussenot7, L. Monteil8, C. Miry9, Y. Ledig1 Petrov10, E. Le Boette11, M. Fradin12, C. Alix-Panabiere1, C. Guissart2 1Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany, 2Depart- ment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wuppertal, Germany, 1Laboratoire de cellules circulantes rares humaines_Uni- 3DepartmentofObstetricsandGynecology,Köln-Weyertal, versityMedicalCenterofMontpellier,Montpellier,France, Germany, 4Division of Gynecology, Poznan, Poland, 2LaboratoiredeGenetiqueMoleculaire_UniversityMedicalAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 161 Center of Montpellier, Montpellier cedex 5, France, L. Cayrefourcq: None. M.C. Vincent: None. S. 3Laboratoire de diagnostic pré-implantatoire_CMCO_Uni- Pierredon: None. C. Moutou: None. M. Imbert-Bou- versityMedicalCenterofStrasbourg,Schiltigheim,France, teille: None. E. Haquet: None. J. Puechberty: None. M. 4Departement de Genetique Medicale_University Medical Willems: None. C. Liautard-Haag: None. N. Molinari: Center of Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5DIM_Univer- None. C. Zordan: None. V. Dorian: None. A. Chausse- sity Medical Center of Montpellier, Montpellier, France, not: None. L. Monteil: None. C. Miry: None. Y. Petrov: 6ServicedeGenetiqueMedicale_UniversityMedicalCenter None. E. Le Boette: None. M. Fradin: None. C. Alix- of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 7Service de Genetique Panabiere: None. C. Guissart: None. Medicale_UniversityMedicalCenterofNice,Nice,France, 8ServicedeGenetiqueMedicale_UniversityMedicalCenter 
P01 .063.C of Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 9Department of Medical Development of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis for Medecinee_University Medical Center of Strasbourg, monogenic diseases: the example of Marfan syndrome Schiltigheim, France, 10Laboratoire de cytologie et cyto- and GCK diabetes genetique_University Medical Center of Nimes, Nîmes, France, 11Service de Genetique Medicale_ Medical Center T. Nouspikel1, A. Bottani2, V. Schwitzgebel1 of Saint Brieuc, Saint Brieuc, France, 12Service de Genetique Medicale_Medical Center of Saint Brieuc, Saint 1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, Brieuc, France 2Hôpital du Valais, Sion, Switzerland Introduction: Non-Invasive Prenatal Diagnosis (NIPD), Introduction: The presence of foetal DNA in maternal basedontheanalysisofcirculatingcell-freefetalDNA(cff- plasma allows for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of DNA), is successfully implemented for an increasing Mendelian diseases, through detection of known parental number of monogenic diseases. However, technical issues mutations. While identifying paternal mutations is related to cff-DNA characteristics remain, and not all straightforward,determiningwhetheramaternalmutationis mutations can be screened with this method, particularly present in the foetus requires relative dosage of maternal tripletexpansionmutationsthatfrequentlyconcernprenatal haplotypes (RHDO), via heterozygous SNPs on either side diagnosis requests. The objective of this study was to of the mutation. develop an approach to isolate and analyze Circulating Results: A custom library of 95 SNPs spread over a ~1 Trophoblastic Fetal Cells (CFTCs) for NIPD of monogenic MbregionaroundtheFBN1genewasusedfor aposteriori diseases caused by triplet repeat expansion or point analysis of two pregnancies in a couple with a paternal mutations. FBN1:c.5143delA mutation causing Marfan syndrome. In Materials and Methods: We developed a method for both cases, the mutation was detected in maternal plasma CFTC isolation based on DEPArrayTM sorting and used and conﬁrmed in amniotic ﬂuid or cord blood. We also Huntington’s disease as the clinical model for CFTC-based veriﬁed that the method could determine which maternal NIPD. Then, we investigated whether CFTC isolation and haplotype each foetus had inherited. Whole Genome Ampliﬁcation (WGA) could be used for In another couple with a maternal GCK:p.Gly246Arg NIPDincouplesatriskoftransmittingdifferentmonogenic mutationcausingMODY2,apanelof99SNPsover0.7Mb diseases. aroundGCKwasusedtoanalysematernalplasmaat16and Results:Ourdatashowedthatthealleledrop-outratewas 30 weeks gestation. In both samples, we correctly 3-fold higher in CFTCs than in maternal cells processed in determined the maternal haplotype inherited by the foetus thesameway.Moreover,wegavenewinsightsintoCFTCs and diagnosed the presence of the mutation, conﬁrmed by by compiling data obtained by extensive molecular testing cord blood DNA analysis. The same results were obtained by microsatellite multiplex PCR genotyping and by WGA by quantifying the number of DNA molecules, obtained followed by mini-exome sequencing. through molecular barcodes, rather than sequence reads. Conclusions:CFTCs appeartobeoftencharacterizedby Bioinformatic reduction of foetal fractions showed that a random state of genomic degradation. This might determination of maternal haplotypes remained possible challenge CFTC use for routine NIPD. This emphasizes down to 4.3% foetal DNA. the importance to have not a single diagnostic cell but Conclusions: Although preliminary, our results indicate multiple diagnostic cells. that a molecular barcode library of ~100 SNPs is adequate ThisresearchwasfundedbyFrenchMinistryofHealth- to achieve non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of monogenic DGOS, grant number PHRCI-16-068 (DIACCIMEX) and diseases, even at low foetal fractions. by Agence de la biomédecine, grant number 18AM
P009  T. Nouspikel: None. A. Bottani: None. V. (DIAFEXOME) Schwitzgebel: None.162 J.delPicchia 
P01 .064.A M. Blankenburg1, A. Weber1, S. Rauschke1,R. Becker2, K. NIPT revealed in a pregnant woman 5Mbp-13q Pötschick3, M. Stumm1 duplication, proved as a familial CNV by array CGH 1Medicover Genetics GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 2Zentrum I. Dimova1, I. Bradinova2, V. Peycheva3, R. Bozhilova3, R. für Pränataldiagnostik Kudamm 199, Berlin, Germany, Raynova2, K. Kercheva1, A. Savov2, I. Kremensky3, R. 3MedicoverHumangenetik-Berlin-Mitte,Berlin,Germany Kaneva3 Introduction:Noninvasiveprenataltests(NIPT)arescreening 1Medical University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2SBALAG methods to detect fetal aneuploidies with high speciﬁcity and "Maichin dom", Medical University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, sensitivity. Nevertheless, maternal factors as copy number 3Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University Soﬁa, variations(CNV)arereasonsfordiscrepanciesbetweenNIPT- Soﬁa, Bulgaria results and fetal karyotypes. We report a case with a con- spicuous trisomy 21 result after NIPT, an unsuspicious fetal Subchromosomal copy number variations (CNVs), known ultrasound and a normal karyotype following conventional as segmental deletions and duplications, are extensively chromosome analysis (CA) of amnioticﬂuid cells. distributed in human genome. A substantial proportion of Material and Methods: Next Generation sequencing these CNVs are associated with severe diseases, even with (NGS)ofcfDNA,CAfromperipheralblood,amnioticﬂuid some newly identiﬁed microdeletion and microduplication and placental cells, Fluorescence-in-situ-Hybridization syndromes. Recently it was showed that NIPT has a good (FISH)onmetaphasesandinterphases,array-CGH(aCGH) performance in detecting fetal subchromosomal CNVs, and quantitative PCR (qPCR). especially for CNVs >10 Mb, and can be incorporated into Results: NIPT indicated a fetal trisomy 21. In contrast, theroutineNIPTchromosomalaneuploidiesscreeningwith ultrasound examination and amniocentesis showed normal high sensitivity and speciﬁcity. The prenatal detection of results. Reanalysis of NIPT by WISECONDOR algorithm CNVs with clinical signiﬁcance would beneﬁt all the showed a 10 Mb gain on chromosome 21. No comparable pregnant women in genetic counselling and clinical man- cases were described in literature or databases. The parents agement of the pregnant outcomes. We report here a result declinedfurther diagnostics until birth. Postpartum CA and from NIPT performed in a ﬁrst trimester of a pregnant FISH from blood and placental cells resulted in normal woman with third normal pregnancy. The test revealed karyotypes.Incontrast,aCGHconﬁrmeda1,44Mbgainin 5Mbp-13q duplication and array CGH was indicated for chromosomalregion21q21.3q22.11andtheaberrationwas conﬁrmation of the aberration after amniocentesis. Array classiﬁed as variant of unclear signiﬁcance (VUS). Addi- CGHconﬁrmedtheaberrationinafetuswiththefollowing tionalqPCRanalysesconﬁrmedthegainandshoweditwas size:13q21.2q21.31(60,540,987-65,431,854)x3(4.89Mb). maternalinherited.Therefore,wereclassiﬁedtheaberration Suchduplicationsin13qaredescribedintheliteraturetobe as a familial benign CNV. associated with the developmental delay, intellectual deﬁ- Conclusions: To best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst cits, behavioral problems, and facial dysmorphisms. We report of a small benign maternal chromosome 21 CNV testedallfamilymembersbyarrayCGHforthepresenceof leadingtoafalsepositivetrisomy21NIPTresult.Thatcase the aberrations - the parents and two siblings (9 years old demonstratesagaintheimportanceofacriticalreﬂectionof girl and 12 years old boy). The same aberration was genotype/phenotype correlations after NIPT. detected in clinically healthy mother and sister, thus deter- M.Blankenburg:None.A.Weber:None.S.Rauschke: mining the familial character of the aberration. In conclu- None. R. Becker: None. K. Pötschick: None. M. sion, careful evaluation should be done for each Stumm: None. submiscroscopic aberration detected by NIPT in order to make proper classiﬁcation and give an adequate genetic 
P01 .068.B counselling. Circulating miRNAs as biomarkers to assess fetal I. Dimova: None. I. Bradinova: None. V. Peycheva: fraction level None. R. Bozhilova: None. R. Raynova: None. K. Kercheva: None. A. Savov: None. I. Kremensky: None. G. Santoro1, S. Caporilli1, C. Lapucci1, M. Rusin2, M. R. Kaneva: None. Giannoccaro1, A. Della Gatta2, S. Amodeo2, A. Farina2 
P01 .067.A 1Synlab Italia, Castenedolo, Italy, 2Università di Bologna, False positive trisomy 21 NIPT-result due to maternal Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche (DIMEC), inherited CNV Bologna, ItalyAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 163 Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) methods are widely sviluppo,AziendaOspedaliero-UniversitariaSenese,Siena, usedasscreeningtoolforfetalaneuploidies.Theyarebased Italy, 6Centro Unico di Diagnosi Prenatale del P.O. Piero on the isolation of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from maternal Palagi, Firenze, Italy, 7UO ginecologia e ostetricia - ASL plasma which for the majority is maternal, but a small DI PISTOIA, Pistoia, Italy, 8Consultori e Diagnosi percentage of it comes from the placenta (cell-free fetal Prenatale USL 4, Prato, Italy DNAorcffDNA).cffDNApercentageorfetalfraction(FF) ranges from < 4% to >30% and it inﬂuences NIPT out- Introduction: Non invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) to come. According to neoBona® NIPT method used in our investigatetheriskforfetalaneuploidies(chromosomes13, laboratory, invalidation occurs with a FF <4%. Recently, 18 e 21 trisomies and X/Y aneuploidies) has been demon- circulating microRNAs (miRNAs) have been investigated strated to have high sensitivity and speciﬁcity and it is as potential biomarkers for screening in pregnancy. We worldwideacceptedbothascontingentscreeningasprimary aimed to investigate them as biomarkers in relation to FF test in ﬁrst trimester. level. Previously tested neoBona® samples were divided Materials and Methods: since March 2019, NIPT is intoone“controlgroup”(FF>4%)andone“testgroup”(FF offeredbypublichealthcare system inTuscany topregnant <4%). Samples were analysed in the nanostring nCounter® women with conventional ﬁrst trimester screening test platform by using a pre-customised panel of 799 miRNAs. (FTS) risk (nuchal translucency and biochemical measure- Each miRNA expression value was normalised to 1 in the ments)rangingfrom1:301-1:1000or1:2-1:300iftheyopt- “controlgroup”and“testgroup”sampleswereanalysedfor out invasive prenatal diagnosis. Women are counseled in expression defects. Data ﬁltering was set using 1.5-fold of different centers spread out over the regional area. Blood changes in signal as threshold. Ninety-three per cent of samples are collected in a single regional center authorized miRNAs showed no signiﬁcant changes of expression toperformthetestforchromosomes13,18,21,XandYby whilst 4 miRNAs (named miR-579, miR-3144, miR-612 CE-IVD VeriSeq™ NIPT Solution (Illumina Inc.). andmiR-6721)weresigniﬁcantlyover-orunder-expressed. Results: Since March to December 2019, 2199 women Bioinformatic analysis showed involvement of these miR- have been screened of which 429 with a FTS risk ranging NAs and their target genes in several biological pathways. from1:2-1:300and940from1:301-1:1000.396outof429 Further investigations of these preliminary data could pro- NIPTresultswereatlowriskforfetalaneuploidieswhereas vide a new insight into the biological roles of the miRNAs 7/429resultedathighriskforT21(n=4),T18(n=1)and in relation to FF level and in their potential use as XXX (n = 2). All these results have been conﬁrmed by biomarkers. IPD.IntheFT
S1 :301-1:1000riskgroup,738casesresulted G. Santoro: None. S. Caporilli: None. C. Lapucci: at low risk for fetal aneuploidies and 5 at high risk for T21 None. M. Rusin: None. M. Giannoccaro: None. A. Della (n=1),T18(n=1),XXY(n=2)andXXX(n=1).Only Gatta: None. S. Amodeo: None. A. Farina: None. sexchromosomeaneuploidyresultshavebeenconﬁrmedby IPD. Conclusions. Preliminary data show that of the 
P01 .071.B Tuscany region protocol improve the pregnancy care An Italian public regional healthcare system experience pathway by reducing inappropriate invasive tests. offeringnoninvasiveaneuploidyscreeningtestbasedon C. Pescucci: None. F. Gerundino: None. C. Giuliani: cfDNA (NIPT) None. B. Minuti: None. F. Sbernini: None. S. Frusconi: None. F. Marin: None. L. Giulietti: None. C. Berni: C. Pescucci1, F. Gerundino1, C. Giuliani1, B. Minuti1, F. None. L. Pasquini: None. C. Luchi: None. F. Severi: Sbernini1, S. Frusconi1, F. Marin1, L. Giulietti1, C. Berni2, None.A.Cordisco:None.B.Melani:None.E.Mainandi: L. Pasquini3, C. Luchi4, F. Severi5, A. Cordisco6, B. None. E. Pelo: None. Melani7, E. Mainandi8, E. Pelo1 
P01 .075.C 1SOD Diagnostica Genetica, Azienda Ospedaliero Uni- THE FREQUENCY OF RARE CHROMOSOMAL versitariaCareggi,Firenze,Italy,2P.O.Reteintegratadelle TRISOMIES USING GENOME WIDE NIPT malattierareedeidifetticongenitiesviluppodellaretedei puntinascitaedellapediatriaspecialistica,SettoreQualità I. M. TEKIN1, H. OZDEMIR2, H. OZGUR1, Y. SAHIN1 dei servizi e reti cliniche, Regione Toscana, Firenze, Italy, 3Medicina e Diagnosi Fetale, Azienda Ospedaliero Uni- 1Genoks Genetic Diseases Diagnostic Center, Ankara, versitaria Careggi, Firenze, Italy, 4U.O. Ostericia e Turkey, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Divi- Ginecologia, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, sion of Perinatology, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Pisa, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare dello Ankara, Turkey164 J.delPicchia Objective: When non invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) with most errors affecting meiosis I/II. Application of next incorporating whole genome sequencing (WGS) is per- generationsequencing(NGS)hasallowedustoconﬁrmour formed, the autosomal aneuploidies other than trisomy 21, ﬁnding, from molecular cytogenetics, that a signiﬁcant 18 and 13 has the potential to be detected. We present the proportion of apparently meiotic aneuploidy is in fact pre- frequency of rare chromosomal trisomies (RATs) that were sent in the early embryo, leading to a risk of oocyte aneu- identiﬁed between 1 July 2018 and 31 December 2019 ploidyirrespectiveofage.Ithasalsoprovidedevidencethat Methods:Standardcentrifugationmethodswereusedfor genetic factors inﬂuence premeiotic oocyte aneuploidy. plasma isolation. Cell free DNA (cfDNA) was isolated and NGS was performed on oocytes using Ion ReproSeqPGS library construction was prepared according to BGI’s (ThermoFisher)/VeriSeqPGS (Illumina). Immature oocytes documented protocol. WGS ofcfDNAwas performed with (84) included germinal vesicles & metaphase I oocytes. BGISEQ-500 sequencer. Data was analysed using BGI’s Mature oocytes (27) were metaphase II - 1st polar body proprietary bioinformatic programme, HALOS. complexes. Totally, 111 oocytes from 33 women, (average Results: WGS data was generated from 13,802 NIPT maternal age, 35.09 years) were tested. Overall 15/111 cases. The mean maternal age was 33 years, fetal fraction (13.5%) oocytes showed premeiotic (PM) errors. Eight of was 10.7% and gestational age at testing was 14 weeks. 33 patients had oocytes with PM errors. Aneuploidy ana- Over an 18-month period, there were 30 RATs identiﬁed. lysis was based on the reproductive histories of female The overall frequency of RATs was 0.21% in our study. partnersdonatingoocytes.Interestinglytheﬁrsttwogroups Trisomies 16 and 22 were the most frequently observed of infertility patients showed almost identical aneuploidy RATs while other chromosomes were less frequently rates in contrast to the social oocyte freezing group. Two involved. Invasive prenatal diagnosis was performed in young women preserving oocytes prior to breast cancer 37% (11/30) of cases with RATs. Three fetal aneuploidies treatment showed complex aneuploidies. We conclude that were conﬁrmed with amniocentesis; one was T16 and the the application of NGS has provided accurate information others were T22. regarding the frequency of aneuploidy that is due to pre- Conclusions: Rare autosomal aneuploidies are not meioticerrorscomparedwiththatcausedbyerrorsatMIof uncommon in clinical practice when performing genome- oogenesis and that on an individual basis this is inﬂuenced wide NIPT. The review of the published reports show a by genetic factors. Grant support: CRGH signiﬁcant risk for obstetric pathology and fetal anomalies such as early miscarriage, true fetal mosaicism,intrauterine Classiﬁcationoffemalepartnersdonatingoocytes growth restriction, in utero fetal demise, and uniparental Classiﬁcationoffemale No.of Total Oocyteswith disomy. We advise genetic counseling in all cases of rare partnersbasedon patients oocytestested premeiotic chromosomaltrisomiestoimprovepregnancymanagement. reproductivehistories aneuploidy I.M.Tekin:None.H.Ozdemir:None.H.Ozgur:None. Y. Sahin: None. 1.Primary/secondaryfemale 13 32 5(15.6%) factorinfertility 2.Femalesnotknowntobe 11 32 4(12.5%) 
P01 .076.A infertile(probablemale Next generation sequencing detects premeiotic errors in factorinfertility) human oocytes and provides evidence of genetic 3.Oocytepreservationdue 2 21 1(4.7%) inﬂuence tosocialreasons 4.Oocytepreservationdue 2 10 5(50%) H.Ghevaria1,S.SenGupta1,R.Naja2,R.Odia3,P.Serhal4, tobreastcancer X. Viñals Gonzalez3, X. Sun1, J. Delhanty1 5.Femalecarriersof 3 6 0 structuralrearrangementsor monogenicdisorders(non- 1Preimplantation Genetics Group, University College cancerrelated) London, London, United Kingdom, 2Molecular Genetics 6.Femalesatincreasedrisk 2 10 0 Laboratory, Igenomix UK Ltd, London, London, United ofdevelopingbreast/ Kingdom, 3Embryology Department, The Centre For ovariancancer Reproductive and Genetic Health, London, United King- dom, 4Clinical Department, The Centre For Reproductive and Genetic Health, London, United Kingdom H. Ghevaria: None. S. SenGupta: None. R. Naja: None. R. Odia: None. P. Serhal: None. X. Viñals As women age the risk of an aneuploid oocyte increases Gonzalez: None. X. Sun: None. J. Delhanty: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 165 
P01 .080.B P. Tulay, Z. Al-Omar, B. Ozbakir Interrogatingtheparentalandzygoticoriginofdenovo mutations in severe male infertility using long read Near East University, Nicosia, Cyprus sequencing Polycystic ovary syndrome is a common disorder among G.S. Holt1,B.Alobaidi1,L. Batty1,M.Oud2,H.Smith1,P. women of reproductive age. The aim of this study was to de Vries2, R. Smits2, L. Vissers2, L. Ramos2, M. Xavier1, J. investigatethegeneexpressionlevelsofanumberofgenes Veltman1 that is functioning in steroidogenesis and in the main- tenance of telomeres. 1Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle The spare oocytes were collected from IVF patients with Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department of Human polycystic ovaries and routine IVF patients as controls. Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and DNA and RNA were extracted from each oocyte. Reverse Behavior, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands transcriptionofRNAwasperformedandrealtimePCRwas conductedtoquantifytheexpressionlevelsofelevengenes, Male infertility affects approximately 7% of the male TERF1, TRF2, TINF2, TP
P1 , POT1, RA
P1 , CY
P11 , population and while genetic abnormalities arepredicted to CY
P17 , CY
P19 , HSD17B1 and HSD3B2. make up at least 15% of the cases, only ~4% are currently Theresultsofthisstudyshowedthattheexpressionlevels identiﬁed. In severe forms of male infertility, patients are ofTERT,TRF,TINF,TPP,RAP,CY
P19 andHSD3B2were foundtohavehighnumbersofgeneticabnormalitiesandde similar between the two groups. However, the expression novomutations(DNMs).InterestinglyDNMsareknownto levels of POT and CY
P11 A1 genes were shown to be play an important role in severe genetic diseases with statistically different in the oocytes obtained from control reduced reproductive ﬁtness. Our research investigates the patients (p < 0.05), whereas statistically signiﬁcant expres- role of DNMs in severe male infertility by studying a sion levels were observed for CY
P17  in the oocytes unique cohort of azoospermic and severe oligozoospermic obtained from the study group (p < 0.05). The expression patients, and their fertile parents. Employing the Illumina’s level of HSD17B1was also shown to be statistically Novaseq6000, 100 DNMs were identiﬁed in the exomes of different in the oocytes (p < 0.05). 99 patients. While short-read sequencing data was used to The results of this study showed that different gene collect the location and genotypes of all informative SNPs expressionlevelsareobservedintheoocytesobtainedfrom (iSNPs)surroundingtheDNMs,limitationsinfragmentsize females with polycystic ovaries compared to the controls. prevented further investigation. In-depth examination of The extrapolation of the results indicates that the genes DNMs in context with their surrounding iSNPs requires essential in maintaining DNA chromosome end integrity targeted capture approaches for long-read sequencing that and steroidogenesis are crucial for the correct development span the entire region of interest. Using PCR amplicon of the oocytes. Any variations of the expression levels of sequencing on the Oxford-Nanopore MinION platform we these genes may result in anomalies of the oocyte have been able to phase ~90% of the DNMs. Phasing maturation. analysis indicated that ~71% of DNMs occurred in the P.Tulay:None.Z.Al-Omar:None.B.Ozbakir:None. paternal gamete pre-fertilization, which is in concordance with current literature. A link between paternal DNMs and 
P01 .085.A likely causation for disease has been noted, though not all Regulatory variants upstream of FLT1 as risk factors data was available for this association at this time. Inves- for preeclampsia tigation of allele frequency identiﬁed 91% of the DNMs occurred pre-zygotically, why they failed to impact father T. Kikas1, R. Inno1, K. Ratnik1,2, K. Rull1,3,4, M. Laan1 spermatogenesis is of particular interest for further study. G.S.Holt:None.B.Alobaidi:None.L.Batty:None.M. 1University of Tartu, Institute of Bio- and Translational Oud:None.H.Smith:None.P.deVries:None.R.Smits: Medicine, Tartu, Estonia, 2SYNLAB Estonia OÜ, Tartu, None. L. Vissers: None. L. Ramos: None. M. Xavier: Estonia,3Women’sClinic,TartuUniversityHospital,Tartu, None. J. Veltman: None. Estonia, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia 
P01 .082.A Polycystic ovary syndrome: Does it affect the gene Introduction:TheﬁrstGWASassessingthegeneticriskto expression patterns in human oocytes? preeclampsia (PE) in placental samples by McGinnis et al., 2017 identiﬁed one statistically signiﬁcant variant asso- ciated with PE (rs4769613 C>T; OR=1.2, P=5.4×10−11).166 J.delPicchia The variant is located near a well-known PE gene FLT1 regulatory single-nucleotide polymorphisms (rSNPs) of encoding sFlt-1. The aim of this study was to further differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in placenta and to investigate the link between two variants highlighted in detect the role of natural selection in its formation. GWAS near FLT1 gene (rs4769613, rs12050029; 69kb/ Materials and Methods: In this report we analyzed 46 158kb, respectively) and PE in two independent cohorts. rSNPs in 21 DEGs, associated with PE according to the Materials and Methods: The study utilized placental analysis of the transcriptome in 551 patients with PE and samplesfromEstonianREPROMETAandHAPPYPREG- 718 women with uncomplicated pregnancies of Buryat, NANCY(placentasn=329/1768,respectively)samplesets, Russian and Yakut populations using MassArray iPLEX includingPEandnon-PEcontrols(totaln=96/2001).SNPs (Sequenom).Fordetectionofthesignalsofnaturalselection (rs4769613, rs12050029) were genotyped using Taqman we used new INSIGHT method. assays. Association analyses and case-control testing were Results: We have detected signiﬁcant associations of PE conducted in PLINK (linear or logistic regression, covari- with 14 rSNPs in 10 genes: BHLH
E40 , CORO2A, INHA, ates gestational age, sex). LHB, NDRG1, PP
P1 R12C, PLIN2, RDH13, SASH1, Results: Case-control testing showed an increased risk SYD
E1 . The effect of weak negative selection has being for PE with rs4769613 C allele in both Estonian sample shown for 4 rSNPs in 4 DEGs: rs10985257 in CORO2A sets, concordant with the previous study. Meta-analysis gene, rs72959687 in INHA gene, rs34845949 in SASH1 across the two cohorts improved the signiﬁcance gene, rs2227262 in NDRG1 gene. It should be noted that (OR=1.75, P = 2.49×10−3). As a novel ﬁnding, no these results corresponds to number of evolutionary associations between rs4769613 and other gestational hypotheses of the occurrence of PE. complications (gestational diabetes, fetal growth, preterm Conclusions:Ourresultsdemonstratethesigniﬁcantrole birth) were detected, which suggests the variant is PE- ofstudiedrSNPsofDEGsandtheiradaptivechangesinthe speciﬁc.ThegeneexpressionofFLT1wasupregulatedonly hereditary predisposition to PE. This work was supported inPEplacentascarrying CC-andCTgenotypes(t-test,P< bytheRussianFoundationforBasicResearch(grant№18- 0.05), whereas in maternal serum, sFlt-1 was increased in 29-13045). PE cases in all genotype groups. V. Serebrova: None. E. Trifonova: None. V. Conclusions: The study emphasizes the placental Stepanov: None. rs4769613 as the only known robust and speciﬁc risk variant for PE, modulating placental FLT1 expression. 
P01 .087.C Funding: IUT34-12 (Estonian Research Council); Genetic risk factors for pre-eclampsia in the Finnish HAPPY PREGNANCY, 3.2.0701.12-0047 (European population Regional Development Fund) T. Kikas: None. R. Inno: None. K. Ratnik: A. T. Kaartokallio1, S. Ruotsalainen2, T. Palviainen2, T. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; SYNLAB Hiekkalinna3,4, K. Auro2,5, M. Perola5,6, FINNPEC, K. Estonia OÜ. K. Rull: None. M. Laan: None. Kivinen2, H. Laivuori1,2,7 
P01 .086.B 1Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki and Theroleofnewgeneticmarkersandnaturalselectionin Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute the formation of a hereditary predisposition to for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki Institute of Life preeclampsia Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 4Clin- V. Serebrova, E. Trifonova, V. Stepanov ical and Molecular Metabolism Research Program, Uni- versityofHelsinki,Helsinki,Finland,5NationalInstitutefor Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 6Diabetes and Research Medical Center of the Russian Academy of Obesity Research Program, University of Helsinki, Hel- Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation sinki, Finland, 7Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tampere University Hospital and Tampere University, Introduction: Preeclampsia (PE) is a pregnancy-speciﬁc Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere, complication with the poorly understood etiopathogenesis. Finland ThereisahypothesisthattherisktothedevelopmentofPE may be a consequence of natural selection affecting on Introduction: Pre-eclampsia (PE) is a vascular pregnancy placental genes responsible for trophoblast invasion and disorderwithmaternalandfetalgeneticcomponents.Asthe remodeling of spiral arteries. The aim of this work was to disease negatively affects reproductive success, the risk characterize the genetic components of PE by analysis of variants are assumed to be under purifying evolutionaryAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 167 selection.Theamountoflow-frequencypathogenicvariants precise outcome predictions are still hard to grasp. Coun- has shown to be increased in Finland due to recent bottle- seling PGT couples remains delicate due to numerous necks, increasing statistical power in genetic studies. We parameters inﬂuencing outcome. Comparing success rates aim to screen for genetic risk factors for PE in the families to (inter)national reference data is part of good clinical mainly originating from a northeastern Finland population practice. PGT technologies evolve at high speed, going isolate, and generalise the results for the whole population. from different biopsy timepoints to more extensive genetic Methods: The PE family cohort consists of 15 extended methodologies, making good comparisons difﬁcult. By families. DNA is available for 174 family members detailedevaluationofourin-housedata,andcomparisonto (mothers: 62 PE+32 ctrl; babies: 41 PE+39 ctrl). Using published data from (inter)national clinics, we obtained genome-wideimputeddata,wehaveperformedlinkageand additional insights and can provide couples with more family-basedassociationanalyseswithPSEUDOMARKER patient-focused information. We performed a retrospective and PLINK to study segregation of loci with both maternal cohort study at the Department for Reproductive Medicine and fetal phenotypes. We will seek replication of the and the Center for Medical Genetics (Ghent University ﬁndingsbyassociationanalysisintwoFinnishcohortswith Hospital), including patients who underwent ICSI-IVF genome-wideimputeddataavailable,theFINRISKpopula- (January 2016-April 2019) followed by PGT-SR or PGT- tion survey (426 PE+8357 ctrl) and the FINNPEC case- A after trophectoderm biopsy (68 and 90 oocyte retrieval control cohort (mothers:1533 PE+995 ctrl; babies:818 PE cycles respectively). Making use of comprehensive chro- +925 ctrl). mosome screening (shallow whole genome sequencing or Results:Inthelinkagescreen,weidentiﬁed~35maternal sWGS),wedetectedchromosomalabnormalities in65%of and 40 fetal candidate loci when using a lenient p-value PGT-SR embryos. In the PGT-A group, 40% of embryos threshold p < 5x10−5. The FINRISK association analysis showed a numerical or structural rearrangement. For showed suggestive replication (p < 5x10−6) of two of the translocation carriers, pregnancy rate per transfer was 58% loci, maternal signal in chr9 close to GA
S1  and fetal signal and live birth rate per transfer 44%. For PGT-A patients, inchr16inCDH13.Nextstepsincludeassociationanalysis pregnancy rate and live birth rate were 39% and 25% in FINNPEC and meta-analysis in both cohorts to verify respectively. these preliminary ﬁndings. M. Baetens: None. I. De Croo: None. A. Dheedene: Funding: Academy of Finland, Erkko, Kordelin and None. K. Tilleman: None. B. Menten: None. Sohlberg Foundations, and VTR funding. T. Kaartokallio: None. S. Ruotsalainen: None. T. 
P01 .090.C Palviainen:None.T.Hiekkalinna:None.K.Auro:None. Preimplantation Genetic Testing (PGT) for cancer M. Perola: None. K. Kivinen: None. H. Laivuori: None. predisposition: A single center large cohort experience 
P01 .089.B S. Zuckerman1, O. Freireich1, T. Eldar-Geva2, S. A Retrospective Study of In Vitro Fertilization and Lieberman1, S. Shaviv1, A. Yadin1, E. Farhi1, E. Hakam- Preimplantation Genetic Testing for chromosomal Spector1, M. Ben-Shlomo1, T. Azar1, E. Zivi2, E. aberrations (PGT-SR and PGT-A) combined with Rubinstein2, O. Schonberger2, I. Ben-Ami2, G. Altarescu1 Clinical Outcome 1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, M. Baetens1, I. De Croo2, A. Dheedene1, K. Tilleman2, B. Jerusalem,Israel,2IVFunit,ShaareZedekMedicalCenter, Menten1 Jerusalem, Israel 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Inthelastdecadeanincreasingnumberofpeoplecarriersof Ghent, Belgium, 2Department for Reproductive Medicine, cancer predisposition mutations (CCPM) are performing Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium PGT-M. PGT-M for these late-onset and partial penetrant conditions implies that the procedure selects against PGTforstructuralrearrangements(PGT-SR)canbeoffered embryos that might have been cancer-free. Moreover, pre- to patients carrying an inversion, balanced reciprocal or ventive and therapeutic options for decreasing morbidity Robertsonian translocation, and PGT for aneuploidy and mortality are available and ongoing cancer research screening (PGT-A) to patients with fertility problems or mightrevealtreatmentsalteringthenaturalhistoryofcancer recurrentmiscarriages.Selectingagainstembryoswithouta inthefuture.MoststudiesexploringperceptionsofPGT-M chromosomal rearrangement could improve live birth rates among CCPM, were based on participants’ theoretical while reducing miscarriage rates or avoiding birth of an declarative intentions. Actual use has rarely been reported affectedchild.PGTisanextended,stressfultrajectorywhile andanalyzed.Between2006-2019overall173CCPMwere168 J.delPicchia counseled in our center: One couple between 2006-2008 questionnaires.Thesedataincludedparentalcharacteristics, and gradual increase until 102 CCPM between 2018-2019. characteristicsofthetreatmentprecedingthepregnancyand Six were single women (3.4%) and 167 couples (96.5%). obstetric and neonatal characteristics. Among them 145(83.8%) were BRCA1/BRCA2 carriers Results: Obstetric complications were reported in 18% (92/48 respectively; 5 BRCA1+BRCA2), 10(5.8%) Lynch and 19% of the singleton pregnancies in the PGT and carriers, 10(5.8%) APC carriers, 4(2.3%) T
P53  carriers, 2 regular IVF/ICSI group, respectively (P = 0.103). The risk (1.2%) MEN2 carriers, 1(0.6%) CHEK2 carrier and 1 forstillbirthwaslowerinthePGTgroup(P=0.044).Birth (0.6%) BMPR1A carrier. Overall, 150(86.7%) of the car- weights of all singletons were converted into z-scores and riers were healthy and 23(13.2%) were diagnosed with showedacomparablebirthweightforthetwogroups(0.09 cancer or related condition. In 120(69.4%) couples the vs. -0.02; P = 0.084). Within the multiple pregnancies, the carrier was the women partner; in 51(29.5%) couples the risk for obstetric complications (P = 0.535) and the carrier was the men partner and in 2(1.2%) couples both incidenceoffetalloss(P=0.617)wascomparablebetween partners were carriers. Five)2.8%) couples had additional thePGTandIVF/ICSIgroup.Themeanpregnancyduration reason for PGT-M/PGT-SR. Overall Live birth rate for was longer (P = 0.037) and the mean birth weight was embryo transfer was 32%. Reproductive decision-making higher (P = 0.010) in the PGT group. More monozygotic regarding PGT-M for CCPM is a complex process. While pregnancies were observed in the PGT group (P = 0.009). this application for PGT-M becomes acceptable, health Conclusions: The more invasive nature of the PGT-M/ professionals involved in the process should be aware and SRtechniquedoesnotleadtoanincreasedriskforobstetric address the speciﬁc issues and concerns of this group complicationsascomparedtoaregularIVF/ICSItreatment. regarding medical, emotional and moral aspects. M. Heijligers: None. Y. Arens: None. R. van Golde: S. Zuckerman: None. O. Freireich: None. T. Eldar- None. M. van der Hoeven: None. J. Dumoulin: None. I. Geva: None. S. Lieberman: None. S. Shaviv: None. A. Homminga: None. C. van Tilborg: None. C. de Die- Yadin: None. E. Farhi: None. E. Hakam-Spector: None. Smulders: None. A. van Montfoort: None. M. Ben-Shlomo: None. T. Azar: None. E. Zivi: None. E. Rubinstein: None. O. Schonberger: None. I. Ben-Ami: 
P01 .092.B None. G. Altarescu: None. Results gained from fetal exome sequencing inform clinical management. A report of 100 cases. 
P01 .091.A Obstetric risks associated with preimplantation genetic E. Dempsey1, L. Ive2, R. Dubis2, E. Serra2, H. Savage2, A. testing for monogenic disorders and structural chromo- Haworth2, S. Mansour1, T. Homfray1, S. Drury2 somal rearrangements (PGT-M/SR) compared to regular IVF/ICSI. 1St George’s University of London, London, United King- dom, 2Congenica Ltd, Cambridge, United Kingdom M. Heijligers1, Y. Arens1, R. van Golde1, M. van der Hoeven1, J. Dumoulin1, I. Homminga2, C. van Tilborg3, C. Introduction:Exomesequencingincasesoffetalstructural de Die-Smulders1, A. van Montfoort1 malformation has been shown to increase diagnostic yield (over traditional diagnostic methods) by 8-80%, depending 1Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, on phenotype. This technique is soon to be made available Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Groningen, Gro- throughout England as part of a centralisation and stan- ningen, Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Utrecht, dardisation of genetic laboratory services. Utrecht, Netherlands Materials and Methods: We have undertaken exome sequencingin100casesoffetalanomalyaspartofaservice Introduction: Earlier studies on the obstetric outcome in improvement project at St George’s Hospital. In half of pregnancies following PGT are inconclusive since both an cases sequencing was undertaken with the intention of increased risk and no increased risk for adverse obstetric informingthemanagementofanongoingpregnancy.Inthe outcome are reported. Moreover, not all of these studies remaining cases exome sequencing was undertaken post- distinguish between PGT for monogenic disorders or mortem. Exome data was analysed via the application of structural chromosomal rearrangements (PGT-M/SR) and patient-speciﬁc phenotype panels, reducing the risk of PGT for aneuploidies (PGT-A). incidental ﬁndings. Methods: This retrospective cohort study included all Results: Our diagnostic rate across all cases is ~ 40 % pregnancies resulting from PGT-M/SR (n = 389) and IVF/ and higher in cases with skeletal and oedema phenotypes. ICSI treatments (n = 1667) conducted between 2004 and Exome results have inﬂuenced the management of preg- 2014. Data were collected from the medical ﬁles and from nancy and labour. They have also directed early neonatalAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 169 care, including enabling the treatment of a newborn with ﬁlteredoutintheprenatalsettingduetovariousreasons,but enzymereplacementtherapy.The results ofexome sequen- could be established using additional postnatal phenotypic cing have been used for accurate assessment of recurrence characteristics. In general, the prenatal phenotype on risk. In addition, results can be used for prenatal testing or ultrasound corresponded well with postnatal phenotype preimplantation genetic diagnosis in a future pregnancy. although some features were not detected by the prenatal Conclusions: Using speciﬁc case examples we will ultrasound examination. describe the way in which the results of fetal exome Conclusions: Increased knowledge about the prenatal sequencing have inﬂuenced clinical management. We will fetalphenotypeisimportantforimprovingtheinterpretation also describe the challenges we have encountered in the and classiﬁcation of fetal genetic variants. This will lead to implementation of a fetal exome sequencing service, improvement of parental genetic counseling as well as including the analysis of variants of uncertain signiﬁcance prenatal and neonatal care. in phenotype-limited situations. L. Leeuwen: None. K. Bouman: None. N. Corsten- E.Dempsey:None.L.Ive:A.Employment(fullorpart- Janssen: None. time); Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. R. Dubis: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. E. 
P01 .098.B Serra: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; LessonslearnedfromrapidExomeSequencing(rES)asa Congenica. H. Savage: A. Employment (full or part-time); standard diagnostic test in a prenatal setting for fetuses Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. A. Haworth: A. Employment with ultrasound abnormalities. (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CongenicaLtd.S.Mansour: None.T. Homfray: None. S. Drury: A.Employment (full N. Corsten-Janssen1, K. Bouman1, A. J. Scheper1, M. T. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. Meems-Veldhuis1, J. B. G. M. Verheij1, R. Suijkerbuijk1, L. K.Duin2,G.T.R.Manten3,I.M.vanLangen1,B.Sikkema- 
P01 .093.C Raddatz1, H. Westers1, C. C. van Diemen1 Whole-exome sequencing in the prenatal setting: relat- ing fetal phenotype to genotype 1Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, Uni- versity Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Nether- L. Leeuwen, K. Bouman, N. Corsten-Janssen lands,2DepartmentofObstetrics,GynecologyandPrenatal Diagnosis, University Medical Centre Groningen, Gronin- UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands gen, Netherlands, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecol- ogy, Isala, Zwolle, Zwolle, Netherlands Introduction: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) is increasingly being used in the prenatal setting. However, Background: Adding rES to conventional genetic tests for interpretation of WES data is complicated due to various fetuses with ultrasound abnormalities improves the diag- factors including limited knowledge on the prenatal fetal nostic yield, but differs from performing postnatal rES for phenotypeofraremonogenicdisorders.Wethereforeaimed instance by its rapid turnaround time and the impact of a to describe the prenatal fetal phenotype of genetic variants diagnosis. We will present the lessons we learned by per- found by WES. forming rES as a diagnostic test in prenatal care from Methods:Inthissingle-centerstudy,weincludedfetuses March 2018. inwhomWESwasindicatedinaprenataldiagnosticsetting Methods:WeperformedtriorESanalysisusingacustom between March 1, 2018 and January 1, 2020 during virtual gene panel of ~4,300 OMIM genes during pregnancyorafterterminationofpregnancy.Weperformed pregnancy. Inclusion criteria were: 1) two or more trio WES using a phenotype-dependent ﬁltering strategy. independent major fetal anomalies, or 2) hydrops fetalis We documented prenatal and postnatal characteristics of or bilateral polycystic kidneys, or 3) one major fetal fetuses and compared the phenotype with literature using anomaly and a ﬁrst-degree relative with the same anomaly. PubMed. Results:WeestablishedageneticrES-baseddiagnosisin Results:WESwasperformedin93fetuses.Apathogenic 14outof54(26%)eligiblefetuseswithameanturnaround or likely pathogenic variant was found in 29 (31.2%) time of 14 days. We learned the following lessons: (1) We fetuses(21different genes).Foreightgenes,itwastheﬁrst made unexpected diagnoses using our broad virtual panel, time a causative genetic variant was found in a prenatal like Zellweger syndrome in a fetus suspected of a setting (
C2 CD3,CNOT1,GATA6, PLD1,POMK,SAMD9, ciliopathy. (2) We missed four diagnoses that were made SM
C3 ,THO
C6 ). In three fetuses, some detected structural postnatally using additional phenotypic information and anomalies have not previously been described (PEX1-, adapted our ﬁlter strategy. 3) We were confronted with POMK-,THO
C6 -variants). In three fetuses, diagnosis was incidental unsolicited ﬁndings and changed our ﬁlter170 J.delPicchia strategytominimizethem.(4)Thereisalackofknowledge Conclusions: Here we described a novel bioinformatic about prenatal phenotype of known genetic conditions, algorithm to determine the sex of both fetuses in twin which hinders diagnostics. Further, we experienced the pregnancies,bytheanalysisofcell-freefetalDNAfromthe impact of time pressure to generate a diagnosis in limited maternalplasma.Ouralgorithmachievedsuperioraccuracy time and had to deal with changing fetal phenotypes. in fetal sex prediction in twins compared to known Conclusion: rES in the prenatal setting is feasible but bioinformatics tools. Moreover, it provides supporting challenging,andimprovesbyadaptingtheprocessbasedon graphs for visual inspection and calculation of prediction insights from previous experiences. conﬁdence. N. Corsten-Janssen: None. K. Bouman: None. A.J. Keywords: non-invasive prenatal testing, twin preg- Scheper: None. M.T. Meems-Veldhuis: None. J.B.G.M. nancy, whole-genome sequencing, fetal sex prediction Verheij: None. R. Suijkerbuijk: None. L.K. Duin: None. T. Sedlackova: A. Employment (full or part-time); G.T.R. Manten: None. I.M. van Langen: None. B. Modest; Geneton Ltd.. M. Hyblova: None. J. Budis: Sikkema-Raddatz: None. H. Westers: None. C.C. van None. M. Harsanyova: None. M. Kucharik: None. O. Diemen: None. Pos: None. M. Sekelska: None. B. Nagy: None. G. Minarik: None. T. Szemes: None. 
P01 .099.C Improvedfetalsexdeterminationintwinpregnanciesin 
P01 .100.A lowcoveragewhole-genomebasednon-invasiveprenatal The value of prenatal array to detect submicroscopic testing chromosomal imbalances in cases with abnormal fetal ultrasonographic ﬁndings; a retrospective study T. Sedlackova1, M. Hyblova2,3, J. Budis1,4,5, M. Harsanyova1,6,M.Kucharik1,5,O.Pos1,6,M.Sekelska2,3,B. L. OZER, M. Aydin, S. Aktuna, E. Unsal Nagy7, G. Minarik2,3, T. Szemes1,5,6 MIKROGEN GENETIC DIAGNOSIS CENTER, ANKARA, 1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Medirex Inc., Brati- Turkey slava, Slovakia, 3Trisomy Test Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Slovak Centre of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Chromosomal microarray (CMA) is used in prenatal diag- Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Comenius University Science Park, nosis for detecting CNVs which are too small to detect by Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Department of Molecular Biology, karyotyping. Here we report our laboratory’s array data of Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, prenatal samples and describe phenotype-genotype corre- Bratislava, Slovakia, 7Semmelweis University, Budapest, lations. Methods: 180 specimens (149 amniotic ﬂuid, 23 Hungary chorionicvilliand8cordbloodsamples)wereanalyzedby array CGH. Detection of genomic CNVs was performed Introduction:Fetalsexdeterminationisalreadyacommon using Agilent, 8x60K CGH Microarray. Interpretation was part of the standard non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT). doneaccordingtotheACMGguidelines.Results:%16.1of The current classiﬁcation methods are almost entirely patients (29/180), CNVs were detected. 24 of them had accurate for fetal sex prediction in singleton pregnancies, segmental duplication or deletion, 5 had trisomy and 1 had but they still show the limitations for multiple pregnancies, monosomy X. 3.3% of patients had aneuploidy, 4.4% of with98%reportedaccuracyoffetalsexpredictionintwins. patients had VUS variants and %8.8 of patients had Methods: We enrolled 99 maternal samples with twin pathogenic segmental deletions/duplications. 61.1% of the pregnancies and conﬁrmed fetus sex in this study. Since a segmental pathogenic variants were deletions and most of precise estimation of the fetal fraction is a key for correct the VUS variants were duplications (62.5%). 50% of the sex determination, we used a previously published segmental pathogenic variants were < 7 Mb and the improved predictor utilizing two different attributes of smallest size was 0.5MB (deletion). 22.2% of pathogenic analyzedgenomicmaterial-lengthandgenomiclocationof variants were well-deﬁned CNV syndromes. The most the sequenced DNA fragments. Subsequent fetal sex prevalent indications were ultrasonographic anomalies, prediction was performed using an SVM classiﬁer. increased triple test risk and advanced maternal age. While Results: Our method has shown perfect prediction 30%ofpatientswithnormalresultshavenormalultrasound, accuracy in distinguishing between pregnancies with two all patients with a pathogenic variant had an ultrasound femalefetusesandpregnancieswithatleastonemalefetus. anomaly. The most deﬁned ultrasonographic ﬁndings in Weobservedoneincorrectpredictionbetweenoneandtwo cases with pathogenic variants were cardiac anomalies, male fetuses. Overall, the accuracy of fetal sex prediction increased NT and brain anomalies. Conclusion: Detection was 98.99%. ofsubmicroscopicimbalancesbyCMAincreasesthepowerAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 171 ofprenataldiagnosis.Ourdataemphasizetheimportanceof and p.Phe1294del) causing autosomal recessive lymphatic CMAintheprenataldiagnosisofthefetuseswithabnormal dysplasia. Pregnancy was terminated in all 4 cases. ultrasonographic ﬁndings whereas conventional karyotyp- Conclusions: targeted WES is an adequate approach of ing resolution is inadequate to detect submicroscopic genome-wide sequencing for ongoing pregnancies with changes. fetal structural abnormalities suspicious for a genetic L. Ozer: None. M. Aydin: None. S. Aktuna: None. E. etiology and normal microarray. It has a diagnostic utility Unsal: None. and might facilitates genetic counseling. L. Quteineh: None. J. Pellegrinelli: None. M. Billieux: 
P01 .102.C None. M. Guipponi: None. S. Laurent: None. E. Targeted prenatal exome sequencing in a series of fetal Hammar: None. A. Murphy: None. M. Carminho structural anomalies detected by ultrasonography: ﬁrst Amaro Rodrigues: None. T. Ait-Mouhoub: None. F. experience of the University Hospitals of Geneva Sloan-Béna: None. S. Unger: None. F. Giuliano: None. C. Rieubland: None. J. Fluss: None. P. Extermann: L.Quteineh1,J.Pellegrinelli2,M.Billieux2,M.Guipponi1,3, None. J. Blouin: None. M. Abramowicz: None. S. S.Laurent1,E.Hammar1,A.Murphy1,M.CarminhoAmaro Fokstuen: None. Rodrigues1,T.Ait-Mouhoub1,F.Sloan-Béna1,S.Unger4,F. Giuliano4, C. Rieubland5, J. Fluss6, P. Extermann7, J. 
P01 .104.B Blouin1,3, M. Abramowicz1, S. Fokstuen1 Prenatal diagnosis of trisomies in CVS: are non-mosaic biallelic QF-PCR results prognostic? 1Service of Genetic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of gynecology and obstetrics, Geneva, Swit- A. R. Pendlebury-Watt1, K. Mann1, C. Ogilvie2 zerland, 3Department of Genetic Medicine and Develop- ment, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Service of Genetic Medicine, 1Viapath analytics, London, United Kingdom, 2Genetics Lausanne,Switzerland,5DepartmentofPediatrics,Division Department,GuysandSt.Thomas’NHSFoundationTrust, of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, 6Pediatric Neurol- London, United Kingdom ogy Unit, Geneva, Switzerland, 7Dianecho echographic center, Geneva, Switzerland Placental mosaicism for chromosome aneuploidy compli- catesprenatalanalysisofchorionicvillus(CV)samplesand Introduction: Diagnostic genome-wide sequencing has a reported incidence of up to 2%. Quantitative approaches to investigate prenatally detected anomalies are ﬂuorescence-PCR (QF-PCR) analysis of microsatellite increasingly used in fetal medicine. We aimed to evaluate repeats is widely used to establish chromosome copy the value of targeted whole exome sequencing (WES) in number of uncultured CV samples; if recommended pre- fetuseswithprenatalsonographicabnormalitiesandnormal paration methods are employed, both cytotrophoblast and microarray and karyotype. mesoderm should be represented. In the case of trisomy Materials and Methods: After informed consent was results, thepresenceofthree differentalleles isobservedin obtained, we sequenced the DNA from amniotic ﬂuid cells ~90% of cases, conﬁrming meiotic non-disjunction as the of 17 fetuses by WES (Illumina NextSEQ500). We then origin of the abnormal cell line. Where only biallelic 2:1 performed bioinformatic analysis of a selected gene panel. ratios areobserved,thetrisomy may havearisenbymitotic All cases were ongoing pregnancies. The genomic results non-disjunction following a normal conception, in which were obtained within 2 weeks. case a normal cell line may be present; European and UK Results: The 17 fetuses presented with the following best practice guidelines recommend that non-mosaic bial- anomalies: isolated brain malformations (n = 6), sustained lelic (NMB) results should be reported more cautiously, increased nuchal translucency (n = 3), multiple structural given the increased risk of mosaicism. However, the like- anomalies (n = 3), polyhydramnios (n = 1), situs inversus lihood of ﬁnding a normal cell line following an NMB (n = 1), renal cysts (n = 1), hydrops fetalis (n = 1) and resultisnotestablished.Wehavethereforeaudited10years skeletal dysplasia (n = 1). Causing variants were identiﬁed of cases and compared NMB results to the follow-up kar- in 4 cases (24%): two with sustained increased nuchal yotype and/or amniocentesis results. In total, 133 CVS translucency presented with a de novo variant in RAF1 (p. showed NMB results for common trisomies, of which 131 Ser267Arg) andinBRAF (p.Thr241Arg)genes, compatible wereconcordantwithfollow-uptests.Twotrisomy18cases withaRASopathy,thefetuswithskeletaldysplasiahadade showed a normal result on amniocentesis, indicating con- novo variant in CO
L11 A1 gene (p.Gln921_Pro926del) ﬁned placental mosaicism; neither case had ultrasound causing Stickler/Marshall syndrome and the fetus with abnormalities present at referral. Therefore, in this cohort, hydrops fetalis had 2 variants in PIEZO1 gene (p.Ser182* ~1.5% of NMB QF-PCR cases subsequently showed172 J.delPicchia evidenceofmosaicism,thisisreducedto0%forcaseswith A. Ranchor: None. N. Corsten-Janssen: None. I. van USS abnormalities. These ﬁgures may inform the reporting Langen: None. and pregnancy management of NMB cases. A.R. Pendlebury-Watt: None. K. Mann: None. C. 
P01 .106.A Ogilvie: None. WhentotestfetusesforRASopathies?Propositionfrom a systematic analysis of 353 multicenter cases and a 
P01 .105.C postnatal cohort ParentalexperiencesofrapidExomeSequencingincase of serious ultrasound abnormalities during pregnancy A. Scott1, N. Di Giosaffatte2, V. Pinna2, P. Daniele2, S. Corno3, V. D’Ambrosio3, E. Andreucci4, A. Marozza5, F. M.Plantinga1,L.Zwienenberg1,E.vanDijk1,H.Breet1,J. Sirchia6, G. Tortora7, D. Mangiameli8, C. Di Marco9, I. Diphoorn1, J. el Mecky2, K. Bouman1, J. Verheij1, A. Donati10, A. Zonta11, E. Grosso11, G. Mastromoro12, P. Ranchor3, N. Corsten-Janssen1, I. van Langen1 Versacci13, F. Pantaleoni14, F. C. Radio14, T. Mazza15, L. Papi5,T. Mattina8,A. Giancotti3,A. Pizzuti12,A. Laberge1, 1UMCG, Clinical Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Uni- M. Tartaglia14, M. Delrue1, A. De Luca2 versity of Southampton, CELS, Southampton, United King- dom, 3UMCG, Health Psychology, Groningen, 1Pediatrics Department, Medical Genetics Division, CHU Netherlands Sainte-Justine, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS- Objective: Adding rapid Exome Sequencing (rES) to con- Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, ventional genetic tests (QF-PCR and SNP-array) can Italy, 3Department of Maternal and Child Health and improve the diagnostic yield of pregnancies showing Urologic Science, "Sapienza" University, Policlinico ultrasound abnormalities but also includes a higher chance Umberto I Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, of unsolicited ﬁndings. rES was offered in the context of a Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, prenatal rES implementation study with a turnaround time 5Section of Medical Genetics, Department of Experimental of14days.Weevaluatedhowthisofferwasexperiencedin and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, an explorative mixed-methods parental experience study. Florence, Italy, 6Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Methods: We investigated reasons for accepting and IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, Italy, 7Azienda declining rES, the impact of rES on decision making, Ospedaliero-Universitaria Ospedali Riuniti di Ancona, experiences of the counseling and test process, and Ancona, Italy, 8Department of Pediatrics, Medical Genet- understanding of test information and possible test out- ics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 9Ospedale Santa comes.Allcoupleswereaskedtoﬁlltwosurveys,oneafter Maria Nuova, Florence, Italy, 10Genetic Department, pre-test and one after post-test counseling. Part of the Infermi Hospital, Rimini, Italy, 11CittàDella SaluteeDella couples were approached for an interview until data Scienza University Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, saturation was reached. Torino, Italy, 12Department of Experimental Medicine, Results:44couplesparticipatedinthesurveystudy,11in Università Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 13Department of Pedia- theinterviewstudy.In22%ofpregnancies,adiagnosiswas trics,UniversitàSapienza,Rome,Italy,14GeneticsandRare found, in 31% an unsolicited ﬁnding. 95% wanted to be Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino informed about unsolicited ﬁndings. The most important Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 15Laboratory of Bioinformatics, reason for accepting rES was to ﬁnd a diagnosis. Most IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni parents already decided to terminate the pregnancy on the Rotondo, Italy basis of the ultrasound abnormalities, although rES results impacted decision in a few cases. The impact for future Introduction: Recent studies have identiﬁed some evoca- pregnancies was higher than with conventional testing and tive prenatal features of RASopathies e.g. lymphatic dys- the fast turnaround was valued highly. The counseling and plasia (cystic hygroma, hydrops, effusions), congenital test process was experienced positive. Parents suggested to heart disease, polyhydramnios, and renal anomalies. The add information of other parents’ experiences and decisio- aim of this study was to better deﬁne the prenatal indica- nal process to the test information. tions for RASopathy testing and the genotype-phenotype Conclusion: Parents evaluate rES positively, despite the correlations. risk of unsolicited ﬁndings. Methods: 353 cases sent for prenatal RASopathy testing M. Plantinga: None. L. Zwienenberg: None. E. van between 2012-2019, after a normal a-CGH, were collected. Dijk: None. H. Breet: None. J. Diphoorn: None. J. el For most, 11 RASopathy genes were tested. Detailed Mecky: None. K. Bouman: None. J. Verheij: None. ultrasound ﬁndings were available for 313 fetuses, whereasAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 173 40 cases had only clinical indications for testing collected. 1sttrimester 14/ 2/20(10%) 12/ 0,08 - hydrops 60(10%) 40(30%) Twenty-ﬁve RASopathy patients diagnosed postnatally Persistenthydrops 26/ 18/20(90%) 28/ 60(90%) 40(70%) were added to widen the phenotypic spectrum. Thoracic 54/ 22/48(46%) 32/ <0,0001 4/25(16%) Results:Seetablesbelowfordetailedresults.Theoverall effusionsor 313(17%) 265(12%) ascites diagnosticyieldwas14%(51/353).Thelargestcontributors Congenitalheart 71/ 18/48(38%) 53/ 0,002 3/25(12%) of mutations were PTPN11 (29%), RIT1 (15%), RAF1 disease 313(23%) 265(20%) (13%) and HRAS (12%).Severe postnatal phenotypes were cardiacdefect 64/ 15/48(31%) 49/ 0,02 3/25(12%) 313(20%) 265(18%) in majority diagnosed prenatally and associated with HCM 13/ 9/48(19%) 4/ 0,007 1/25(4%) 313(4%) 265(2%) mutations in HRAS, RIT1 and RAF1. HCMwithoutCD 7/13(54%) 3/9(33%) 4/ N/A 0/25(0%) Conclusions: After normal a-CGH, RASopathies should 4(100%) be considered when any ultrasound ﬁnding of lymphatic combinedHCM 6/13(46%) 6/9(67%) 0/4(0%) 1/25(4%) +CD dysplasia or suggestive congenital heart disease is found Otherassociatedﬁndings alone or in association. In the presence of persistent or Polyhydramnios 36/ 14/48(29%) 22/ <0,0001 8/25(32%) 313(12%) 265(8%) associated hygroma, NT>6 mm, hypertrophic cardiomyo- Renalanomaly 46/ 14/48(29%) 32/ 0,0003 5/25(20%) pathy, or any ﬁnding combined with polyhydramnios or 313(15%) 265(12%) Macrosomia 12/ 6/48(13%) 6/ 0,001 2/25(8%) renal anomaly, the likelihood of RASopathy diagnosis is 313(4%) 265(2%) signiﬁcantly increased. Mild 13/ 7/48(15%) 6/ 0,0001 0/25(0%) ventriculomegaly 313(4%) 265(2%) Shortlong 18/ 8/48(17%) 10/ 0,0004 1/25(4%) Table 1 Prenatal ultrasound ﬁndings in 313 patients with bones 313(6%) 265(4%) a normal array-CGH OnlyoneUS 61/ 2/48(4%) 59/ 0,004 6/25(24%) ﬁnding 313(19%) 265(22%) Prenatalﬁndings Total#of Prenatal Mutation- p-valuea Postnatal TwoormoreUS 252/ 46/48(96%) 254/ 7/25(28%) patients mutation- negative mutation- ﬁndings 313(81%) 265(78%) (n=313) positive group positive NoUSﬁnding N/A N/A N/A - 12/25(48%) group(n=48) (n=265) group(n=25) a:chi-squarestatisticorFisherexacttest,asappropriate.α;;;error= IncreasedNT 233113/(74%) 30/48(63%) 226051/(76%) 0,03 1/25(4%) 0,05,b:t-studenttest,*withoutanotherﬁnding,exceptincreasedNT NT>3<3,5 21/ 0/30(0%) 21/ 0,048 231(9%) 201(10%) NT≥3,5 145/ 18/30(60%) 127/ - 231(63%) 201(63%) Table 2 Diagnostic yield of prenatal ultrasound ﬁndings NT>6 60/ 12/30(40%) 48/ 231(26%) 201(24%) Prenatalﬁndings DiagnosticyieldforNSD p- Diagnosticyieldfor p-valuea unknown 5/231(2%) 0/30(0%) 5/ accordingtoindications valuea NSDaccordingto 201(2%) fortesting(51NSD) prenatalUSﬁndings IncreasedNT 86/ 7/48(15%) 79/ 0,02 1/25(4%) (48NSD) withoutCH 313(27%) 265(30%) MeanNT(mm)b 5,01(0,7- 6,59(1,25-13,5) 4,80(0,7- 0,0001 2,58(1,0-4,1) n=353 n=313 14,9) 14,9) Globaldiagnostic 14%(51/353) - 15%(48/313) - Cystichygroma 183/ 31/48(65%) 152/ 0,3 1/25(4%) yield 313(58%) 265(57%) IncreasedNT 11%(29/258) 0,4 13%(30/231) 0,7 1sttrimesterCH 58/ 4/31(13%) 54/ 0,02 - NT>3<3,5 0% 0% 183(32%) 152(36%) NT≥3,5 9% 0,02 12% 0,1 PersistentCH 125/ 27/31(87%) 98/ NT>6 20% 20% 183(68%) 152(64%) Isolated* 89/ 5/31(16%) 84/ <0,0001 - alone 1% 0,005 0% N/A 183(49%) 152(55%) inassociation 18% 100% inassociation 94/ 26/31(84%) 68/ IncreasedNT 4,5% 0,03 8% 0,09 183(51%) 152(45%) withoutCH CHwithout↑NT 34/ 9/31(29%) 25/ 0,1 1/25(4%) Cystichygroma 16%(30/189) 0,6 17%(31/183) 0,9 183(19%) 152(16%) 1sttrimesterCH N/A N/A 7% 0,02 CHwith↑NT 149/ 22/31(71%) 127/ PersistentCH N/A 22% 183(81%) 152(84%) Isolated* 9% 0,02 6% 0,0003 NT>3<3,5 17/ 0/22(0%) 17/127 0,02 - 149(11%) (13,5%) inassociation 28% 28% NT≥3,5 89/ 11/22(50%) 78/127 CHwithout↑NT 23% 0,2 26% 0,1 149(60%) (61,5%) CHwith↑NT 14% 15% NT>6 43/ 11/22(50%) 32/ NT>3<3,5 - N/A 0% 0,08 149(29%) 127(25%) NT≥3,5 - 12% IncreasedNF 68/ 18/48(38%) 50/ 0,001 0/25(0%) 313(22%) 265(19%) NT>6 - 26% NF>6 63/ 15/18(83%) 48/ 0,08 - IncreasedNF 26%(13/50) 0,03 26%(18/68) 0,02 68(93%) 50(96%) NF>6 22% 0,1 24% 0,1 NF>15 5/68(7%) 3/18(17%) 2/50(4%) NF>15 60% 60% MeanNF(mm)b 6,94(3,0- 9,39(4,2-22) 6,28(3,0- 0,01 N/A Hydrops 35%(17/48) 0,0001 33%(20/60) 0,0004 28) 28) 1sttrimester N/A N/A 14% 0,1 Hydrops 60/ 20/48(42%) 40/ <0,0001 1/25(4%) hydrops 313(19%) 265(15%) Persistenthydrops N/A 39%174 J.delPicchia Thoracic 30%(12/40) 0,01 41%(22/54) <0,0001 identiﬁcationandmolecular diagnosisinclinical carewhen effusionsor ascites applying genome-wide sequencing. Congenitalheart 23%(12/53) 0,1 25%(18/71) 0,03 Materials and Methods: We used Phenolyzer to obtain disease cardiacdefect 23%(11/48) 0,002 23%(15/64) <0,0001 all genes known as causative for syndromic and non- HCM 60%(6/10) 69%(9/13) syndromic uni- and bilateral RA. Using ClueGO gene c+omCbDinedHCM 100%(5/5) 100%(6/6) enrichment analysis we classiﬁed the relationship between Otherassociatedﬁndings these genes and biological processes as deﬁned by gene Polyhydramnios 50%(8/16) N/A 39%(14/36) <0,0001 ontology. Renalanomaly 29%(4/14) N/A 30%(14/46) 0,01 Results: We identiﬁed 289 genes described to be Macrosomia 57%(4/7) N/A 50%(6/12) N/A Mild - N/A 54%(7/13) N/A involved in the pathogenesis of RA when mutated. We ventriculomegaly obtained69groupsofenrichedbiologicalprocesses.About Shortlong - N/A 44%(8/18) N/A bones 50%includedpathways directlyrelatedtothedevelopment Generalﬁndings of urogenital organ tissues (e.g. metanephros, nephric duct, ﬁOnndliyngoneUS 9%(13/143) 0,03 3%(2/61) 0,002 ureter). Furthermore, several ciliary, axis speciﬁcation, TwoormoreUS 18%(38/210) 18%(46/252) hindgutdevelopment andendocrinepathwaysareenriched, ﬁndings which may relate to different clinical presentations of RA. TheresultsalsosupportthehypothesisthatRAispartofthe N.B. Diagnostic yield of each major US ﬁnding was ciliopathy spectrum and developmentally related to dys- compared with the global diagnostic yield for p-value’s plastic kidneys. calculation Conclusions: Our gene ontology analysis shows that A. Scott: None. N. Di Giosaffatte: None. V. Pinna: genes representing distinct biological pathways are sig- None.P.Daniele:None.S.Corno:None.V.D’Ambrosio: niﬁcantly enriched. They may relate to different clinical None. E. Andreucci: None. A. Marozza: None. F. presentations of RA, which will lead to an improved Sirchia: None. G. Tortora: None. D. Mangiameli: None. delineation of candidate genes and molecular diagnosis of C.DiMarco:None. I.Donati: None.A.Zonta:None. E. this congenital anomaly in clinical practice. Grosso:None.G.Mastromoro:None.P.Versacci:None. S. Kalantari: None. I. Filges: None. F.Pantaleoni:None.F.C.Radio:None.T.Mazza:None. L.Papi:None.T.Mattina:None.A.Giancotti:None.A. 
P01 .108.C Pizzuti:None.A.Laberge:D.SpeakersBureau/Honoraria IsmitochondrialDNA(mtDNA)copynumberinhuman (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; cleavage-stage embryos a marker of embryonic quality Sobi. M. Tartaglia: None. M. Delrue: None. A. De and development, or modiﬁed by the presence of a Luca: None. mtDNA mutation? 
P01 .107.B J.Steffann1,K.Chatzovoulou1,N.Gigarel1,A.Mayeur2,F. Gene ontology enrichment analysis of congenital renal Jabot-Hanin3, S. Monnot1, L. Hesters2, N. Frydman2, J. agenesis-associated genes Bonnefont1 S. Kalantari1,2,3, I. Filges1,2,3 1Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Hopital Antoine-Béclère, Clamart, France, 3Université de Paris, 1Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical Genetics and Paris, France Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Department of Clinical Research, University Hospital Mitochondria play a critical role during the early stages of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3University of Basel, Basel, human embryo development by supplying sufﬁcient levels Switzerland of energy required for embryo survival. Because mtDNA replicationissilencedduringearlyembryonicdevelopment, Introduction: Uni- or bilateral renal agenesis (RA) is a the presence of a large number of mtDNA copies in the commonly occurring major congenital anomaly impacting mature oocyte is mandatory. In human, several studies on fetal and neonatal outcomes. Although chromosomal blastocysts day-5 embryos have paradoxically evidenced a abnormalities, CNVs and pathogenic variants in many positive correlation between high quantities of mtDNA genes have been associated to RA, the etiology is still molecules and severe conditions, like aneuploidy, poor poorly understood. Our aim was to better understand the embryo quality, and implantation failure. However, data biological pathways involved in RA and to identify inter- from day-3 embryos are much more limited and contra- acting candidate pathways useful for further gene dictory, making this point a highly controversial one.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 175 We have quantiﬁed the mtDNA copy number (CN) in sensitivity is down to DNA concentrations corresponding residualDNAof1or2cells,sampledfromday-3embryos, tolessthan7genecopiesperreactionwith95%probability. in a context of preimplantation genetic analysis for a non- Summary/conclusions: Devyser RHD provides a fast, metabolic, non-mitochondrial DNA disorder (n = 165, non-invasive procedure to assess the fetal RHD status in control group) and for a mtDNA mutation (n = 16, mito- Rhesus-D negative mothers. This product is validated chondrialgroup).AgreatdispersionofthemtDNACNwas together with an automated DNA extraction process and found,amongthedifferentcellsofagivenembryo,andthe reaction set-up (QIASymphony AS/SP), enabling high- different embryos from a given patient. A maternal effect throughput sample analysis with low-risk for sample mix- regulating the mtDNA CN was observed, but remained of up. Various kit sizes are available offering ﬂexibility with unknown origin. In particular, no correlation was detected sample throughput. between mtDNA CN and maternal age or ovarian reserve. B. Schreiner: A. Employment (full or part-time); mtDNA CN did not correlate with embryonic quality and Signiﬁcant; Devyser. E. Lindström: A. Employment (full abilityofanembryotoimplantandgiveaviablepregnancy. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Devyser. B. Vanherberghen: A. Finally,themtDNACNwasnotinﬂuencedbythepresence Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Devyser. A. ofamtDNAmutation.Basedontheseﬁndings,mtDNACN Hedrum: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; at day 3 of development cannot be used to select the best Devyser. embryo to transfer. J.Steffann:None.K.Chatzovoulou:None.N.Gigarel: 
P01 .110.B None. A. Mayeur: None. F. Jabot-Hanin: None. S. Diagnosis of Rothmund Thomson Syndrome by whole Monnot: None. L. Hesters: None. N. Frydman: None. J. genome sequencing Bonnefont: None. Q.Zhou,J.Sun,T.Wang,Y.Xing,Z.Wan,X.Yang,Z.Liu, 
P01 .109.A W. Wang A FAST AND NON-INVASIVE METHOD TO DETERMINE FETAL RHD GENE STATUS Genomics Institute of Beijing, Shenzhen, China B. Schreiner,E. Lindström, B.Vanherberghen,A. Hedrum Introduction: Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome (RTS) is a rare disorder and has been described in all ethnicities, with Devyser, Hägersten, Sweden several identiﬁed pathogenic variants. Since there is fewer than hundreds of individuals have been described, the Background: Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn populationprevalenceisunknown.Thegeneticfeaturesand (HDFN) is a serious complication of maternal and fetal follow-up data of individuals with RTS are limited. blood group incompatibility. This occurs when a Rhesus-D Methods: We performed a whole genome sequencing negativewoman,carryingaRhesus-Dpositivefetusduring (WGS) using cord blood for an infant, who had RTS like her ﬁrst pregnancy, is alloimmunized against RhD antigen clinical features in infancy. and carries another Rhesus-positive fetus during a sub- Results: The infant showed a developmental delay in sequent pregnancy. Nowadays, HDFN is rare since anti-D infancy, with a small size in both height and weight. The prophylaxis is provided to all RhD negative pregnant erythema started appearing on her face at the age of three women. However, 40% of these women carry a Rhesus- monthsandthenspreadtotheentirebody.Besides,shehad negative fetus and are administered unnecessary treatment neither eyelashes nor eyebrows, with sparse scalp hair. including all risks connected to blood-based products. After analyzing the WGS data, we found a heterozygous Aims:Wesetouttodevelopafastandreliablediagnostic nonsense mutation c.2752G>T (p.Glu918*) and a novel test assessing the fetal RHD gene status from maternal frameshift-insertion c.1547_1548insC (p.Ala516fs) in the blood at the end of the ﬁrst pregnancy trimester to enable gene RECQ
L4 , which is a known pathogenic gene of RTS. targeted anti-D prophylaxis. Both variants had potential effects on protein synthesis or Methods:Areal-timePCR-basedassaywasdevelopedto function.Furthervalidationindicatedthesewerecompound detectcell-freefetalDNA(cffDNA)inmaternalblood.The variants inheriting from parents. assay contains primer-probe combination speciﬁc for the Conclusions:Takingtogetherwiththeclinicalcharacter- RHDgeneandtheGAPDHhouse-keepinggeneasinternal istics and the identiﬁcation of biallelic pathogenic variants control. CffDNA from clinical samples was automatically in a recessive manner, we report a diagnosed infant with extracted from 1mL of plasma. RTS.OurﬁndingsprovidepotentialapplicationofWGSfor Results: Devyser RHD exhibits high experiment repeat- newborntoclinicaldiagnosis.Thefollow-upstudycanhelp ability between different reagent lots. The analytical176 J.delPicchia tofurtherunderstandtheclinicalfeaturesandthegenotype- N. Krasovskaja: None. A. Matulevičienė: None. K. phenotype interactions of RTS. Šiaurytė: None. K. Grigalionienė: None. L. Ambrozai- Grant: The Shenzhen Municipal Government of China tytė: None. A. Utkus: None. (NO.JCYJ20170412152854656) Q. Zhou: None. J. Sun: None. T. Wang: None. Y. 
P01 .112.A Xing: None. Z. Wan: None. X. Yang: None. Z. Liu: Prenataldiagnosisofskeletaldysplasias/anomalies:high None. W. Wang: None. diagnostic yield using microarray and sequencing data 
P01 .111.C I. Mademont-Soler1, A. Maroto1, J. Meléndez2, A. Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome familial case series Cherino1, J. Perapoch1, N. Artigas1, B. Campos3, M. with an emphasis on prenatal diagnosis Segura3,C.Pérez4,E.Lloveras4,J.Hernando1,X.Queralt1, M. Obón1 N. Krasovskaja1,2, A. Matulevičienė1,2, K. Šiaurytė2,3, K. Grigalionienė1,2, L. Ambrozaitytė1,2, A. Utkus2 1Hospital Universitari de Girona Dr. Josep Trueta, Salt, Spain, 2Hospital Santa Caterina, Salt, Spain, 3Quantitative 1Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Genomic Medicine Laboratories, Barcelona, Spain, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics, 4Synlab, Barcelona, Spain Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, VilniusUniversity,Vilnius,Lithuania,3FacultyofMedicine, Introduction: Skeletal dysplasias (SDs) are severe con- Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania genitaldisorders,mostlyofgeneticorigin.Etiologyremains unknown in ~50% of cases. Materials and Methods: Nine Introduction: Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) pregnancies with ultrasound ﬁndings compatible with SDs is a rare recessively inherited X-linked condition, with less were recruited prospectively from 2017 to 2019. A diag- than 300 reported cases. Characteristic features of SGBS nostic algorithm combining microarray, Sanger and Next- include pre/postnatal overgrowth, distinctive craniofacial Generation Sequencing was used. features (macrocephaly, coarse face with macroglossia), Results: Deﬁnite diagnosis was achieved in 6 cases, visceromegaly and increased risk of neoplasia. This condi- uncertain results in 2 and negative results in 1. tion is almost always diagnosed postnatally. Materials and methods: A 23-y/o woman with unin- Ultrasound Genetics Diagnosis formative anamnesis on the 21 weeks’ gestation was referred due to abnormal fetal ultrasound ﬁndings (poly- 
C1  Skeletalanomalies, Microarray:Normal No oligohydramnios, WES:Normal hydramnios, macrocephaly, corpus callosum agenesis, increasedNT abdominal visceromegaly and abnormal genitalia). The 
C2  Shortlongbones, Microarray:Normal Achondroplasia results of fetal DNA qPCR and SNP-CGH tests from polyhydramnios Sanger:Pathogenic amnioticﬂuidrevealednochromosomalabnormalities.The variantFGFR3 precise evaluation of mother’s phenotype (tall stature, 
C3  Shortlongbones, Microarray:Normal Thanatophoric coarse facial features, macroglossia) and fetal scan were narrowthorax Sanger:Pathogenic dysplasia key to directly sequence GP
C3  gene and make the correct variantFGFR3 SGBS diagnosis prenatally. 
C4  Multiplebone Microarray:NormalNGS Uncertain Results: Sanger sequencing from amniotic ﬂuid revealed fractures, virtualpanel:Two malpositionof VOUSIFT140 hemizygous pathogenic variant NM_004484.3:c.1159C>T, extremities,skull (NP_004475.1:p.(Arg387Ter), rs122453121, CM073110) hypomineralization in exon 4 of the GP
C3  gene, which determines SGBS. 
C5  Multiplebone Microarray:NormalNGS Osteogenesis Mother was also found to be a carrier. Despite severe fractures virtualpanel:Pathogenic imperfecta polyhydramnios progression on 33 weeks’ gestation, variantCO
L1 A1 
C6  Bilateralradial Microarray:arr TARsyndrome condition of the fetus was manageable and, pregnancy aplasia [GRCh37]1q21.1 was carried to 38th weeks. The newborn’s phenotype (145415156_145899418) presented with classical SGBS features. x1Sanger:Pathogenic Conclusions: An accurate evaluation of maternal pheno- variantRBM8A type and fetal scan are essential pathognomonic signs for 
C7  Bowingoflong Sanger:Twopathogenic Stüve- bones, variantsLIFR Wiedemann early suspicion of SGBS. Successful prenatal diagnosis oligohydramnios syndrome enablestomakedecisionsontimeforfamilyandphysicians about the outcomes of pregnancy and delivery.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 177 
C8  Arthrogryposis Microarray:Multiple Glycine Bibliography:1. Huang, L. et al. Noninvasive preimplanta- LOHregionsSanger: encephalopathy tiongenetictestingforaneuploidyinspentmediummaybe Twopathogenic withnormal more reliable than trophectoderm biopsy. Proc. Natl. Acad. variantsSL
C6 A9 serumglycine Sci. 116, 14105-14112 (2019).2. Li, P. et al. Preimplanta- 
C9  Arthrogryposis Microarray: Uncertain NormalWES:One tion Genetic Screening with Spent Culture Medium/ VOUSPIEZO2 Blastocoel Fluid for in Vitro Fertilization. Sci. Rep. 8, 9275 (2018). L.A. Alcaraz: None. C. Pérez-Pelegrín: None. S. Conclusions: A combination of molecular cytogenetics González-Reig: None. P. Brígido: None. P. Piqueras: and sequencing offers a high diagnostic yield (6/9), None. A. Martí: None. F. Sánchez-Martín: None. V. facilitating genetic counselling and clinical management. Penacho: None. An individualized approach, multidisciplinary teams and the contribution of new sequencing technologies to 
P01 .115.A diagnosis are recognized. Sperm protamine mRNA ratio in relation to DNA I. Mademont-Soler: None. A. Maroto: None. J. fragmentation and semen analysis Meléndez: None. A. Cherino: None. J. Perapoch: None. N. Artigas: None. B. Campos: None. M. Segura: None. M. A. Ishchuk1,2, E. M. Komarova2, O. V. Malysheva2, I. C. Pérez: None. E. Lloveras: None. J. Hernando: None. D. Mekina2, E. A. Lesik2, A. M. Gzgzyan2,1, V. S. X. Queralt: None. M. Obón: None. Baranov2,1, I. Y. Kogan2 
P01 .114.C 1St. Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Embryo haplotype phasing based on non-invasive Federation,2TheResearchInstituteofObstetrics,Gynecol- procedures ogy and Reproductology named after D.O.Ott, Saint- Petersburg, Russian Federation L. A. Alcaraz1, C. Pérez-Pelegrín1, S. González-Reig1, P. Brígido1, P. Piqueras2, A. Martí2, F. Sánchez-Martín2, V. Introduction: Sperm contain a complex population of Penacho1 RNA, andtheutilityofsperm RNA infertility researchare currently being explored. During mammalian spermato- 1Bioarray, SL, Elche, Spain, 2Ginemed, Sevilla, Spain genesis, the chromatin structure undergoes substantial condensation. The key role in this process is played by Introduction: Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) protamines 1 and 2 (PRM1, PRM2). Abnormal condensa- representsawidelyappliedgeneticprocedureformanyIVF tion could lead to DNA breaks, which is linked to preg- centers. Nowadays, for these purposes embryo material is nancy loss after assisted fertilization, disturbances in needed. The removal of three cells in a day 5 embryo, embryo development and increased risk of abortions. The represents an invasive procedure that could concern the aim of this study was to estimate the relations between embryoviabilityandincreasethecostofaPGT.Inthepast protamine mRNA ration and semen quality and further few years there have been an increasing interest in the DNA fragmentation. Finding sperm-quality markers would possibility of obtaining reliable DNA in the spent culture help to understand the causes of male infertility and to media (SCM) where the embryo is growing (1, 2). improve the male reproductive health. MaterialsandMethods:ForoptimalPGT-Mresults,we Materials and Methods: Human ejaculates were aim to compare embryo biopsy and SCM. After that, we obtained from 33 patients and semen analyses were wanttogofurther:discernwhethertheSCMisevenabetter assessed by WHO criteria (2010). We evaluated the sperm choice to diagnose an embryo in comparison with the DNA fragmentation measured by TUNEL assay. Patient’s trophectoderm biopsy, comparing a complete embryo. All ejaculates were puriﬁed by density-gradient centrifugation, based on next generation sequencing (NGS) with sperm cells were lysed, mRNA extracted, reverse tran- PGDSeqTM (Journey Genomics S.L.U.) technology. scribed and subjected to real-time qPCR using speciﬁc Results:WecanconﬁrmahighcoincidenceofSCMwith primer pairs for protamine-1 and protamine-2. complete embryo and the embryo biopsy. Tis primary Results: The sperm protamine mRNA ratio in normo- results are promising, even if there are less polymorphisms zoospermicmen(n=19;2,86±0,67)differedsigniﬁcantly obtained from this kind of material, we were able to study from that of patozoospermic patients (n = 14; 3,43 ± 0,79; the haplotypes and the inheritance of the embryos. p<0,05). A signiﬁcant correlation was shown between Conclusions: A non-invasive perspective on the PGT sperm DNA fragmentation and the PRM2/PRM1 mRNA world is certainly to be the next generation of samples. ratio (r=0,33; p <0,05). In the group of patients with an178 J.delPicchia increased sperm DNA fragmentation (n = 14; 3,26 ± 0,19) PHF13 an interesting infertility factor and a fundamental the PRM2/PRM1 ratio was signiﬁcantly higher than in the player in germ cell differentiation. group ofpatientswith normal rates(n=19;2,74±0,18;p E. Bosch: None. S. Lukassen: None. A. Gregor: None. < 0,05). A.B. Ekici: None. C. Zweier: None. A. Conclusions:Abnormalspermprotamineratioassociated Winterpacht: None. with poor semen quality and DNA fragmentation. M.A. Ishchuk: None. E.M. Komarova: None. O.V. 
P01 .118.A Malysheva:None.I.D.Mekina:None.E.A.Lesik:None. Telomerelengthinkaryotypicallynormalandabnormal A.M. Gzgzyan: None. V.S. Baranov: None. I.Y. chorion in progressing pregnancies and embryonic Kogan: None. losses 
P01 .116.B A. V. Tikhonov1, M. I. Krapivin1, A. V. Petrovskaia- Investigating PHF13 induced infertility through single Kaminskaia1, A. A. Smirnova2, Y. M. Sagurova3, O. A. cell transcriptomics and non-vertebrate model Eﬁmova1,A.A.Pendina1,O.G.Chiryaeva1,L.I.Petrova1, organisms V. S. Dudkina1, V. S. Baranov1,3 E. Bosch1, S. Lukassen2, A. Gregor1, A. B. Ekici1, C. 1D.O.Ott Research InstituteofObstetrics,Gynecology and Zweier1, A. Winterpacht1 Reproductology, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, St. Peters- 1Institute of Human Genetics, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, burg, RussianFederation, 3St. PetersburgState University, Erlangen,Germany,2DigitalHealthCenter,BerlinInstitute St. Petersburg, Russian Federation of Health (BIH) and Charité, Berlin, Germany Telomere length (TL) is considered to be an indicator of Infertility is a common medical problem worldwide. Of all biological age. Its correct regulation during pregnancy is infertility cases, approximately 40 - 50% are due to “male crucial for embryonic development. The possible contribu- factor” infertility, mostly caused by spermatogenic failure. tion of TL to the developmental capacity of embryos with Despite extensive research, there is still limited knowledge abnormal karyotype remains unknown so far. Here, we of the genetic causes and underlying molecular mechan- studied TL in karyotypically normal and abnormal chorion isms. We previously showed that deﬁciency for the epige- in progressing pregnancies and embryonic losses. The neticreaderPHF13inthemouseresultsintestishypoplasia chorionic villus samples were obtained by chorion biopsy due to a spermatogenic defect. from 15 patients with progressing ﬁrst trimester pregnancy Here, we obtained single-cell RNA expression proﬁles referred to invasive prenatal diagnosis and by curettage from Phf13−/− and Phf13+/- testis and compared them with from 15 patients with missed abortion. The karyotypically wild type data. The results revealed a loss of meiotic sex abnormalsamplesincludedtrisomy21andtrisomy16cases chromosome inactivation (MSCI) in pachytene spermato- in both progressing pregnancies (n = 7) and missed abor- cytes of PHF13 deﬁcient mice. This is remarkable, since tion (n = 7). The telomeric regions were detected on direct canonical PHF13 is only expressed in spermatogonia. In metaphase preparations by qFISH. Relative TLs were combination with ChIPseq data demonstrating an enrich- measured by dividing telomeric by subtelomeric ﬂuores- mentofPHF13bindingsitesontheX-andY-chromosome, cence intensity assessed in ImageJ1.49v. The results were wehypothesizethatPHF13mediatesepigeneticchangeson compared by the Mann-Whitney U-test. In progressing the sex chromosomes in spermatogonia, rendering the pregnancies, the relative TL was higher in karyotypically chromosomes competent for later inactivation. abnormal samples compared to karyotypically normal ones PHF13 is evolutionarily conserved down to Bilateria (p < 0.0001). In missed abortions, we observed the same including sea urchin, acorn worm and several insects like tendency although the difference did not reach statistical the ﬂour beetle (Tribolium), but strikingly not in the signiﬁcance (p=0.4652). When comparing the relative TL evolutionary “young”genus Drosophila.Consequently, we between the samples with normal karyotype in progressing ubiquitously overexpressed the Tribolium Phf13-homolog pregnancies and missed abortions, we revealed no differ- inD.melanogasterandcomparedtheselineswithwildtype ence (p=0.8890). However, the relative TL was higher in lines and lines overexpressing neuronal control genes. the samples with abnormal karyotype in progressing preg- Phf13-overexpressing strains but not the control strains nanciescomparedtothoseinmissedabortions(p=0.0013). show a high grade of infertility in seemingly normal ﬂies. Our results suggest that in the case of karyotype abnorm- This strongly indicates a conserved and very speciﬁc ality, longer telomeres in chorionic villi may contribute to function of this protein in germ cell development, making pregnancy success. Supported by RSF №19-75-00023.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 179 A.V. Tikhonov: None. M.I. Krapivin: None. A.V. M.I. Krapivin: None. A.A. Pendina: None. O.A. Petrovskaia-Kaminskaia: None. A.A. Smirnova: None. Eﬁmova: None. I.D. Mekina: None. E.M. Komarova: Y.M. Sagurova: None. O.A. Eﬁmova: None. A.A. None.Y.M.Sagurova:None.I.V.Mayorova:None.A.M. Pendina: None. O.G. Chiryaeva: None. L.I. Petrova: Gzgzyan: None. I.Y. Kogan: None. V.S. Baranov: None. None. V.S. Dudkina: None. V.S. Baranov: None. 
P01 .121.A 
P01 .120.C Transcriptomics of placental tissue: identiﬁcation of Telomerelengthofmaternalandpaternalchromosomes potential biomarkers and biological pathways in the in human triploid zygotes great obstetrical syndromes M. I. Krapivin1, A. A. Pendina1, O. A. Eﬁmova1, I. D. E. Trifonova1,2, A. Markov1, A. Zarubin1, T. Gabidulina2, Mekina1, E. M. Komarova1, Y. M. Sagurova2, I. V. V. Stepanov1 Mayorova2,A.M. Gzgzyan1,I.Y.Kogan1, V.S. Baranov1,2 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National 1D.O.Ott Research InstituteofObstetrics,Gynecology and Research Medical Center of the Russian Academy of Reproductology,St.Petersburg,RussianFederation,2Saint Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russian Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation Federation The great obstetrical syndromes (GOS) are common preg- Telomeres are complex structures of tandem DNA repeats nancy complications that can have detrimental effects on andproteinsatchromosomeends.Telomereshorteningdue morbidity and mortality of the mother and fetus as well as to cell divisions, oxidative stress or genetic effects may long-term health outcomes. Although they are distinct resultinend-to-endchromosomejoining,theirdegradation, conditions, they areoften considered together asthey share and cell death. In contrast to short telomeres in oocytes, a common etiology of inadequate placental perfusion. The sperm telomeres become longer with age. Telomere length aim of the work was to search for new genetic markers of (TL) correlates with embryo developmental potential GOS on the basis of integrative analysis of transcriptomic advocatingtheimportanceofTLanalysisafterfertilization. data. Genome-wide expression proﬁling was performed on Thestudywasperformedonmetaphasechromosomesof23 placental tissue from preeclamptic and normal (n = 47) triploid human zygotes from 20 couples (women aged pregnancies. Thirty original datasets from patients with 32.04 ± 0.8; men aged 34.15 ± 1.2) referred for in vitro preterm birth, intrauterine growth restriction, preeclampsia fertilization. Paternal (sperm-derived) chromosomes were (n = 434) were downloaded from Gene Expression identiﬁed immunocytochemically by weak DNA methyla- Omnibusandwerefurtherintegratedandanalyzedwithour tion and strong hydroxymethylation which contrasted them data. Subsequently, 5023 differentially expressed genes with strongly methylated and poorly hydroxymethylated (DEGs) between GOS patients and healthy women were maternal (oocyte-derived) chromosomes. After qFISH, identiﬁed. We found that the transcriptional activity of 64 relative TL was measured by dividing telomeric by sub- DEGschangesinatleasttwoGOSdiseases.Weightedgene telomeric ﬂuorescence assessed in ImageJ1.49v. The rela- co-expression network analysis identiﬁed distinct gene tiveTLwassigniﬁcantlyhigherinthepaternalcomparedto modules associated with preterm birth, intrauterine growth the maternal chromosomes (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, р < restriction or preeclampsia. Using Gene Set Enrichment 0.0001). Rare zygotes demonstrated the opposite pattern: Analysis we identiﬁed the signiﬁcant role of disturbance of higher TL in the maternal chromosomes. However, they intercellular interactions and regulation of proteins mod- seemtobetheexceptionratherthantherulesuggestingthat iﬁcation in placental tissue during the development of the some cases of developmental arrest may be caused by GOS.Weappliedupstreamanalysisapproachimplemented altered TL pattern. Neither in sperm- nor in oocyte-derived in geneXplain platform and identiﬁed master regulators chromosomes the relative TL correlated with paternal (r=- (MECOM, CD
C34 , UB
E2 E1
, UB E2
D4, STAT3 and 0.058;р=0.736) or maternal age (r=0.155;р=0.44), UB E2
R2)thatarenewtherapeutictargets.Thesekeygenes respectively. Thus, after fertilization, TL in paternal chro- may be potential biomarkers of diagnosis, therapy and mosomes is “reprogrammed”. Being hypomethylated, prognosis for GOS. This work was supported by the Rus- paternal chromosomes are prone to recombination and, sian Foundation for Basic Research (grant No. 18-29- thus,toalternativelengtheningoftelomeres,whichmay be 13045, No. 18-44-700007). part ofdevelopmentalprogram and explainsthe absence of E. Trifonova: None. A. Markov: None. A. Zarubin: correlation of TL in sperm-derived chromosomes with None. T. Gabidulina: None. V. Stepanov: None. paternal age. Supported by RSF№18-75-10046.180 J.delPicchia  P01
.123.C Barroso: None. D. Rodriguez: None. P. Maietta: None. The importance of trio WES integration into prenatal G. Martin-Serrano: None. S. Izquierdo: None. M. diagnosis Miramar: None. A. Rodriguez: None. F. Diaz-Flores: None. M. Zeleniuc: None. L. Martorell: None. J. C. Rodriguez-Solera1, M. Martinez-Garcia1, I. Diez1, I. Bermejo: None. C. Toledo: None. S. Lopez: None. M. Sanchez-Navarro1,E.Barroso1,D.Rodriguez1,P.Maietta1, Sanchez: None. S. Alvarez: None. G. Martin-Serrano1, S. Izquierdo2, M. Miramar2, A. Rodriguez2,F.Diaz-Flores3,M.Zeleniuc4,L.Martorell5,J.  P01
.125.B Bermejo6, C. Toledo7, S. Lopez8, M. Sanchez8, S. Alvarez1 Pregnancy outcome after failure of emergency contra- ception with ulipristal acetate - an observational study 1NIMGenetics S.L, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario MiguelServet,Zaragoza,Spain,3HospitalUniversitariode M. Hoeltzenbein, J. K. Wagner, C. Schaefer, K. Dathe Canarias, Tenerife, Spain, 4Personal Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 5Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, Pharmakovigilanzzentrum Embryonaltoxikologie, Institut 6Hospital General de Segovia, Segovia, Spain, 7Hospital für Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Charité- Virgen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain, 8Hospital Clínico de Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain Introduction: Ulipristal acetate (UPA) is a selective pro- Background: Exome sequencing has proved tobe a useful gesterone receptor modulator used for emergency contra- diagnostic tool when fetal structural anomalies suggest a ception (EC) after unprotected sexual intercourse. Data on genetic etiology, but other standard prenatal genetic tests pregnancy outcome after failure of EC is very limited. didnotprovideadiagnosis.Wedescribeasinglelaboratory MaterialandMethods: Observational studyofprospec- experience with prenatal and fetal samples. tively ascertained pregnancies after UPA exposure for EC. Material and Methods: This study includes 13 samples In addition, retrospectively reported pregnancy outcomes withultrasoundimagessuggestingskeletalabnormalitiesor were evaluated separately. rasopathies, among others. The samples origin were Results: Among 216 requests to the German Embryotox amniotic ﬂuid (69%) and fetal tissues (31%). In six cases institute related to EC with UPA, 95 concerned prospec- a whole exome sequencing with a trio analysis was tively ascertained pregnancies after failed EC. Follow-up performed. The genomic libraries were generated using dataonpregnancyoutcomewasobtainedin56pregnancies: SureSelectXT and sequenced on a Novaseq 6000. Data 7 spontaneous abortions, 12 terminations of pregnancy alignment, calling and ﬁltering was performed using an in- (ETOP) and 37 live births. Major birth defects were not house developed pipeline. Informed consent was obtained reported. Only 34% of women had taken UPA during the from all participants. fertile window. Among the 4 retrospectively reported Results: A molecular diagnosis was obtained on 1 pregnancies there was one child diagnosed with amniotic ﬂuid prenatal sample and on 1 fetal specimen Beckwith-Wiedemann-syndrome (BWS) due to hypo- (15% global diagnostic yield). All positive cases were methylation of I C2
. obtained after trio analysis. Two pathogenic variants in the Conclusions: We provide a preliminary basis for ESCO2 gene associated with Roberts syndrome were reassuring women who wish to carry their pregnancy to identiﬁed in the prenatal sample and one homozygous term after failed EC with UPA. However, due to the variant in the ASPM gene, associated with a primary retrospectivecasereportofachildwithBWSaftermaternal microcephaly5,was identiﬁedinfetal tissue.Bothvariants UPA exposure possible epigenetic effects could not be were cosegregated with the disease. Ultrasound studies did excluded and require further evaluation. As ovarian not suggest the candidate genes due to the insufﬁcient and stimulation alone (independent of artiﬁcial reproductive nonspeciﬁcinformationabouttheprenatalclinicalpresenta- techniques) was previously discussed as a predisposing tion of these syndromes. factor for disturbance of imprinting maintenance, UPA Conclusion: This study highlights the importance of trio might have inﬂuenced preimplantation development and WES integration into prenatal diagnosis. Compared to disturbed epigenetic processes. ultrasound studies alone, prenatal molecular diagnoses led Thisworkwasperformedwithﬁnancialsupportfromthe to a reﬁned recurrence risk estimation, altered medical German Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices managementandallowsaninformedreproductiveplanning (BfArM). for families. M. Hoeltzenbein: None. J.K. Wagner: None. C. C. Rodriguez-Solera: None. M. Martinez-Garcia: Schaefer: None. K. Dathe: None. None. I. Diez: None. I. Sanchez-Navarro: None. E.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 181  P01
.126.C D. Trost1, A. Boughalem1, P. Blanchet2, C. Cenni2, R. Chromosomalmicroarrayconﬁrmsarareprenatalcase Dard3, A. Benachi4, V. Ciorna-Monferrato5, R. Touraine6, of WAGR syndrome P. Kleinﬁnger1, L. Lohmann1, A. Luscan1, M. Valduga1, J. Costa1 M. Shetty, P. Venkatesh, S. Menezes, S. Hegde 1Laboratoire Cerba, Saint Ouen l’Aumone, France, Manipal Hospital, Bangalore, India 2Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 3Hôpital Poissy, Poissy, France, 4Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Introduction: WAGR syndrome is a rare genetic disorder Clamart, France, 5Hôpital Metz-Thionville, Metz, France, withprevalenceof1in500,000to1million.Itaffectsmany 6Hôpital Nord, Saint Etienne, France body systems and is named for its main features: wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies and range of Introduction: Fetal structural abnormalities detected by developmental delays. Children with WAGR syndrome ultrasonography, have a range of genetic causes. Chromo- presentwithaniridia,genito-urinarydefectsinthenewborn somal aneuploidy and structural abnormalities are explored period and are at an increased risk for developing malig- by karyotype testing and chromosomal microarray (CGH). nancies, varying range of intellectual disability and obesity The utility of prenatal whole exome sequencing (WES) is in childhood. The syndrome is a contiguous gene deletion discussed. Information on the interest of prenatal WES syndrome involving chromosome 11p13 containing WT1 remains limited. and PAX6 genes. Methods and results: In our cohort of 53 fetuses with MaterialsandMethods:Wereportacaseof29-year-old normalkaryotype andCGH,TrioWESwasperformed.All Asian (Indian ethnicity) primigravida with non- fetuses had ultrasound abnormalities of poor prognosis. consanguineous marriage. Her mid trimester anomaly scan Most fetuses (26) were analyzed after medical termination at 18 weeks gestation showed bilateral ventriculomegaly, of pregnancy, 24 analyzes were performed on ongoing small cavum septum pellucidum and partial agenesis of pregnancies and 3 analyzes after intrauterine fetal demise. corpus callosum. Amniocentesis was performed for chro- Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were found in 20 mosomal microarray analysis which was performed using cases resulting ina diagnostic yield of 37%. Of these, 55% an Agilent 8x60K array. The cytogenomic microarray (11) were autosomal dominant with de novo variants, 45% analysis showed 4.9MB deletion in chromosome 11 of the diagnoses followed an autosomal recessive inheri- (11p13-p12). tance pattern (5 homozygous variants, 4 compound Discussion: The prenatal diagnosis of WAGR syndrome heterozygous variants). In urgent cases turn-around-time is associated with borderline ventriculomegaly, absent was 2 weeks. Reporting results for an antenatal Trio WES corpus callosum and absent cavum septum pellucidum. In varies between 2-4 weeks. order to diagnose rare syndrome, microarray should be the Conclusions: Whole exome sequencing identiﬁed a ﬁrstchoiceofinvestigationinthepresenceofanystructural genetic cause for the fetal anomalies in 20 of the 53 abnormality. This wouldhelp inunderstandingthe prenatal (37%) cases analyzed. This made it possible to carry out presentation,potentialco-morbidcondition,counselingand geneticcounselingforfamiliesandtooffertargetedprenatal accordingly decision making. diagnosisforrecessivediseasesincaseofanewpregnancy. Conclusions: The clinical association of WAGR syn- D. Trost: None. A. Boughalem: None. P. Blanchet: drome in postnatal period is well established but the None.C.Cenni:None.R.Dard:None.A.Benachi:None. antenatal presentation is not well-understood and reported V. Ciorna-Monferrato: None. R. Touraine: None. P. twice in the literature earlier. Microarray study conﬁrms Kleinﬁnger:None.L.Lohmann:None.A.Luscan:None. these rare non-classical prenatal manifestations of WAGR M. Valduga: None. J. Costa: None. syndrome. M. Shetty: None. P. Venkatesh: None. S. Menezes:  P02
 Sensory Disorders (Eye, Ear, Pain) None. S. Hegde: None.  P02
.01.C  P01
.127.A Disruption of PAX6 translation by 5′ UTR variants Whole Exome Sequencing in 53 fetuses with abnormal causes Congenital aniridia ultrasound: 37% of diagnostic yield182 J.delPicchia A.Filatova,T.Vasilyeva,A.Marakhonov,R.Zinchenko,M. Introduction: ABCA4 variants cause autosomal recessive Skoblov Stargardt disease (STGD1), the most prevalent hereditary macular disease. Major challenges in STGD1 molecular Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian diagnostics include (i) non-coding variants typically not Federation targetedbyavailablegenetictests(ii)copynumbervariants (CNV) missed by standard testing, and (iii) interpretation Introduction:Congenitalaniridia(AN)isarareautosomal challenges with common hypomorphic variants. We eval- dominant panocular disorder caused by mutations in the uated the signiﬁcance of challenging ABCA4 variants and PAX6 gene. Previously, we performed a molecular genetic their contribution to STGD1 diagnostic yield in a cohort of study of a large cohort of Russian patients with AN and inherited retinal disease (IRD) patients. found six PAX6 nucleotide variants in 5ʹ-UTR. It is known MaterialsandMethods:Weincluded7500IRDpatients that 5′-UTR variants could inﬂuence the translation efﬁ- tested at a CLIA laboratory between 2017 and 2019. ciency and cause some diseases, but for AN such a Sequencing analysis, including established non-coding mechanism has not been previously shown. Thus, to ABCA4 variants and high resolution CNV detection, was investigate the pathogenicity of 5′-UTR PAX6 variants the done by using in-house developed and validated NGS functional studies are required. platform. Materials and Methods: To study 5ʹ-UTR variants we Results: Two disease-causing ABCA4 variants were generatedluciferaseconstructswithfull-lengthPAX65ʹ-UTR identiﬁed in 663 patients, of which 20 (20/663; 3%) had (wtandmutants).Thetranslationefﬁciencywasmeasuredby an established non-coding variant and 11 (11/663; 1.5%) a luciferase dual-assay, mRNA structure and expression level CNV. In 192 patients with clinically diagnosed ABCA4- were determined by RT-PCR and qPCR respectively. related disease, only one disease-causing variant was Results:Sixpatient-derived5ʹ-UTR-variantswerefoundto identiﬁed. Among those, the hypomorphic allele ABCA4 lead to a signiﬁcant decrease in the translation efﬁciency, c.5603A>T, p.(Asn1868Ile) was identiﬁed in 109 patients while mRNA expression level was not signiﬁcantly reduced. (109/192: 57%), with a signiﬁcantly increased allele Three of these variants also affect splicing. Further bioinfor- frequency (126/384=0.328) compared to controls in maticsanalysisallowsustosuggestthemechanismof5ʹ-UTR gnomAD (AF 11928/282712=0.042) (OR: 11.087, 95% variantspathogenicitythroughdisruptionofanupstreamORF CI: 8.953-13.73, p < 0.001). The median age at genetic which possibly exists in PAX6 5ʹ-UTR. To validate this testing among the 109 patients was 56 years, which was hypothesis,weperformedadditionalmutagenesisexperiments signiﬁcantly higher compared to 37 years among the 663 and conﬁrmed the essential role of uORF in the molecular patients with two disease-causing variants. pathogenesis of the disease. Moreover, we showed that this Conclusions: Non-coding variants and CNVs contribute uORF normally affects the main protein translation. signiﬁcantly to diagnostic yield in ABCA4-related disease. Conclusions:WehaveidentiﬁeduORFin5′-UTRofthe Our large dataset supports the important role of the PAX6geneandfoundthatmutationsthatdisruptthisuORF hypomorphic allele ABCA4 c.5603A>T, p.(Asn1868Ile) in cause the congenital aniridia. In addition, we hypothesized diagnostics of late-onset STGD1. that this uORF may participate in the normal regulation of J. Känsäkoski: A. Employment (full or part-time); PAX6 expression. Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Kämpjärvi: A. A. Filatova: None. T. Vasilyeva: None. A. Marakho- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint nov: None. R. Zinchenko: None. M. Skoblov: None. Genetics.S.Tuupanen:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Wells: A. Employment  P02
.02.A (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. L. Evaluating diagnostic challenges with ABCA4-related Sarantaus: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; retinal disease - experience with a 7500 IRD patient Blueprint Genetics. P. von Nandelstadh: A. Employment cohort sent for genetic diagnostics (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Merkkiniemi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- J.Känsäkoski1,K.Kämpjärvi1,S.Tuupanen1,K.Wells1,L. niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. H. Västinsalo: A. Employ- Sarantaus1, P. von Nandelstadh1, K. Merkkiniemi1, ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. H. Västinsalo1, E. Mårtensson1, R. Perez Carro1, E. E. Mårtensson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sankila2, J. W. Koskenvuo1, S. Myllykangas1, T. Alastalo1 Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. R. Perez Carro: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint 1Blueprint Genetics, Espoo, Finland, 2Helsinki University Genetics. E. Sankila: A. Employment (full or part-time); Eye Hospital, Helsinki, Finland Modest;BlueprintGenetics.J.W.Koskenvuo:A.Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 183 E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other chain domain. In vitro splice testing conﬁrmed abnormal intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. splicing. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Conclusions: We report on the second DFNA37- Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest associated splice-altering variant, providing conﬁrmatory (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); evidence of CO L11
A1 as a bona ﬁde autosomal dominant Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employ- non-syndromic HL gene. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. B. Vona: None. A. Tropitzsch: None. A. Rad: None. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other F. Schneider: None. M.Müller: None.T. Schade-Mann: intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. None. S. Biskup: None. H. Löwenheim: None.  P02
.03.B  P02
.05.A A novel splicing variant conﬁrms CO L11
A1 as a cause Non-Mendelian inheritance in Bardet-Biedl syndrome: of autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss in triallelism the DFNA37 locus I. Perea-Romero1,2, F. Blanco-Kelly1,2, I. Lorda-Sanchez1, B. Vona1, A. Tropitzsch1, A. Rad1, F. Schneider1, M. I. Sanchez-Navarro3, O. Zurita1,2, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, M. Müller1, T. Schade-Mann1, S. Biskup2, H. Löwenheim1 Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, A. Avila-Fernandez1,2, M. Corton1,2, D. Valverde4,5, C. Ayuso1,2 1Dept of Otolaryngology—Head & Neck Surgery, Tuebin- gen Hearing Research Centre, University of Tuebingen, 1Department of Genetics, Instituto de Investigación Sani- Tuebingen, Germany, 2CeGaT GmbH and Praxis für taria – Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital – Humangenetik Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid, Spain, 2Center for Biomedical Network Research Introduction: Hereditary hearing loss (HL) is a clinically on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, and genetically heterogeneous disorder. Many genes exhi- 3Medical Department, NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain, biting either non-syndromic or syndromic HL have also 4Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, been identiﬁed as causing both, owing to extensive phe- BiologyFaculty,VigoUniversity,Pontevedra,Spain,5Cen- notypic manifestations in the form of pleiotropy. The gene ter for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases CO L11
A1 has long been associated with autosomal domi- (CIBERER), ISCIII, Pontevedra, Spain nant Marshall syndrome and Stickler syndrome type II, as well as autosomal recessive ﬁbrochondrogenesis. Each of Introduction:Bardet-Biedlsyndrome(BBS)isaciliopathy these syndromes have overlapping phenotypes including characterized by retinal dystrophy, obesity, polydactyly, skeletal abnormalities, dysmorphic features, variable cleft cognitive impairment, renal failure and hypogonadism. palate, ocular and auditory phenotypes that can include Typically, it has an autosomal recessive mode of inheri- mild-to-moderate HL, and outer ear malformations. tance, but this heterogeneous disease has variable expres- Recently, CO L11
A1 has been associated with autosomal sivitybetweenandwithinfamilies,whichmightbepartially dominant non-syndromic HL (DFNA37) through the explained by oligogenic inheritance, like triallelism. genetic analysis of a large European-American family pre- Materials and methods: A total of 61 families (78 senting a novel splice-site altering variant. affectedcases)withan“apriori”diagnosisofBBSorBBS- Materials and Methods: A proband from a four like were studied using different molecular approaches generationfamily with non-syndromicHLwas ascertained. (commercialgenotypingmicroarrays,Sangersequencingof DNAfromtheprobandwassubjectedtoacustom-designed speciﬁc genes and/or NGS technologies). high-throughput sequencing panel consisting of 160 HL- Results:Thecharacterizationrateinourcohortwas79% associatedgenes.Aninvitrospliceassaywasperformedto (48/61 families). In 5 of the families, we found a possible study the RNA-level effect of the variant. triallelicinheritance,involving6outofthe7affectedcases. Results: The patient was diagnosed with moderate Three families carried biallelic BB S1
 variants together with sensorineural HL. Additional syndromic features were one allele in MKKS, one family with biallelic MKKS absent. A heterozygous variant (c.4338+2T>C, p.?, variants and one allele in BB S5
 and one additional family NM_080629.2) was uncovered in CO L11
A1 that is carriedbiallelic C8
orf37variantsandonealleleinWDPCP. predicted to abolish the 5′ splice site in exon 58 out of The MKKS (c.724G>T; p.Ala242Ser) variant was found to the68exonscomprisingCO L11
A1.Furthermore,thisnovel be part in 3 families accompanying different biallelic variant affects a highly conserved nucleotide in the alpha variantsinBB S1
.Inonefamily,thetrialleliccaseshoweda more severe phenotype than the biallelic affected sibling.184 J.delPicchia However, the phenotypic modiﬁer effect of the triallelism (NM_021954) and c.2665G>A in EPHA2 could not be stablished in 4 of the families, as they were (NM_001329090). No pathogenic variants were found in either unique cases or both affected showed triallelism. 5 probands. Conclusions: Our study presents triallelism as an option Conclusions: Herein we report for the ﬁrst time in BBS diagnosis, being important to consider it in genetic mutational spectrum of non-syndromic cataracts in Czech counselling. patient population. The failure to identify disease-causing Funding: FIS (PI16/00425 and PI19/00321), University variants in half of the analysed cases suggests, that either Chair UAM-IIS-FJD Genomic Medicine and FEDER the underlying mechanisms are not of genetic origin and/or (European Regional Development Fund) that the pathogenic changes are not located in coding I. Perea-Romero: None. F. Blanco-Kelly: None. I. regions of the genome. Only two probands with family Lorda-Sanchez: None. I. Sanchez-Navarro: None. O. historyofcataractsremainedunsolved.Alternatively,larger Zurita: None. R. Riveiro-Alvarez: None. M. Trujillo- structural variants or rearrangement could be also Tiebas: None. A. Avila-Fernandez: None. M. Corton: implicated. None. D. Valverde: None. C. Ayuso: None. Supported by AZV 17-30500A. J. Moravikova: None. L. Dudakova: None. M.  P02
.07.C Schwarz: None. L. Hlavata: None. F. Malinka: None. Molecular genetic cause of non-syndromic congenital P. Liskova: None. and juvenile cataracts in the Czech population  P02
.08.A J. Moravikova1, L. Dudakova1, M. Schwarz2, L. Hlavata1, Insights into the retinal function of ciliopathy proteins F. Malinka1,3, P. Liskova1,4 gained through zebraﬁsh models 1DepartmentofPaediatricsandAdolescentMedicine,First M. Masek, R. Bachmann-Gagescu Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich, Switzer- 2Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Second land Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Ciliopathiesaredisorderscausedbydysfunctionofprimary Computer Science, Czech Technical University in Prague, cilia, ubiquitous organelles involved in signal transduction. Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Inretinalphotoreceptors(PRs),lightsensationoccursinthe First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General outer segments (OSs), which represent highly specialized University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic ciliary compartments. Consequently, retinal disease is a commonmanifestationinciliopathypatients.Our effortsto Introduction: Congenital and juvenile cataracts are phe- elucidatethemolecularfunctionsofciliopathyproteinsrely notypically and genetically very heterogeneous group. In on zebraﬁsh mutants in genes associated with Joubert syn- this study, we aimed to investigate the molecular genetic drome, an iconic ciliopathy associated with retinal disease causeinCzechpatientswithbilateralcongenitalorjuvenile in25%ofpatients.Wefocusongenesthatencodeproteins cataracts not associated with other ocular or systemic clin- participating in distinct ciliary complexes: Cc2d2a at the ical ﬁndings. transition zone, representing the gate to the cilium, or Tal- Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was pid3/KIAA0586 at the basal body (BB), anchoring the performed in 10 probands of Czech origin. Variants with cilium in the cell. While both mutants display decreased minor allelefrequency less than 0.005 as perGnomAD v.2 visual function, we identify distinct ultra-structural pheno- were ﬁltered and those located in genes known to be types indicating speciﬁc roles for each protein in primary associated with cataract development as per Cat-Map cilium function. We ﬁnd that Cc2d2a organizes the vesicle database were given a priority for further evaluation. fusion machinery at the periciliary margin and provides a Conventional sequencing was used to follow segregation docking point for incoming vesicles through a chain of of the presumably pathogenic variants in available ﬁrst interactions linking C C2
D2A to NINL-MICA L3
-RAB8. In degree relatives. contrast, Talpid3 is involved in BB docking and ciliogen- Results:Outofthe10probands6hadafamilyhistoryof esis upstream of Rab8a activation. Retina-speciﬁc tran- congenitalorinfantilecataracts.Intotal5variantsclassiﬁed scriptomics identiﬁes both shared and distinct effects on aspathogenicorlikelypathogenicasperAmericanCollege gene transcription: while transcription of phototransduction of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines were genes is decreased in both mutants, likely as a secondary identiﬁed. Two variants were novel; c.299T>A in GJA3 effect,weobservedownregulationoftheBBSome,amulti-Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 185 proteincomplexassociatedwiththeciliopathyBardet-Biedl in regions with recurrent CNVs (1q21.1, 6q16, 10q11, syndrome, only in talpid3 mutants, while Nek8 is upregu- 16p11.2, 22q11.2). lated only in cc2d2a mutants. In conclusion, our ﬁndings Conclusions:OurstudysupportstheimportanceofCNV demonstrate how mutations in genes causing the same screening in routine diagnostic testing. It also highlights humandisorderresultinsimilarphenotypesthroughdistinct how CNVs affecting noncoding elements can provide mechanisms. insights into the role of regulatory regions of eye M. Masek: None. R. Bachmann-Gagescu: None. development genes in AMC. Further investigation of such variants will improve the genetic diagnostic yield and our  P02
.09.B understanding of the aetiology of these conditions. Analysis of copy number variants in a large cohort of F. Ceroni: None. D.A. Bax: None. R.J. Holt: None. Y. individuals with anophthalmia, microphthalmia and Kesim: None. A. Cole: None. C. Ogilvie: None. D. coloboma Bunyan:None.L.Cooper-Charles:None.D.McMullan: None. M. Grifﬁths: None. N.K. Ragge: None. F.Ceroni1,D.A.Bax1,R. J.Holt1,Y.Kesim1,A.Cole2,C. Ogilvie3,D.Bunyan4,5,L.Cooper-Charles2,D.McMullan2,  P02
.10.C M. Grifﬁths2, N. K. Ragge1,2 Cataract and retinal dystrophy inVps13bΔEx3/ΔEx3mice. 1Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes V. R. M. Lhussiez1, Q.Cesar2, E. Dubus2,3, M. Simonutti2, University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2West Midlands E. Lizé1, S. Nguyen1,A. Geissler3,A. Bouchot3, S.Picaud2, Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women’s and E. F. Nandrot2, N. Acar4, L. Faivre1,5,6, C. Thauvin1,5,7, L. Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Duplomb1,5, R. Da Costa1,5 Kingdom, 3Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4Wessex Regional Genetics 1INSERM, UMR1231, Equipe GAD, Université de Bour- Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, United gogne Franche Comté, Dijon, France, 2Sorbonne Univer- Kingdom,5FacultyofMedicine,UniversityofSouthampton, sité, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, Paris, France, Southampton, United Kingdom 3Plateforme d’Imagerie Cellulaire CellImaP/DimaCell, Inserm LNC UMR1231, Dijon, France, 4Centre des Introduction: Anophthalmia, microphthalmia and colo- Sciences du Goût et de l’Alimentation, AgroSup Dijon, boma (AMC) are a genetically heterogenous collection of CNRS, INRAE, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, developmental eye disorders, with variants in >100 genes Dijon, France, 5FHU TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, implicated. However, only 25-60% of patients receive France,6CentredeRéférenceAnomaliesduDéveloppement genetic diagnoses. Structural variants are an important et Syndromes Malformatifs, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, sourceofgeneticvariation,andhaveledtotheidentiﬁcation 7Centre de Référence Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes of numerous eye development genes, including SOX2 and Rares, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France OTX2. However, few studies systematically address their contributiontoAMC.Here,weinvestigatealargecohortof Cohen syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disorder due to AMC families for known and novel copy number variants variation in the VP S13
B gene. It is characterized by a wide (CNVs). variety of clinical features that includes a typical facial Materials and methods: A cohort of 320 unrelated dysmorphism, hypotonia, neutropenia, microcephaly, intel- probands was screened using either diagnostic genome- lectual disability and severe visual impairments. In their wide aCGH platforms (n = 156), including the customised early childhood, CS patients already suffer from myopia OGT CytoSure 4x180K eye array, or the Illumina Inﬁnium and a retinal dystrophy that affects both peripheral and GlobalScreeningArray(n=164).SNPdatawereanalysed central vision. In addition, long-term outcome studies usingthealgorithmsQuantiSNPandPennCNV.Variantsof showed that cataract reaches a high prevalence in adults interest were validated using qPCR and long-range PCR. with CS in their forties. To understand how VP S13
B var- Results: Our analysis identiﬁed multiple variants of iants lead to these visual impairments and have the possi- interest,includinglikelypathogenicCNVsaffectingknown bility to assess therapeutic approaches, we generated the AMC genes and rare CNVs highlighting new candidates. Vps13bΔEx3/ΔEx3 mouse model. Cataract was almost sys- We describe a novel homozygous 113kb deletion 19kb tematicin2-month-oldanimals.Eyefundiappearednormal upstream of MAB21 L2
, a developmental gene involved in until cataractdevelopment,butOCT,ERG andhistological eye morphogenesis. This deletion removes multiple con- data suggest that rod homeostasis may be affected in the servedcis-regulatoryelements.Wealsoidentiﬁeddeletions fewVps13bΔEx3/ΔEx3micewithoutcataractafter5monthsof age. Immunostaining of the lens revealed that cataract186 J.delPicchia formation was associated with the appearance of large Arg373Cys) of PROM1 located on chromosome 4p. All vacuoles in the cortical area, epithelial-mesenchymal tran- affected individuals subsequently were heterozygotes for sition and ﬁbrosis. In later stages, cataracts became hyper- this variant. Cytogenetic analysis excluded a balanced mature, lens capsules ruptured, and sclerotic nuclear parts translocation that might explain co-segregation of a region dissociated.Altogether, ourresultsshow that Vps13b hasa on 6q and 4p. function in lens homeostasis in mice and that the Thisﬁndingsuggeststherareoccurrenceofanalphaerror Vps13bΔEx3/ΔEx3 mouse line is a useful model to study the despiterobustlinkageanalysisinalargefamily.Sofarthere pathomechanism leading to CS-related cataract. This work isnoevidencethatperturbationofRIM S1
affectstheretina wassupportedwithfundsfromtheJEDFondationandfrom in humans. the Fondation Maladies Rares. G. Arno: None. E. Schiff: None. G. Wright: None. N. V.R.M. Lhussiez: None. Q. Cesar: None. E. Dubus: Waseem: None. M. Michaelides: None. A.T. Moore: None. M. Simonutti: None. E. Lizé: None. S. Nguyen: None. A.R. Webster: None. None. A. Geissler: None. A. Bouchot: None. S. Picaud: None. E.F. Nandrot: None. N. Acar: None. L. Faivre:  P02
.14.A None. C. Thauvin: None. L. Duplomb: None. R. Da CRB1-related retinopathy superimposed on a S-adeno- Costa: None. sylhomocysteine hydrolase deﬁciency phenotype.  P02
.12.B M.DiScipio1,M.K.GrudzinskaPechhacker1,2,A.Vig1,A. Dominant cone rod dystrophy (CORD7) previously Anupreet1, E. Tavares1, A. Vincent1,2,3, E. Heon1,2,3 assigned to mutation of RIM S1
, is fully explained by co-inheritance of a dominant allele of PROM1 1Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hopsital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department of Ophthal- G. Arno1,2, E. Schiff2, G. Wright2, N. Waseem1, Genomics mology and Vision Sciences, University of Toronto, England Research Consortium, M. Michaelides1,2, A. T. Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Department of Ophthalmology Moore1,2,3, A. R. Webster1,2 and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United King- dom, 2Moorﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, Background: S-adenosylhomocysteine deﬁciency is a rare 3University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, metabolic disorder for which no eye phenotype has been CA, United States documented. CRB1 gene is known to cause wide spectrum of autosomal recessive retinal diseases such as Leber’s Asinglemissensevariant(p.Arg820His)inRIM S1
hasbeen congenital amaurosis, early onset cone-rod dystrophy, reti- associated with autosomal dominant cone rod dystrophy 7 nitis pigmentosa, isolated maculopathy and familial foveal (CORD-7)andenhancedcognition. Thiswas discovered in retinoschisis;orautosomaldominantpigmentedparavenous 2003 following linkage (LOD 3.61) to a 7cM region on chorioretinal atrophy. chromosome6q,inafourgenerationBritishfamilyin1998. Materials and Methods: The present report describes a The RIM S1
 gene is often included in diagnostic panels for non-consanguineous family, where two children were retinaldystrophy.However,despitethis,nofurtherfamilies affected with S-adenosylhomocysteine deﬁciency and one with CORD7 have been reported. ofthempresentedwithreduced visionduetomaculopathy. Widespread availability of massively parallel sequencing Comprehensive eye examination was performed in avail- has enabled detection of genomic variation at a scale not able family members together with color vision test, possible in the early 2000s. Access to vast datasets in contrast sensitivity, visual ﬁelds, fundus images, OCT, full gnomAD and Genomics England 100k genomes project ﬁeldelectroretinogram,patternelectroretinogramandvisual (G E100
KGP) now enables better understanding of the evoked potentials. Genetic testing included WES, retinal validity of previously accepted genetic associations. dystrophy panel and segregation analysis. Interrogation of the gnomAD datasets reveal 10 carriers Results: Clinical whole exome sequencing revealed of RIM S1
 p.Arg820His (Non Finnish European allele homozygous missense mutations in AHCY gene frequency 0.0001). This would be unusual given the (c.148G>A, p.Ala50Thr) as a cause of S-adenosylhomo- severity of visual impairment in adulthood and absence of cysteine deﬁciency. Because of a maculopathy in the the variant in further patient cohorts. Four members of the proband, retinal dystrophy gene panel sequencing revealed original CORD7 family were recruited to the G E100
KGP, two heterozygous missense mutations in CRB1 gene where WGS showed the two affected members to be (c.1831T>C, p.Ser611Pro) and (c.3955T>C, p. heterozygous for a well characterised dominant allele (p.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 187 Phe1319Leu) in the proband (III-1) and her mother. mutation in the patient’s mother who was a heterozygous Mutations segregated with disease phenotype in family carrier. Мother’s ophthalmological examination subse- members. quently conﬁrmed pre-existing stationary night blindness, Conclusions: Establishing an ocular genetic diagnosis prolonged dark adaptation with preserved visual acuity may be complicated by the co-existence of a rare systemic strongly suggesting a phenotype consistent with FA. genetic disease with previously unknown eye involvement. Conclusions:Mostreportedpedigreesareconsistentwith Extensive phenotyping and genotyping of available family a recessive pattern of Mendelian inheritance of FA, members, and genotype-phenotype correlations helps to although autosomal-dominant inheritance has been also establish a diagnosis. reported. Our results suggest that mutation RLB P1
-p. Grant References: Henry Brent Research Chair; Cana- G116R may be considered as dominant-acting in pedigrees dian Foundation Fighting Blindness; Career Development with autosomal-dominant FA. Award (Foundation ﬁghting Blindness, USA). Acknowledgements: D01-285; КП-06-Н33/12. M. Di Scipio: None. M.K. Grudzinska Pechhacker: K.Mihova:None.K.Kamenarova: None.S.Chernin- None. A. Vig: None. A. Anupreet: None. E. Tavares: kova: None. I. Dimova: None. F. Shakola: None. V. None. A. Vincent: None. E. Heon: None. Mitev: None. R. Kaneva: None.  P02
.18.B  P02
.19.C Fundus albipunctatus in a pedigree with autosomal- TheG-EARConsortiumstudy:newcandidategenesfor dominant transmission of G116R mutation in RLB P1
 normalhearingfunction(NHF)andage-relatedhearing loss (ARHL) in a large and deeply phenotyped cohort. K.Mihova1,K.Kamenarova1,S.Cherninkova2,I.Dimova1, F. Shakola1, V. Mitev1, R. Kaneva1 M. Brumat1, A. Morgan1,2, A. P. Nagtegaal3, B. C. Oosterloo3, S. Seshadri4,5, N. L. Heard-Costa4,6, G. Van 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Camp7, E. Fransen8, P. Gasparini1,2, G. Girotto1,2 Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Department of Neurology, University 1Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, HospitalAlexandrovska,MedicalUniversityofSoﬁa,Soﬁa, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal Bulgaria and Child Health – IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Erasmus Medical Introduction: Fundus albipunctatus (FA) is a rare form of Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Framingham Heart congenital stationary night blindness in which white or Study, Framingham, MA, United States, 5Glenn Biggs yellow dots can be seen scattered through the fundus. Institute for Alzheimer’s and Neurodegenerative Diseases, Individuals complain of night blindness early in childhood University of Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antonio, without progression. By next-generation sequencing of TX, United States, 6Department of Neurology, Boston clinical exome including all inherited retinal degeneration University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, causative genes, we aimed to identify the disease-causing 7Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and mutation in a patient with clinical signs of FA. Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 8Depart- Materials and Methods: Using Illumina® platform and ment of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, TruSight One, we identiﬁed heterozygous RLB P1
-mutation Antwerp, Belgium in a young patient, which results in phenotype consistent with FA. Understanding the genetic basis of hearing traits and dis- Results: A 5-years-old patient presenting ophthalmo- eases (e.g. NHF and ARHL) is central to the development scopic phenotype including delayed dark adaptation, of precision medicine for the hearing impaired; to pursue aggregation of yellowish-white lesions of various sizes in this aim, fully audiometrically characterised cohorts are the retina, and slight vascular abnormalities, was screened fundamental. formutationsinallknowngenespreviouslyassociatedwith Through theinternational G-EAR Consortium,we united inheritedretinaldegeneration.Weidentiﬁedaheterozygous data from ten such cohorts from Europe, USA, Caucasus mutation, c.346G>C (p.G116R), in the gene for cellular andCentralAsia(overall>9000individuals)andperformed retinaldehyde-bindingprotein1(RLB P1
),alreadydescribed a GWAS meta-analysis on NHF and ARHL, analysing in inapedigreeaffectedbyautosomal-recessiveFA.Allother the former case single hearing thresholds or their average genetic variants detected in the patient’s DNA were value across speciﬁc frequencies, and in the latter a case- excluded after applying commonly used ﬁltering criteria. control phenotype (PMID:29725052). Analyses used linear Pedigree analysis showed the presence of p.G116R188 J.delPicchia mixed model/logistic regression; meta-analysis was per- sensory disorder with a prevalence of 1-3 affected in 1000 formed with METAL. newborns. Since 2016, the gene CD C14
A (Cell Division Suggestive association signals were detected on chromo- Cycle 14A) is associated with autosomal recessive non- somes 3, 8, 11, 16 and 18. In particular, three genes - syndromic HL (DFNB32) and hearing impairment and CADM2, CALB1 and LRR C4
C - result to be potentially infertile male syndrome (HIIMS). associated with NHF and two more - CDH13 and CTIF - Materials and Methods: In order to identify likely with ARHL. pathogenic variants of already known and novel HL genes CADM2 encodes a protein of the nectin-like family, in Iranian and Pakistani families with sensorineural HL, members of which are fundamental for the development of exomesequencing,genemappingapproachesandbioinfor- the inner ear; CALB1 encodes a calcium-binding protein matics analysis was performed. Segregation testing of thatregulatesthedevelopmentofmurinecochlearhaircells; variants ensued. To investigate functional consequences LRR C4
C encodes a transmembrane protein abundantly on the RNA-level of both loss-of-function variants and to expressed in mouse inner ear. Finally, CDH13 and CTIF evaluate altered expression levels, we used a minigene have been associated with NHF in previous studies, assay for the splice variant (c.1421+2T>C, p.?) and RT- suggesting their possible role also in ARHL. qPCR for the c.1041dup variant. Replication is in progress in an independent cohort of Results: We identiﬁed a novel homozygous CD C14
A ~1500individuals,fullyphenotyped;updatedresultswillbe splice site variant (c.1421+2T>C, p.?) responsible for the presented. These ﬁndings provide a strong contribution to disruptionofasplicedonorsitebasedoninsilicoprediction our understanding of the genetic bases of both NHF and tools. Moreover, we identiﬁed a novel homozygous frame- ARHL, laying the foundation of future therapeutic targets. shift variant (c.1041dup, p.Ser348Glnfs*2) in the gene M. Brumat: None. A. Morgan: None. A.P. Nagtegaal: CD C14
A. We observed that the c.1421+T>C variant is None. B.C. Oosterloo: None. S. Seshadri: None. N.L. responsible for the activation of a cryptic splice site Heard-Costa: None. G. Van Camp: None. E. Fransen: resulting in a truncated transcript (c.1414_1421del, p. None. P. Gasparini: None. G. Girotto: None. Val472Leufs*20). Signiﬁcantly reduced CD C14
A mRNA levels indicated a defective transcript due to the c.1041dup  P02
.20.A variant, which is likely targeted by nonsense-mediated Further evidence of involvement of CD C14
A in auto- mRNA decay (NMD). somal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss Conclusions:Insummary,weidentiﬁedandassessedthe pathogenicity of two novel variants on the RNA-level and J.Doll1,S.Kolb1,L.Schnapp1,A.Rad2,3,F.Rüschendorf4, expand the spectrum of clinically relevant mutations in the I.Khan5,A.Adli2,A.Hasanzadeh2,D.Liedtke1,S.Knaup1, gene CD C14
A. M.A.H.Hofrichter1,T.Müller6,M.Dittrich1,6,I.Kong7,H. J. Doll: None. S. Kolb: None. L. Schnapp: None. A. Kim8, T. Haaf1, B. Vona1,3 Rad: None. F. Rüschendorf: None. I. Khan: None. A. Adli: None. A. Hasanzadeh: None. D. Liedtke: None. S. 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,JuliusMaximiliansUniversity Knaup: None. M.A.H. Hofrichter: None. T. Müller: Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 2Cellular and Molecular None. M. Dittrich: None. I. Kong: None. H. Kim: None. Research Center, Sabzevar University ofMedicalSciences, T. Haaf: None. B. Vona: None. Sabzevar, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Tübingen Hearing Research Centre, Department of Otorhinolaryngology,  P02
.21.B Head and Neck Surgery, Eberhard Karls University, Causes of congenital hearing loss and cochlear implant Tübingen, Germany, 4Max Delbrück Center for Molecular outcome Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany, 5Department of Chemistry, Bacha Khan University, Char- C. Landgraf1, S. von Hardenberg1, A. Lesinski-Schiedat2, sadda, Pakistan, 6Institute of Bioinformatics, Julius Max- A. Büchner2, B. Schlegelberger1, B. Auber1 imilians University, Würzburg, Germany, 7Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied Life Science 1DepartmentofHumanGenetics,HannoverMedicalSchool (BK21plus), Institute of Agriculture and Life Science, (MHH), Hannover, Germany, 2Department of Otorhinolar- Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Korea, Republic yngology, Hannover Medical School (MHH), Hannover, of, 8Neurological Disorders Research Center, Qatar Germany Biomedical Research Institute, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar Aim: Personalize prognosis and therapy through genetic screening of potential cochlear implant patients. Introduction: Hearingloss (HL) isahighlyheterogeneousAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 189 Background: Hearing loss (HL) can be divided into Genética del Hospital de Clínicas “José de San Martín”., syndromic and non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL, CiudadAutónomadeBuenosAires,Argentina,6Serviciode approximately 70 %). While pathogenic variants affecting Otorrinolaringología Infantil del Hospital de Clínicas the gene GJB2 account for roughly 10-30 % of NSHL, the “José de San Martín”., Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos majorityofNSHLisdistributedamongmorethan100other Aires, Argentina, 7Tercera Cátedra de Farmacología, genes. For many patients who do not beneﬁt sufﬁciently Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, fromhearingaids,cochlearimplants(CIs)arethedeviceof Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina choice. Performance of CI recipients is expected to depend on genetic background and a favorable outcome has been Hereditaryhearingloss(HHL)isthemostcommonsensory associated with pathogenic variants in genes affecting the disorderaffecting1in500newbornchildren.SinceHHLis function of the cochlear sensory organ (CSO); a negative related to more than 150 target genes, we designed a outcome was reported for patients with variants in genes diagnosis strategy in order to identify pathogenic variants. associated with spiral ganglion neuron (SGN) function. A total of 1250 patients were analyzed for frequent muta- Patients: 129 unrelated hearing impaired children and tions in GJB2 and GJB6 genes by Sanger Sequencing, adults without pathogenic variants in GJB2 and without genotyping 25% of them. From undiagnosed patients, 29 evidence for acquired HL. familieswereselectedtoperformWholeexomesequencing. Methods: Whole exome sequencing was performed After ﬁltering and analysis process, 45% of patients were analyzing 148 genes associated with HL listed in the genotyped,identifying23causativemutations(11novel,12 Deafness Variation Database and additional 681 genes reported)classiﬁedaccordingtoACMGStandards.Someof listedintheHumanPhenotypeOntologydatabasebasedon thenovelvariantswerefurtherstudiedinsilicobystructural hearing impairment. and stability studies of the mutated proteins. In addition, Results:In33of129patientsweidentiﬁedpathogenicor datasets from deafness and speciﬁc variant databases were likely pathogenic variants in30 different genes,conﬁrming correlated with different protein motifs in order to predict the genetic heterogeneity of hereditary HL. Among these the theoretical pathogenicity effect of the aminoacid chan- was one patient with a(homozygous)pathogenic variantin ges. Furthermore, knock-down phenotype rescue assays in a gene proven to affect SGN function (DFNB59). zebraﬁshareunderwaytoaccomplishinvivovalidation.In Conclusions: For meaningful results, a signiﬁcantly some cases, extensive analysis reinforced the pathogenicity higher number of cases is required. In addition, a further prediction effect of variants and surprisingly, in one case, functional subdivision of patients with gene alterations discouragedthedeleteriouseffectofageneticvarianttothe inﬂuencing CSO function should be considered. protein. Preliminary results in zebraﬁsh conﬁrmed the C. Landgraf: None. S. von Hardenberg: None. A. pathogenicity of one novel variant in the hair cell function Lesinski-Schiedat: None. A. Büchner: None. B. Schle- andauditorysystem.Thisstudyshowsthatouralgorithmis gelberger: None. B. Auber: None. successful for the genetic diagnosis of deafness. Compre- hensive analysis is crucial to strengthen prediction of var-  P02
.22.C iant pathogenicity. These ﬁndings highlight the importance Insilico andinvivoanalysesofnovelvariantsidentiﬁed of genetic studies followed by in silico and in vivo vali- by Whole Exome Sequencing in Argentinean deaf dation to better understand the genetic basis of HHL. patients: to be or not be pathogenic P.I. Buonﬁglio: None. C.D. Bruque: None. E. Gold- schmidt: None. V. Lotersztein: None. S. Menazzi: None. P. I. Buonﬁglio1, C. D. Bruque2, E. Goldschmidt3, V. B.Paoli:None.P.Plazas:None.A.B.Elgoyhen:None.V. Lotersztein4, S. Menazzi5, B. Paoli6, P. Plazas7, A. B. K. Dalamón: None. Elgoyhen1, V. K. Dalamón1  P02
.23.A 1Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Genetic spectrum of hereditary hearing loss in multi- Biología Molecular “Dr. Héctor Torres” - INGEBI/ generational families with autosomal dominant mode of CONICET, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina, inheritance 2Centro Nacional de Genética Médica “A.N.L.I.S. – Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán “, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, M. Oldak1, M. L. Leja1,2, D. Ozieblo1,3, A. Sarosiak1,3, H. Argentina, 3Servicio de Genética del Hospital General de Skarzynski4 Agudos “Dr. Juan A. Fernández”, Ciudad Autónoma de BuenosAires,Argentina,4ServiciodeGenéticadelHospital 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Militar Central Cirujano Mayor “Dr. Cosme Argerich”, Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate CiudadAutónomadeBuenosAires,Argentina,5Serviciode School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of190 J.delPicchia Warsaw,Warsaw,Poland,Warsaw,Poland,3Postgraduate Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland, 43. Oto-Rhino-Laryngology Surgery Clinic, Insti- Introduction: Every year, approximately 1-6/1000 children tute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, are born with severe to profound hearing loss (HL). For this Poland, Warsaw, Poland groupofpatientscochlearimplantation(CI)isthetreatmentof choice. In the majority of deaf children HL is determined by Introduction: Hearing loss (HL) is the most common dis- DFNB1locuspathogenicvariants.Here,weaimtodissectthe ability of human senses and genetic factors play an genetic background of HL in DFNB1-negative CI patients. importantroleinitsdevelopment.AutosomaldominantHL Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was isolated (ADHL)isthesecondmostcommonformofinheritedHL, from blood samples of carefully selected DFNB1-negative characterized by postlingual age of onset and progression. patients with profound prelingual HL (n = 50) and their To date 63 loci with 47 different genes were causally family members. In all probands whole exome sequencing involved in ADHL. (WES)followedbybioinformaticsandexpertanalysiswere MaterialsandMethods:Multigenerationalfamilieswith performed. Standard Sanger sequencing was used for ADHL were recruited for the study (n = 44). Genomic validation of selected variants, family segregation analysis DNA was isolated from whole blood and buccal swabs and detection of the CEVA haplotype. Copy number samples. A high-throughput sequencing with custom variants were conﬁrmed with qPCR. multigene panel was performed on probands’ DNA Results: In every tested subject WES revealed at least 5 samples. Family segregation analysis of the identiﬁed probably pathogenic variants in HL-related genes. Causa- variants was conducted using Sanger sequencing. All tive variants were identiﬁed in 33 patients and in 39% (13/ detectedvariantswereanalyzedinthecontextofpopulation 33) of them they were inherited in an autosomal dominant databases and available literature. Pathogenicity of the manner. Among the detected 53 disease-causing alleles, identiﬁedvariantswaspredictedbydifferentcomputational 55% (29/53) contained novel genetic alterations. approaches. Conclusions:Obtainedresultsshowahighheterogeneity Results: Genetic testing revealed probably pathogenic of genetic HL causes in the population of Polish DFNB1- variantsinabout52%(23/44)oftheanalyzedfamilies.The negative cochlea-implanted patients. In children with no majority of identiﬁed variants were novel, previously not familyhistoryofHL,thepossibilityofidentifyingcausative reported and hitherto not linked to the disease. The most variantsinheritedinbothautosomalrecessiveanddominant frequent genes with identiﬁed causative variants were manner should be taken into account. In patients with an MYO6, COCH, DFNA5, KCNQ4, TECTA and POU4F3. unknown genetic cause of HL, the tested area should be Conclusions: Our study revealed a high involvement of expanded with whole genomeanalysis. Supportedby NCN novel probably pathogenic variants in the development of grant: 2017/27/N/NZ5/02369 ADHLandconﬁrmedahighheterogeneityoftheidentiﬁed D. Ozieblo: None. M.L. Leja: None. H. Skarzynski: genetic changes. High-throughput sequencing in HL None. M. Oldak: None. patients generates large amount of data that should be interpretedcarefullyandconﬁrmedbyfamilystudies.There  P02
.25.C isalsoaneedforfunctionalvalidationofthedetectednovel Diagnostic Efﬁciency of Clinical Exome Solution Panel variants.Supportedby:NCNResearchGrantno.2016/22/ in patients with Hearing loss/Hereditary Deafness by E/NZ5/00470 SONATA BI S6
 using Next Generation Sequencing M. Oldak: None. M.L. Leja: None. D. Ozieblo: None. A. Sarosiak: None. H. Skarzynski: None. S. G. Temel1,2, A. Alemdar1, M. Yılmaz3, L. Aliyeva2, S. Ozemri Sag2  P02
.24.B Wide spectrum of genetic hearing loss causes and large 1Department of Translational Medicine, Bursa Uludag number of novel variants in cochlea implanted children University, Bursa, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genet- ics, Bursa Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, 3Faculty of D. Ozieblo1,2, M. L. Leja1,2, H. Skarzynski3, M. Oldak1 Medicine, Bursa Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Hearing loss (HL)/Hereditary Deafness (HD) is a hetero- Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate geneous disease which multiple genes have been found to School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of be implicated in the disease etiopathogenesis. Genetic Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Oto-Rhino-Laryngology diagnosisishighlyimportantforHL/HDpatientsinordertoAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 191 ensuretheetiologyoftheconditionandcounselthepatients variants in GJB2 account for a large proportion of cases, properly.Inthisstudy,41patients(22M/19F)whoadmitted many patients remain undiagnosed after DFNB1 testing. to our clinic between February 2018 and November 2019 NGS analysis of HL-genes to simultaneously search for with HL/HD were screened for 110 genes related with nucleotide variants and copy number variants (CNVs) syndromic/non-syndromicHL/HD.NGSisconsideredtobe greatly improve the detection rate. the best practice for diagnosis. Large gene panels also can Materials and methods: clinical exome sequencing evaluatenon-prevelantgenesandcandidatevariantsspeciﬁc followed by in silico analysis of HL-gene panel (106 to populations. All exons and exon-intron boundaries were genes) was carried out on 117 patients on which DFNB1 amplifed by using Clinical Exome (Sophia Genetics) pathogenic variants were previously excluded. Eighty Solution (CES) kit in MiSeq NGS instrument. Variant cases show prelingual or childhood deafness while in 37 analyis (SNV, Indel and CNV) and annotations were per- patients HL was progressive with variable age of onset. formed by Sophia DDM platform, classiﬁed according to Clinical interpretation of genetic variants was performed ACMG criteriawithin-silico toolsandalso investigated by according to ACMG2015 by InterVar and Varsome tools HGMD Professional 2019-4 and other available online and revised according to the speciﬁc guidelines for HL- bioinformatictools.WeidentiﬁedCNVinthreepatients,26 genes. pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in 19 of 41 HL/ Results: Forty-eight pathogenic or likely pathogenic HD patients (46 %) in 10 different genes. Similarly, 23 variantsandeightpathogenicCNVs(6STRC-CATSPER2 variantsofuncertainsigniﬁcancearedeterminedin18of41 and2OTOAwholegenedeletions)wereidentiﬁedwithan HL/HD patients (43 %) in 18 distinct genes. Besides these overall detection rate of 26.5%. Speciﬁc detection rate was variations, we found 31 novel variations that are not 32% (12/37) for adult cases and 24% in children. In reportedbefore inliteratureordatabases. Our studyafﬁrms particular, NGS identiﬁed 12 different pathogenic variants that genetic screening of patients with HL by using CES in dominant, 28 in recessive and 8 in dominant/recessive panelnotonlyeasilydiagnosesbutalsohelpcounselingthe genes.ThegenesmostinvolvedwereSL C26
A4andSTRC. patients and their family for their future risk of developing AsinglepathogenicvariantinSL C26
A4genewasfoundin the disease. 7 cases. S.G. Temel: None. A. Alemdar: None. M. Yılmaz: Conclusions: overall detection rate of the test is in line None. L. Aliyeva: None. S. Ozemri Sag: None. with available data. MLPA analysis in target genes such as SL C26
A4shouldbeperformedtoexcludethepresenceofa  P02
.26.A deletion at exonic level in cases where a single variant as NGS approach for molecular diagnosis of hereditary been identiﬁed. hearing loss F. Gerundino: None. C. Pescucci: None. C. Giuliani: None. B. Bianchi: None. G. Traﬁcante: None. S. F. Gerundino1, C. Pescucci1, C. Giuliani1, B. Bianchi2, G. Bargiacchi: None. S. Romano: None. A. Cecconi: None. Traﬁcante3,S.Bargiacchi3,S.Romano4,A.Cecconi5,C.Di C. Di Marco: None. A. Orrico: None. M. Mencarelli: Marco6, A. Orrico7,8, M. Mencarelli9, L. Candita1, C. None. L. Candita: None. C. Deledda: None. M. Trafeli: Deledda1, M. Trafeli1, B. Minuti1, A. Renieri9, E. Pelo1 None.B.Minuti:None.A.Renieri: None.E.Pelo:None. 1SOD Diagnostica Genetica, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy,  P02
.27.B 2Audiologia SOC Otorinolaringoiatria AOU Meyer, Fire- Complex assessment of pathogenicity of novel variant nze, Italy, 3SOC Genetica Medica AOU Meyer, Firenze, c.516G>C (p.Trp172Cys) in the GJB2 gene associated Italy, 4Medicina 1, Genetica Medica AOU Pisana, Pisa, with hearing loss in indigenous peoples of Southern Italy, 5Ambulatorio Integrato Genetica Medica, Usl Tos- Siberia (Russia) cana Centro, Firenze, Italy, 6Ambulatorio Integrato Genet- ica Medica, Usl Toscana Centro, Florence, Italy, E. A. Maslova1,2, M. V. Zytsar1, V. Y. Danilchenko1, K. E. 7Interdipartimental Program for molecular diagnosis and Orishchenko1,2, O. L. Posukh1,2 characterization of pathogenic mechanisms of rare genetic diseases, Siena, Italy, 8Clinical Genetics. ASL Toscana 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Sudest. Ospedale della Misericordia., Grosseto, Italy, Federation, 2Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, 9Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Russian Federation Senese, Siena, Italy Assessment of pathogenicity of novel variants is a primary Introduction: hearing loss (HL) is one of the most task for molecular diagnostics of hereditary diseases. genetically heterogeneous disorders. Although pathogenic Mutations in gene GJB2 encoding transmembrane protein192 J.delPicchia Cx26 are the common cause for hearing loss worldwide. origin. The identiﬁcation of the causative gene in affected Wepresentacomplexassessmentofpathogenicityofnovel familieswithhearinglossisdifﬁcultduetoextremegenetic non-synonymousvariantc.516G>C(p.Trp172Cys)inGJB2 heterogeneity and lack of phenotypic variability. Consan- found with high frequency in deaf patients belonging to guineous families are a powerful resource for genetic indigenous peoples of Southern Siberia (Tuvinians and linkage studies/homozygosity mapping for recessively Altaians). inherited hearing impairment. Homozygosity mapping, Materials & Methods: Genetic analysis was performed linkage analysis and next generation sequencing Deafness in group of deaf patients and ethnically matched controls. Gene-panelandWholeExomesequencingwereconducted. The GJB2 knockout HeLa cell line (obtained by CRISPR/ Using the combined approaches, so far mutations in 32 Cas9system)wasusedtoestablishmentoftransgenicHeLa different deafness genes including novel genes ﬁrst time cell lines with different pathogenic GJB2-variants and identiﬁed in this population, have been identiﬁed. More GJB2-wt. Cellular Cx26 localization was investigated by than 300 familial/sporadic cases were solved, including immunocytochemistry (ICC). The Cx26-channels perme- novel variants in known HL genes. ability was analyzed by dye (PI) loading assay. Using these innovative molecular approaches, we were Results:Segregationofvariantc.516G>C(p.Trp172Cys) able to document the most common forms of hereditary withhearinglosswasestablishedinanalysisofpedigreesof hearing loss, their incidence and distribution in the Saudi deaf patients and its frequency was signiﬁcantly higher in population. The overall results of this study are highly patient’s group than incontrols. Most of in silico programs suggestive that the underlying molecular basis of hearing predicted a likely damaging effect of p.Trp172Cys. ICC lossinSaudiArabiaisverygeneticallyheterogeneous.The showed predominantly cytoplasmic localization of the beneﬁt of this study will hopefully provide the foundation Cx26-p.Trp172Cys protein in contrast to Cx26-wt which for knowledge and awareness through screening of carrier represented distinct conglomerates on cell membrane. Dye status and genetic counselling, thereby having a major (PI) loading assay revealed lower PI loading efﬁciencies in impact upon early intervention for and prevention of cells expressing mutant variant Cx26-p.Trp172Cys com- hereditary hearing loss. paredtoCx26-wtwhiletheabsenceofPIaccumulationwas K. Ramzan: None. F. Imtiaz: None. M. Al-Owain: shown for other mutant Cx26-variants with known None. S. Alhazzaa: None. pathogenic effects. Conclusions: Several lines of evidences support patho-  P02
.29.A genicity of novel variant c.516G>C (p.Trp172Cys) in gene ENT- Genetics Genome Boards: Over 50% diagnostic GJB2 and its involving in hearing loss. yield Study was supported by Project #0324-2019-0041-C-01 and RFBR grant #17-29-06016_oﬁ-m. M. Carminho-Rodrigues1, P. Senn2, M. Abramowicz1, E. E.A. Maslova: None. M.V. Zytsar: None. V.Y. Hammar1, L. Quteineh1, A. Murphy1, S. Laurent1, M. Danilchenko: None. K.E. Orishchenko: None. O.L. Guipponi1, H. Cao-Van2, A. Paoloni-Giacobino1 Posukh: None. 1Medical Genetics Unit, Geneva University Hospitals,  P02
.28.C Geneva, Switzerland, 2ENT Unit, Geneva University GeneticheterogeneityunderlyinghearinglossandUsher Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland syndrome in Saudi population Introduction: Hearing impairment (HI) is the most com- K. Ramzan, F. Imtiaz, M. Al-Owain, S. Alhazzaa mon sensory impairment. It can be isolated or syndromic. Molecular diagnosis through whole exome sequencing King Faisal Specialist Hospital and research centre, (WES) can allow an improved management and surveil- Riyadh, Saudi Arabia lance of HI and possible associated anomalies. Here we show the results of a 3 years’ experience of Ear-nose-and- Hearing loss is one of the most common sensory disorders throat (ENT) Genetics Genome boards. in humans with both genetic and environmental etiologies. Materials and Methods: Our cohort includes children Usher syndrome (USH) is the most common cause of with mild to profound, unilateralor bilateral HI referred by combinedblindnessanddeafness.Moleculardiagnosisisof ENT clinic from 2017 to 2019. We performed WES with great signiﬁcance in revealing the molecular pathogenesis bioinformatics analysis of 189 genes associated with HI. and aiding the clinical diagnosis of this disease. The results are discussed during a genome board where Our study aims to comprehensively delineate the genetic geneticistsandENTspecialistsconfrontthegeneticvariants basis of hearing loss in the individuals of Saudi Arabian found byWESwith theauditoryphenotypeofthepatients.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 193 Results: We tested 38 children, most often with to ACMG standards and guidelines for variant moderate, bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. The diag- interpretation. nosticratewas52.6%(20/38).Amongtheresultswefound Results: We found causative pathogenic or likely variants associated with: syndromic forms: Usher, Wol- pathogenic variants in 102 patients. The diagnostic yield fram-like, Branchio-oto-renal, Alport, Perrault, GATA3; was 50% for retinal degeneration (78/156), 20% for optic non-syndromic forms: Cx26, ACTG1, OTOA, ILDR1, atrophy(6/30),75%forhighmyopia(3/4),29%forcataract SL C17
A8, LOXHD1, TB C1
D24 and STRC related HI (2/7),45%forretinoblastoma(4/9),20%fordevelopmental associated or not with infertility in males. ocular anomalies (3/15), 67% for corneal dystrophy (2/3), Conclusions: The diagnostic yield of our study (52.6%) and 56% for syndromic ocular disease (11/19). is comparable to recent data in the literature. A genetic Conclusions: The overall diagnostic yield for ophtalmo- assessmentofHIinyoungchildrenmakestheidentiﬁcation genetic referral in a cohort of unselected consecutive of the molecular cause possible, and permits to anticipate patients was 42%. Therefore, the exome sequencing is a possiblecomplicationsparticularlyinthecaseofsyndromic cost-effective and efﬁcient comprehensive approach that forms with medical problems involving other organs or should be considered as a ﬁrst-tier investigation for systems. Collaboration between ENT specialists and diagnostics of hereditary eye diseases. geneticists is essential to make an accurate and precise M. Volk: None. N. Teran: None. A. Maver: None. H. diagnosisandtopersonalizethefollow-upandtreatmentof Jaklič: None. A. Fakin: None. M. Hawlina: None. B. these young patients. Peterlin: None. M. Carminho-Rodrigues: None. P. Senn: None. M. Abramowicz: None. E. Hammar: None. L. Quteineh:  P02
.31.C None. A. Murphy: None. S. Laurent: None. M. Analysis of recurrent mutations in different Iranian Guipponi: None. H. Cao-Van: None. A. Paoloni- families with hearing loss Giacobino: None. M. A. H. Hofrichter1, A. Rad2,3, S. Kolb1, J. Weingart1, J.  P02
.30.B Doll1, T. Müller4, C. Remmele5,1, M. Dittrich1,4, R. The utility of exome sequencing for hereditary eye Marooﬁan6, T. Haaf1, B. Vona1,3 diseases: single-centre experience 1Institute of Human Genetics, Julius Maximilians Univer- M. Volk1, N. Teran1, A. Maver1, H. Jaklič1, A. Fakin2, M. sity, Würzburg, Germany, 2Cellular and Molecular Hawlina2, B. Peterlin1 Research Center, Sabzevar University ofMedicalSciences, Sabzevar, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Department of 1InstituteofGenomicMedicine,UMCLjubljana,Ljubljana, Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Tübingen Slovenia, 2Eye hospital, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Hearing Research Centre (THRC), Eberhard Karls Uni- Slovenia versity, Tübingen, Germany, 4Institute of Bioinformatics, Julius Maximilians University, Würzburg, Germany, 5Cen- Introduction: Over 650 heritable conditions with ocular ter for Rare Diseases, University Hospital Würzburg, involvement have been described to date. These include Würzburg, Germany, 6Genetics and Molecular Cell isolated eyediseases (retinal degeneration,cataract,corneal Sciences Research Centre, St George’s, University of dystrophy,opticatrophy,developmental ocular anomalies), London, Cranmer Terrace, London, United Kingdom as well as complex genetic syndromes with ocular mani- festations. This group of disorders is genetically hetero- Introduction: Hereditary hearing loss (HL) is one of the geneous and diagnostically challenging. The aim of our most genetically heterogeneous disorders. The genetic study was to determine the clinical diagnostic utility of landscapeofnon-syndromicHLincludesover100genes.In exome sequencing in hereditary eye diseases. aggregate, these genes harbor several thousand causally Materials and Methods: 243 Slovene unselected con- implicated variants. The observation of recurrent variants secutive patients were referred to our institution from raises the question about whether variants arose from a November 2013 to October 2019 because of suspected single ancestral allele or were the result of independent hereditary eye disease. We performed exome sequencing mutational events. In our study that includes 150 Iranian with the mitochondrial sequence analysis based on the off- probands, we identiﬁed 15 families with recurrent likely target exome reads. Filtered variants were analyzed pathogenic variants in the genes SMPX, SL C26
A4, TECTA according to population frequency, characterization in the and TMIE. ClinVar database, the putative impact of the variant, and Methods:DNAsamplesfromindexpatientswereexome predicted pathogenicity. Variants were classiﬁed according sequenced following Illumina exome protocols. Libraries194 J.delPicchia were sequenced with a NextSeq500 benchtop sequencer. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) for new candidates Variantandcopynumbervariationanalysiswereperformed identiﬁcation. TRS and SNP-arrays characterized ~28% of using GensearchNGS and an in-house exome analysis the HL cases (42% familial and 20% sporadic cases) pipeline. Segregation analysis was performed for all highlightingSTRCandTECTAasthesecondmajorplayers families. Haplotype reconstruction allowed comparison in the Italian population after GJB2. Then, WES allowed across families. the identiﬁcation of ﬁve new HHL genes, two of them Results: Haplotype analysis of the c.99del variant in (SL C12
A2 and US P48
) just identiﬁed. As regards SMPXthatwasidentiﬁedinthreeIranianfamiliessuggested SL C12
A2, a heterozygous missense variation a common descent. Interestingly, this X-linked variant was (NM_001046.2, exon25, c.3431C>A, p.(T1144N)) has described as a founder mutation in an isolated Newfound- been identiﬁed in a three-generation HHL family. The land population. In addition, more than one recurrent variant is predicted as deleterious by several bioinformatic mutation was identiﬁed in the genes SL C26
A4 and TECTA prediction tools and is not reported in any public database. infamilieswithautosomalrecessiveHLthatwasconsistent Interestingly, studies in mouse and zebraﬁsh models with a founder effect. In three additional families, the demonstrated Slc12a2 expression in the inner ear and its c.250C>T variant in TMIE was implicated in autosomal involvement in hearing loss. Moreover, to better evaluate recessive HL without sharing further common variants, the pathogenic effect of the identiﬁed variant, an in silico suggesting a mutational hotspot. protein modelling has been performed suggesting that the Conclusions: The genetic origin of recurrent mutations substitution identiﬁed might alter the correct folding of the couldbeinterestingforfurthercharacterizationofHLgenes protein.Thanks tothis approach ~35% (60% familialcases with respect to ethnic background and susceptibility of and 20% sporadic ones) of cases have been characterized mutational events. conﬁrming the large mutation’s spectrum of HHL, and the M.A.H. Hofrichter: None. A. Rad: None. S. Kolb: importance of an accurate clinical diagnosis. None.J.Weingart:None.J.Doll:None.T.Müller:None. A. Morgan: None. G. Pelliccione: None. F. Faletra: C. Remmele: None. M. Dittrich: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. D. Dell’Orco: None. M. Brumat: None. P. None. T. Haaf: None. B. Vona: None. Gasparini: None. G. Girotto: None.  P02
.32.A  P02
.33.B Genomic approaches for the analysis fo more than 700 Genetic causes of paediatric hereditary retinal diseases Italian patients affected by Hereditary Hearing Loss in Polish population (HHL) reveal new genes/alleles. K. H. Chrzanowska1, B. Kocyła-Karczmarewicz2, A. M. A. Morgan1,2, G. Pelliccione1, F. Faletra1, D. Dell’Orco3, Tracewska3, E. Ciara1, M. Rydzanicz4, P. Stawiński4, R. M. Brumat2, P. Gasparini4,2, G. Girotto1,2 Płoski4 1Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS Burlo 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,TheChildren’sMemorial Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Department of Medicine, Surgery HealthInstitute,Warsaw,Poland,2DepartmentofOphthal- and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, mology, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, War- 3DepartmentofNeurosciences,BiomedicineandMovement saw, Poland, 3DNA Analysis Laboratory, PORT Polish Sciences, Section of Biological Chemistry, University of Center for Research Technology, Wrocław, Poland, Verona, Verona, Italy, 4Institute for Maternal and Child 4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Health – IRCCS, Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland Discerning the complex genetic basis of HHL is funda- Introduction: Every year, Children’s Memorial Health mental to facilitate a correct genetic counselling and Institute admits approximately 100 children suffering from molecular diagnosis. The use of high-throughput genome vision impairment with suspicion of inherited retinal technologieshasmadegreatstridesinthediscoveryofnew degeneration(IRD),whichisconﬁrmedinhalfofthecases. alleles/genes identiﬁcation. Here, 714 deeply clinically In many paediatric patients, genetic diagnosis is crucial for characterized patients were screened with a Targeted Re- prognostics and future planning. Sequencing (TRS) panel of 96 deafness genes and, in Methods: 76 probands and 22 affected family members negative cases, SNP-arrays were applied. Afterwards, were ascertained,andadetailedmedical andfamily history families negative to both approaches were analysed by was obtained. Ophthalmological assessment consisted,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 195 when feasible, of: best-corrected Snellen visual acuity aim of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic yield of (BCVA),colourvision,visualﬁeldtest,dilatedophthalmo- whole exome sequencing (WES) in patients with HM. scopy, colour fundus photography, autoﬂuorescence ima- Materials and methods: Patients with HM were ging, spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD- recruited by ophthalmologists and clinical geneticists. OCT), ﬂuorescein angiography and electrophysiological Clinical features were categorized into isolated HM, HM assessment. DNA was isolated from blood samples, and with other ocular features or syndromic HM with systemic proband samples underwent targeted next-generation involvement. WES was performed using a vision gene sequencing for 108 known IRD genes. panel including 477 genes. Results: In the vast majority of affected individuals the Results:WESwasperformedin50patientswithHM;the genetic analyses conﬁrmed the initial diagnosis; some majority had isolated HM (75%). A genetic cause was diagnoses, however, needed to be revised. Causal variants identiﬁed in 11 patients (22%; mean age at diagnosis 9.4 werefoundin2/3ofthefamilies.Inﬁvecases,monoallelic years (SD 7.5); mean refractive error -12.60 diopters (SD pathogenic alterations were found in autosomal recessive 6.22)). Four patients had mutations in known retinal genes. Most commonly mutated genes in this cohort were dystrophy genes (GUCY2D; FAM161A; PD E6
H; CAC- ABCA4 (23 individuals), CNGA3 (5) and CE P290
 (4). NA1F); 3 female patients had a ARR3 mutation (X-linked Conclusions: Genetic analysis is crucial to achieve femalelimitedhighmyopia);2patientshadhomozygousor accurate diagnosis and prognosis, which enables informed compound heterozygous CO L18
A1 mutations (Knobloch choices for the future of the affected children. Many syndrome); 1 patient had a CO L2
A1 mutation (Stickler probandsweretheﬁrstindividualsufferingfromIRDinthe syndrome); 1 patient had a PAX6 mutation. In 14 patients family.Animportantroleofgeneticdiagnosticsistoinform (28%)avariantofunknownsigniﬁcancewasfound;follow- theparentsabouttheirriskforhavinganotherchildwiththe up examinations are necessary. disease.Finally,emergingtargetedgenetherapiesindicatea Conclusions: The diagnostic yield of our WES vision chance of slowing or stopping the disease progression. gene panel for HM was 22%. It enabled us to diagnose Funding: National Science Centre (Poland) grant no. various causes of HM, i.e. retinal dystrophies, connective UMO-2015/19/D/NZ2/03193. tissue diseases, and non-syndromic HM, allowing appro- 1 priatefollowupofsystemicandocularfeaturesandgenetic K.H. Chrzanowska:None. B. Kocyła-Karczmarewicz: counselling. None. A.M. Tracewska: None. E. Ciara: None. Horizon 2020 (grant 648268); NWO (grants 91815655, M. Rydzanicz: None. P. Stawiński: None. R. 91617076); Oogfonds; ODAS; Uitzicht (grant 2017-28). Płoski: None. V.J.M. Verhoeven: None. A.E.G. Haarman: None. M. van Tienhoven: None. A.A.H.J. Thiadens: None. S.E.  P02
.35.A Loudon: None. A. de Klein: None. E. Brosens: None. J. Diagnostic exome sequencing in 50 patients with high R. Polling: None. A. Bouman: None. C.C.W. Klaver: myopia None. A.J.A. Kievit: None. L.H. Hoefsloot: None. V. J. M. Verhoeven1,2, A. E. G. Haarman2,3, M. van  P02
.37.C Tienhoven1, A. A. H. J. Thiadens2, S. E. Loudon2, A. de Geneticarchitectureofinheritedretinaldegenerationin Klein1, E. Brosens1, J. R. Polling2,4, A. Bouman1, C. C. W. Germany:Alargecohortstudyfromasinglediagnostic Klaver5,3,2, A. J. A. Kievit1, L. H. Hoefsloot1 center over a 9-year period 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, N. Weisschuh1, C. D. Obermaier2,3, A. Bernd1, L. Rotterdam, the Netherlands, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Kühlewein1,4, F. Nasser5, D. Zobor1, F. Battke3, E. 2Dept. of Ophthalmology, Erasmus Medical Center, Zrenner1,6, E. Weber1, B. Wissinger1, S. Biskup2,3, K. Rotterdam, the Netherlands, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Stingl5, S. Kohl1 3Dept. of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotter- dam, the Netherlands, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Dept. of 1InstituteforOphthalmicResearch,CentreforOphthalmol- Orthoptics, School of Applied Science Utrecht, Utrecht, ogy, University of Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Praxis Netherlands, 5Dept. of Ophthalmology, UMC St Radboud, fuerHumangenetikTuebingen,Tuebingen,Germany,3Cen- Nijmegen, the Netherlands, Nijmegen, Netherlands ter for Genomics and Transcriptomics, CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 4University Eye Hospital, Center for Introduction: High myopia (HM; ≤-6 diopters) is a het- Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Ger- erogeneous condition, and without clear accompanying many,5UniversityEyeHospital,CenterforOphthalmology, features it can be difﬁcult to pinpoint a genetic cause. The University of Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 6Werner196 J.delPicchia Reichardt Centre for Integrative Neuroscience (CIN), Germany, 3University Eye Hospital, Center for Ophthal- University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany mology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 4InstituteforOphthalmicResearch,CentreforOphthalmol- Introduction: The aim of this cohort study was to unravel ogy, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany the molecular basis of inherited retinal degeneration (IRD) in a large cohort of 2,156 affected patients diagnosed and Introduction: Implementation ofgenome-wide sequencing followed-up in the largest center for inherited retinal dis- approaches such as exome and genome sequencing in eases in Germany. Our study cohort accounts for approxi- routine diagnostics implicates the possibility of incidental mately 7% of the estimated 30,000 IRD patients in ﬁndings and unexpected diagnoses. Here we present two Germany, thereby providing representative data for the patients,a9-year-oldgirlwithconedystrophyanda43-year prevalence and the mutation spectrum of IRD genes and old man with rod-cone dystrophy, initially referred to the mutations for the population in Germany. Presently, more Department of Ophthalmology to conﬁrm inherited retinal than 260 `disease genes’ are known to cause IRDs. The disease. identiﬁcation of the underlying disease-causing mutations Material and Methods: Genomic DNA was processed hasbeenacceleratedbytheintroductionofnext-generation- using the TruSeq DNA PCR-free Kit (Illumina) for library sequencing technologies (NGS). Within the ﬁeld of NGS preparation and paired-end whole genome sequencing platforms, the targeted capture of known ‘disease genes’ (WGS) was performed on a NovaSeq6000 System (Illu- with its strong optimization of coverage on relevant targets mina). Data analysis was conducted using an in-house has been proven superior over whole exome sequencing bioinformatics pipeline optimized for structural/copy num- with respect to read depth and on-target efﬁciency. ber variant detection. Materials and Methods: DNA samples were analyzed Results: WGS of the girl identiﬁed a clinically relevant by targeted NGS and, whenever indicated, multiplex homozygousdeletioninCLN3.Thedetecteddeletionc.461- ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA). Patients 280_677+382del, p.? is the most frequent pathogenic with single-gene disorders were analyzed by Sanger deletion in CLN3 associated with autosomal recessive sequencing and MLPA. neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. This lysosomal storage Results: We achieved an overall molecular diagnostic diseaseischaracterizedbyseizures,psychomotordegenera- solving rate of 70.8%. A total of 1,161 distinct variants tion and visual failure. Clinical course is progressive and were identiﬁed, including 501 novel variants, reafﬁrming unfavorable. WGS of the man identiﬁed a pathogenic the known vast genetic heterogeneity of IRD in a mainly homozygous missense variant c.635G>T, p.Gly212Val in outbred European population. TMEM126B. Variants of TMEM126B are associated with Conclusions: Our study demonstrates the clinical utility autosomal recessive complex 1 deﬁciency. This mitochon- of panel-based NGS in a large and highly heterogeneous drial disease is characterized by a variable clinical cohort from an outbred population and for the ﬁrst time phenotype including neuromuscular, cardiovascular and gives a comprehensive representation of the genetic land- metabolic symptoms and visual impairment. The detected scape of IRDs in Germany. variant has been described before in another patient with N. Weisschuh: None. C.D. Obermaier: None. A. rod-cone dystrophy. Bernd: None. L. Kühlewein: None. F. Nasser: None. D. Conclusions: This study highlights the importance to Zobor: None. F. Battke: None. E. Zrenner: None. E. informpatientsaboutthepossibilityofretinaldiseasebeing Weber: None. B. Wissinger: None. S. Biskup: None. K. the leading clinical manifestation of unexpected inherited Stingl: None. S. Kohl: None. systemic disorders. Thus, comprehensive genetic counsel- ing and appropriate documentation of informed consent is  P02
.38.A crucial prior to performing WGS. Retinal disease as the leading clinical manifestation in A. Liebmann: None. P. Mazzola: None. K. Stingl: patients with unexpected inherited systemic disorders None. T. Heinrich: None. K. Schäferhoff: None. S. detected by whole genome sequencing Ossowski: None. M. Sturm: None. S. Kohl: None. N. Weisschuh: None. B. Wissinger: None. O. Riess: None. A.Liebmann1,2,P.Mazzola1,2,K.Stingl3,T.Heinrich1,2,K. T. Haack: None. Schäferhoff1,2, S. Ossowski1,2, M. Sturm1,2, S. Kohl4, N. Weisschuh4, B. Wissinger4, O. Riess1,2, T. Haack1,2  P02
.44.A Shift of T-cell repertoire in cornea of keratoconus 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, patients University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 2Centre for Rare Diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 197 L. Skorodumova1, A. Kanygina1, A. Belodedova2, E. E.Guillen2,S.TahsinSwaﬁri1,I.Lorda1,F.Blanco-Kelly1, Sharova1, B. Malyugin2 M. Trujillo1, C. Ayuso1, M. Corton1 1Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical- 1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2University Hospital Virgen de la Agency, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2S. Fyodorov Eye Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain Microsurgery Complex Federal State Institution, Ministry of Health of Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Human eye development is coordinated by complex Federation developmental processes which involves several hundreds of genes. Any disruption in this regulation during the eye Introduction: Keratoconusisapathologic condition ofthe organogenesis can lead to ocular malformations such as eye which results in thinning and cone-shaped deformation Microphthalmia- Anophthalmia-Coloboma (MAC). These of cornea. While its precise cause is still unknown, kera- diseases are very clinically and genetically heterogeneous toconus is considered to be a multifactorial disease, and conditions with overlapping phenotypes; consequently the immune processes are assumed to contribute to its devel- mutational load is not well known and the genotype- opment, yet little data is available so far on the immune phenotype correlations can be difﬁcult to deﬁne. Our aim microenvironment of cornea in affected patients. Here we was to perform a comprehensive molecular screening in a present the assessment of T cell repertoire in cornea and cohort of Spanish patients with ocular malformations using blood samples from 3 patients with keratoconus who different approaches of next-generation sequencing (NGS). underwent cornea transplantation. We have ﬁndings in around 52% of the patients. One-third Materials and Methods: RNA was extracted from carried likely causal mutations, 8% were partially char- PBMC and cornea samples with RNeasy Micro Kit acterizedand8%hadVUS.Differentcasualmutationswere (Qiagen). RNA libraries of TCR-alpha and TCR-beta foundandthemostprevalentinourcohortaretranscription transcripts were prepared using SMARTer Human TCR a/ factorssuchasOTX2,SOX2,VSX2andPAX6.Incontrast, bProﬁlingKit(TakaraBioUSAInc.)andsequencedusing others variants have expanded the phenotypic spectrum of Illumina MiSeq platform. TRA and TRB clonotypes were some genes classically associated with other phenotypes assembled and quantiﬁed with MiXCR package. such as GJA8, KERA, or the lens crystallins family genes CDR3 sequences were annotated against VDJdb, PIRD suggesting new roles of them in the early development of and McPAS-TCR databases. theeye.ThisresultsshowthatnotonlyNGSisefﬁcientfor Results: Cornea samples for all 3 patients demonstrated the genetic analysis of ocular malformations but also for signiﬁcantly lower clonotype diversity than corresponding achieving new candidate genes. Therefore, we have update PBMC samples. We observed a shift of T cell repertoire in our gene panels resulting in an increase in our diagnostic cornea compared to PBMC samples. The top abundant yield. In contrast, 34% of patients remain uncharacterized, TCR clones in cornea were poorly represented or absent in mostly unilateral or non-syndromic cases. So that, our corresponding blood samples, which indicates that they futurepurposesaretounderstand themechanismsinvolved represent a tissue-speciﬁc population. For most of in this disease by identifying novel genetic causes and the CDR3 variants detected in cornea, no speciﬁcities exploring their functional role. against known antigens were found, and further research is A. Damián: None. A. Tamayo: None. J. Moya: None. needed to identify possible functions of these T cell C. Villaverde: None. A. Avila-Fernández: None. A. populations. Arteche: None. V. López: None. M. Ballesta: None. E. ThisstudywassupportedbyRFBRaspartoftheresearch Guillen: None. S. Tahsin Swaﬁri: None. I. Lorda: None. project № 17-29-06077. F. Blanco-Kelly: None. M. Trujillo: None. C. Ayuso: L. Skorodumova: None. A. Kanygina: None. A. None. M. Corton: None. Belodedova: None. E. Sharova: None. B. Malyugin: None.  P02
.46.C Exome-based panel testing as an efﬁcient method to  P02
.45.B diagnose the highly heterogeneous ocular disorder Genomic landscape in spanish patients with ocular spectrum Microphthalmia, Anophthalmia, Coloboma malformations by next generation sequencing and Anterior Segment Dysgenesis (MAC-ASD) A. Damián1, A. Tamayo1, J. Moya1, C. Villaverde1, H. Verdin1, T. Rosseel1, S. Vermeer2, I. Balikova3, A. Avila-Fernández1, A. Arteche1, V. López2, M. Ballesta2, P. Kestelyn4, C. Meunier5, F. Meire6, J. Van De Velde1,198 J.delPicchia O. Vanakker1, J. Van Den Ende7, M. De Rademaeker7, Conclusions: Exome-based MAC-ASD panel analysis M. Meuwissen7, M. De Vries8, Y. Sznajer9, M. Desmet1, T. revealed a molecular diagnosis in 34.6% of a MAC-ASD Sante1, F. Coppieters1, B. P. Leroy1,4,10, E. De Baere1 cohort, highlighting the efﬁcacy of exome-based panel testing in heterogeneous conditions. 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Funding: FWO/12R3419N; FWO/1802220N; BOF15/ Ghent, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics, University GOA/011. Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of H.Verdin:None.T.Rosseel:None.S.Vermeer:None. Ophthalmology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, I.Balikova:None.P.Kestelyn:None.C.Meunier:None. Belgium,4Department ofOphthalmology, GhentUniversity F. Meire: None. J. Van De Velde: None. O. Vanakker: andGhentUniversityHospital,Ghent,Belgium,5Centerfor None. J. Van Den Ende: None. M. De Rademaeker: Human Genetics, Institute of Pathology and Genetics, None. M. Meuwissen: None. M. De Vries: None. Y. Gosselies, Belgium, 6Department of Ophthalmology, Hôpi- Sznajer: None. M. Desmet: None. T. Sante: None. F. tal Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Coppieters:None.B.P.Leroy:None.E.DeBaere:None. Belgium, 7Center for Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp,  P02
.47.A Belgium, 8Department of Ophthalmology, Antwerp Uni- TheenigmaofMidfacialToddlerExcoriationSyndrome versity Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 9Center for Human (MiTES), a second PRDM12 poly-alanine tract expan- Genetics,CliniquesUniversitaires St-Luc,Universite Cath- sion disorder olique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 10Division of Ophthalmology and Center for Cellular & Molecular N. Sarveswaran1, G. Woods1, C. Moss2 Therapeutics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States 1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Birmingham Children’s hospital, Bir- Introduction: Microphthalmia and anophthalmia are part mingham, United Kingdom of a spectrum with ocular coloboma, a structural mal- formation resulting from incomplete fusion of the optic Mid-face toddler excoriation syndrome (MiTES) is a new ﬁssure,whichlikelyhaveashared,althoughheterogeneous sensory disease ﬁrst described in 2017 (PMID: 28028858). genetic basis. They are collectively named MAC (Micro- We report 12 cases in 7 families. The phenotype is of phthalmia-Anophthalmia-Coloboma), characterized by a intense itch in early childhood, which causes mutilating tremendousclinicalheterogeneityandoftenassociatedwith self-injury by scratching. The intense itch is localised only other ocular abnormalities such as anterior segment dys- to the midface and no other body parts; is not associated genesis (ASD). We aimed to set up an exome-based gene with altered sweating; it spontaneously subsides by 4-6 panel test for MAC-ASD. years; cognition and pain sensing is normal; there is no Materials and Methods: Sample preparation was done excess of Staph Aureus infections (on the face or else- with the SureSelectXT Low Input Human All Exon V7 kit where). Inheritance appeared recessive, as parents were using Bravo (Agilent Technologies) and pooled libraries unaffected, males and females were equally affected, and were sequenced on a HiSeq 3000 or NovaSeq 6000 most cases were consanguineous. Older individuals “grow (Illumina) aiming for a minimal coverage of 20x for at out” of the condition, facial injuries heal, and have normal least 90% of the investigated regions. Data analysis was whole-body itch and pain sensing. In six of seven families, executed with a bcbio-based pipeline and variant ﬁltering we found the same mutation in affected individuals - a with in-house Seqplorer software. Copy number variant homozygous poly-Alanine repeat expansion from the nor- (CNV) analysis was done using ExomeDepth. mal range (7-13) to 18. Parents were always carriers. This Results: As of May 2018, 26 patients, 12 with MAC was also found in a non-Asian, Caucasian, non- (46.2%) and 14 with ASD (53.8%), underwent MAC- consanguineous family. In the seventh family, we found ASD panel analysis. The overall diagnostic yield was 9/ only a heterozygous 7 base pair deletion in PRDM12, but 26 (34.6%), in line with the reported range (11-36%). no second mutation. What is extraordinary is that a ASD has the highest yield (50%), compared to MAC PRDM12 homozygous 19 poly-Alanine repeat expansion (16.7%). In seven out of the nine cases a (likely) causes Congenital Insensitivity to Pain; which is not asso- pathogenic variant was identiﬁed in ALDH1A3, ciatedwithexcessitch,leadstoself-inﬂictedlip,tongueand CPAMD8, FOX E3
, MFRP, PAX6, PITX2 and PITX3. In corneal damage, and always cause excess S. Aureus infec- two of the nine patients a CNV encompassing FOX C1
 tions.Nootherpoly-alaninetractexpansiondiseasehastwo was found. phenotypes. We present our cellular studies to try andAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 199 understand the disease mechanism whereby a single addi- J.Swierkowska1,2,3,M.S.Tedja1,2,A.E.G.Haarman1,2,M. tional alanine can cause such different phenotypes. Ghanbari1, S. J. Erkeland4, M. Meester-Smoor1,2, C. C. W. N. Sarveswaran: None. G. Woods: None. C. Klaver5,6,7, V. J. M. Verhoeven1,2,8 Moss: None. 1Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center,  P02
.49.C Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Mutational analysis of 256 Russian patients with ErasmusMedicalCenter,Rotterdam,Netherlands,3Institute congenital aniridia and overlapping phenotypes of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of Immunology, Erasmus Medical T. A. Vasilyeva, A. V. Marakhonov, V. V. Kadyshev, R. A. Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Epidemiology and Zinchenko Ophthalmology Departments, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of Ophthalmology, Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether- Federation lands, 7Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology, Basel, Switzerland, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Congenital aniridia (OMIM#106210) is an autosomal Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands dominant eye disorder mainly caused by heterozygous PAX6 mutations or 11p13 chromosome rearrangements. Introduction:Previousstudieshaveindicatedacrucialrole Pathogenic variants in some other genes could cause of the non-coding genome in myopia (nearsightedness), a overlapping phenotypes, also, PAX6 missense mutations complex genetic trait. We aimed to identify enhancers, cis- couldbeassociatedwithotherthananiridiaphenotypes.A regulatory elements regulating gene expression, associated total of 208 unrelated families (256 patients) with clinical with myopia leveraging summary statistics of previous diagnoses of either congenital aniridia, counting WAGR genome-wide association studies (GWAS). syndrome, or overlapping ophthalmological diagnoses Materials and Methods: GWAS on myopia related characterized by iris hypoplasia were included in the phenotypes (148,485 European, 11,935 Asian individuals) study. Familial to sporadic proportion counted for 44/164. from CREAM and 23andMe were used to examine the AcombinationofSanger PAX6 sequencing,whole-exome association between enhancer-related SNPs and myopia. sequencing, followed by MLPA analysis of 11p13, 4q25, Weobtainedenhancerregions(N =12,244)activeineye- total 6p25.3 loci was implemented. 204 out of 208 families related human tissues from the FANTOM5 database and (98%) were found to have either heterozygous pathogenic performed a look-up of these regions in the GWAS. We nucleotide sequence variant or chromosome deletion. prioritized enhancers and ANNOVAR determined target Disease-causing variants in PAX6 and deletions in 11p13 genes by ranking system based on LD, eQTLs, enhancer were found in 92.7%. Four other genes (FOX C1
, PITX2, histone marks (HaploReg v4.1) and the association with NDP, CRYAA) explained 5.3% of the examined families. myopia/ocular phenotype (GWAS catalog). 30.3% of the cohort carried pathogenic CNVs (62 in Results: We selected enhancers expressed in ≥3 eye- 11p13 and 1 in 6p25.3). A frequent 11p13 deletion of related tissue types (N=7,944), of which 4,610 enhancers PAX6 3′-cis-regulatory region was determined (16/208, (N =9,253) were available in the GWAS for analysis. SNPs 7.7%). The frequency of this deletion in the cohort was The look-up of these regions yielded 15 signiﬁcant SNPs higherthanPAX6hotspotc.718C>Trate(9/208,4.3%).In clusteringin12enhancersregionsexceedingtheBonferroni total, repeated PAX6 variants were determined in 39/208 signiﬁcance threshold (P = 0.05/4,610=1.08x10−5). The (18,8%) families, together with 11p13 downstream dele- highest ranked rs9535268 (P = 1.04x10−9) and rs4415919 tion they explained 55/208 (26.4%) of the families. PAX6 (P = 3.76x10−8) were annotated to an intergenic enhancer missense variants counted for 6/208 (2.8%). Mutational region between RCBTB1 (~16 kb) and AR L11
 (~27 kb) spectrumpeculiaritiesinalargecohortofRussianfamilies genes. Interestingly, SNPs within RCBTB1 were associated with congenital aniridia were established. Supported by with myopia in the GWAS. grant RFBR 19-015-00122 and state task of the Ministry Conclusions: We selected enhancers with putative target of education and science of Russia. genes, as RCBTB1 (RC C1
 and BTB domain containing T.A. Vasilyeva: None. A.V. Marakhonov: None. V.V. protein 1), that could explain signiﬁcant loci identiﬁed in Kadyshev: None. R.A. Zinchenko: None. GWAS and play a role in myopia pathogenesis. Support: Horizon 2020 (648268); NWO (91815655, 91617076);  P02
.50.A Uitzicht (2017-28; Oogfonds; Landelijke Stichting voor Revealing the role of enhancers in myopia Blinden en Slechtzienden; MaculaFonds), EMBO (8529).200 J.delPicchia J. Swierkowska: None. M.S. Tedja: None. A.E.G.  P02
.55.C Haarman: None. M. Ghanbari: None. S.J. Erkeland: CharacterizingalargeIraniancohortofnon-syndromic None. M. Meester-Smoor: None. C.C.W. Klaver: None. hearing loss families using molecular inversion probe V.J.M. Verhoeven: None. and exome sequencing  P02
.53.A A. Rad1, R. Marooﬁan2, N. Mazaheri3, J. Oostrik4, S. FunctionalanalysisofanovelMyo6variantinhereditary Loum1, H. Löwenheim1, T. Haaf5, H. Galehdari6, H. hearing loss family from Qatar Kremer4, B. Vona1 M. K. Al-Kowari1,2, S. Da’as1, M. Guarch1, D. 1Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Abdurahman1, W. Hasan1, N. Krishnamoorthy1, H. Horn2, Surgery, Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of Neuromus- X. Estivill1,2 cular Disorders, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurol- ogy,, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Genetics, 1Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar, 2Biological and Biomedical Faculty of Science, Shahid Chamran University of Ahvaz, Program, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Department of Otorhi- nolaryngology, Radboud University Medical Center,, Introduction: Hereditary Hearing Loss (HHL) is a com- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Institute of Human Genetics, mon genetic disorder accounting for at least 60% of pre- Julius Maximilians University, Würzburg, Germany, lingual deafness in children. The long tradition of con- 6Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science, Shahid sanguinity among Qatari population increases the pre- Chamran University of Ahvaz,, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic valence of HHL. A novel missense variant in Myo6 was Republic of detectedintwosiblingesdiagnosedwithseveretoprofound HL (Alkowari et al. 2017). Prediction tools revealed that Introduction: Hearing loss (HL) is the most prevalent this variant is pathogenic and conserved. sensory deﬁcit. With about 120 genes implicated, non- Materials and methods: We functionally validate the syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) is extremely genetically pathogenicity of the novel variant using both cellular and heterogeneous. In this study, we investigated extended animalmodels.HeLacellsweretransientlytransfectedwith Iranian families with hereditary NSHL to uncover the plasmids carrying wildtype and mutated human Myo6. A geneticlandscapeandcharacterizeitsgeneticheterogeneity. zebraﬁsh model was generated using morpholino knock Materials and Methods: Using molecular inversion down and co-injection with synthetic RNA (Myo6WT and probes (MIPs), we targeted 89 genes involved in NSHL in Myo6p. E60
Q) to further characterize the phenotype. 20 patients. Exome sequencing (ES) was performed in 102 Results:HeLa cellstransfectedwithMyo6WTand Myo6p. GJB2-negative and unresolved MIP-screened NSHL pro-  E60
Q, overexpressed the same amount of protein. Cells with bands. Sanger sequencing, homozygosity mapping, and Myo6WT showed localization of the protein in both in vitro functional assays were used to conﬁrm selected cytoplasm and the plasma membrane. In contrast, Myo6p. variants.  E60
Q is not expressed in the plasma membrane but it’s Results: Our analysis resolved 50% (10/20) of the MIP- restricted to the cytoplasm. Zebraﬁsh model resulted in screened patients and about 76% (78/102) of patients severe otic defects. Myo6p. E60
Q RNA injection resulted in subjected toES. The overall diagnosticrate isabout 78.5% alterations in the saccule that is responsible for hearing in (88/112). Nearly half of the diagnostic yield was attributed zebraﬁsh ear. Additionally, we found that zebraﬁsh with tothegenesSL C26
A4(13.4%),MYO15A(8.0%),LOXHD1 Myo6p. E60
Q displayed shorter, less abundant and disordered (7.0%),MYO7A(6.2%),CDH23(5.3%)andTM C1
(4.5%). hairbundlesinotichaircellswhencomparedtocontroland OurdataalsoidentiﬁedCLRN2asanovelNSHLgeneina Myo6WT injected zebraﬁsh. family. A novel variant in the SPATA5 gene, known to Conclusions: In this study we functionally characterized cause epilepsy, hearing loss, and mental retardation anovelgeneticvariantassociatedwithhearingloss;invitro syndrome, was implicated in a family with HL as the sole studies demonstrated that c.G178C variant affects Myo6 clinical feature. protein trafﬁcking. A zebraﬁsh model conﬁrmed the Conclusions: Using two approaches, we could resolve pathogenicity and identiﬁed signiﬁcant otic defects. roughly78.5%ofthepatientsundergoinggeneticscreening M.K. Al-Kowari: None. S. Da’as: None. M. Guarch: forNSHL.OurcohortalsouncoveredLOXHD1asahighly None. D. Abdurahman: None. W. Hasan: None. N. prevalent gene in NSHL diagnoses that was not similarly Krishnamoorthy: None. H. Horn: None. X. observed in large cohort screenings of Iranian HL patients. Estivill: None. Furthermore, we introduce CLRN2 and SPATA5 as novel autosomal recessive NSHL genes. Select unresolvedAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 201 families from this cohort have been followed-up with  P02
.57.B genome sequencing. NineTunisianpatientswithtypicalPetersplussyndrome A. Rad: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. N. Mazaheri: None.J.Oostrik:None.S.Loum: None.H.Löwenheim: M. Guirat, S. Guidara, H. Kanoun, I. Boujelbene, None. T. Haaf: None. H. Galehdari: None. H. Kremer: N. Gharbi, I. B. Ayed, F. Abdelhedi, H. Kamoun, None. B. Vona: None. N. Belguith  P02
.56.A Service de génétique médicale, CHU Hedi Chaker, Sfax, MultitopographicaleffectofmutationsinthegenePAX6 Tunisia for pediatric ophthalmology Peters plus syndrome is an autosomal recessive rare dis- V. V. Kadyshev, T. A. Vasilyeva, A. V. Marakhonov, S. I. order comprising ocular anterior segment dysgenesis, short Kutsev, R. A. Zinchenko stature, hand abnormalities, distinctive facial features. It was related only to mutations in the B3GALTL gene FSBSI Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, (13q12.3), leading to the inactivation of the B1, 3- Russian Federation glucosyltransferase. In this study, we report 9 patients with typical Peters plus syndrome. Ocular abnormality, The expression of the PAX6 gene is realized in the forma- facial dysmorphism, and rhizomelic dwarﬁsm were present tionofalmostallstructuresoftheeye-thecornea,iris,lens, inall cases. Wenoted thepresenceof2new anomaliesnot optic nerve and central part of the retina. Accounting this previouslydescribedinPetersPlussyndrome,namelyrenal fact, the clinical spectrum expands when there is a single malformationandsexualambiguity.Totalsequencingofthe pathogeneticprocess.Materialsandmethods.Thesampleof B3GALTL gene showed the presence of the splicing muta- patientswithhereditaryophthalmologicalpathologywas31 tion(c.597-2A>G)intheB3GALTLgenein7patients.This children(0-16yearsold).Theexaminationincludedclinical mutation harbours a novel splice site mutation in the (ophthalmoscopy, biomicroscopy, gonyoscopy, visometry, B3GALTL gene that modulates the mRNA secondary tonometry), instrumental (electrophysiological, ultrasound, structure.Thesedataconﬁrmakeyroleofthegeneticstudy etc.), genealogical and molecular genetic (NGS, direct that provides diagnosis conﬁrmation and improves genetic Sanger sequencing, MLPA) research methods. Results. counseling for the families Accounting the topographical principle, mutations in the M.Guirat:None.S.Guidara:None.H.Kanoun:None. PAX6 gene led to lesions in both the anterior and posterior I. Boujelbene: None. N. Gharbi: None. I.B. Ayed: None. segments of the eyeball. Structures such as the optic disc F. Abdelhedi: None. H. Kamoun: None. and/or macular zone (posterior segment) are affected in N. Belguith: None. 100%ofcases.Thelesionoftheanteriorsegmentoftheeye ischaracterizedbytheinvolvementofdifferentstructuresin  P02
.58.C the process: 6 patients had corneal changes of different Severe forms of presbycusis are caused by very rare grades (ex.; c. 1184-2_1184delAGGinsGGA PAX6 het; c. variants in genes underlying early-onset forms of 1184-2_1184delAGGinsGGA PAX6 het); in 5 cases - deafness pathology of the lens (NM_000280. 4(PAX6_v001):c. 765G>Ahetsynchronoussplicing);7patientshaddifferent S. boucher1, F. Wong Jun Tai2, A. Lelli3, S. Delmaghani3, grades of iris pathology. One patient with mutation A. Singh-Estivalet3, T. Dupont3, V. Michel3, N. Wolff4, A. NM_000280.4(PAX6_v001):c.109dupG had a congenital Bahloul3, M. Niasme-Grare5, A. Bouaita3, D. Oﬁcjalska- malformation-colobomatous microphthalmos. Two patients Pham3, S. Chardenoux3, Y. Bouyacoub6, D. Bouccara7, O. had anterior segment dysgenesis (corneal, iris, anterior Deguine8, B. Fraysse8, L. Collet9, H. Thai-Van10, E. chamber angle, lens) (c.142-139T>C PAX6 IV S5
a-3T>C Ionescu9, J. Kemeny11, F. Giraudet12, J. Lavieille13, A. het; c.718C>T, p.(Arg240*)). Mutations in the PAX6 gene Devèze13, A. Roudevitch-Pujol14, V. Christophe15, C. have a multitopographic effect on the eye, with the devel- Renard16, V. Franco-Vidal17, C. Thibult-Apt17, V. opmentof pathology in theanterior and posterior segments Darrouzet17, E. Bizaguet18, A. Coez19, A. Aubois14, G. oftheeyeball.SupportedbyRFBRgrant18-015-00090.All Lefèvre3, N. Michalski3, P. Avan20, C. Bonnet3, C. Petit21 authors haven’t conﬂict of interest. V.V. Kadyshev: None. T.A. Vasilyeva: None. A.V. 1INSERM UMR S1120
, Institut de l’Audition, Pasteur Marakhonov: None. S.I. Kutsev: None. R.A. Institute and University Hospital of Angers, Paris, France, Zinchenko: None. 2INSERM UMR S1120
 and Institut de l’Audition, Pasteur Institute, Paris, France, 3INSERM UMR S1120
, Institut de202 J.delPicchia l’Audition, Pasteur Institute, Paris, France, 4Institut carried by 24.7% of mARHL and 21,8% of sARHL (aside Pasteur, Unité de RMN des Biomolécules, UMR 3528, fromthreeindividualscarryingGJB2biallelicvariants)than CNRS, Paris, France, 5Service de Biochimie et Biologie in the controls (6,7%) (p < 0,001). By studing a mouse Moléculaire, Hôpital d’Enfants Armand-Trousseau, AP- model Tmc1N321I, we conﬁrmed the pathogenicity of the HP,Paris,France,6INSERMUMR S1120
,PasteurInstitute, mutation leading to congenital moderate hearing loss in Paris, France, 7Hôpital Beaujon, Hôpitaux Universitaires homozygous mice due to a reduced mechanotransduction Paris Nord val-de-Seine, APHP, Paris, France, 8Centre current amplitude, and to a progressive hearing loss Hospitalier Universitaire de Toulouse, Hôpital Larrey, beginning at 7 months and affecting the high frequencies Service d’Oto-Rhino-Laryngologie et Chirurgie Cervico- in heterozygous carriers, validating also the mutation as Faciale, Toulouse, France, 9Centre Hospitalier Universi- responsible for a monogenic form of presbycusis. taire, Hôpital Lyon-Sud, Audiologie et Explorations Conclusions: WES unraveled that a large proportion of Orofaciales, Lyon, France, 10Centre Hospitalier Universi- severe presbycusis is due to new mutations in autosomal taire, Hôpital Lyon-Sud, Audiologie et Explorations dominant deafness genes arguing for a genetic continuum Orofaciales and Institut de l’Audition, Lyon and Paris, between early-onset deafness and presbycusis. We demon- France, 11Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Clermont strated also the existence of monogenic forms of presby- Ferrand, Hôpital Gabriel Montpied, Service d’Anatomo- cusisthatcouldbetargettedbynewpersonnalizedtherapies Pathologie, Clermont Ferrand, France, 12Centre Hospita- likegenetherapy.Thisstudywassupportedbyagrantfrom lier Universitaire de Clermont Ferrand, Hôpital Gabriel “Fondation pour l’Audition” and also by the LabEx Montpied, Service d’Anatomo-Pathologie, UMR 1107, Lifesenses (ANR-10-LABX-65). INSERM and Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont Ferrand, S. boucher: None. F. Wong Jun Tai: None. A. Lelli: France, 13Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Marseille, None.S.Delmaghani:None.A.Singh-Estivalet:None.T. Hôpital Nord, Service d’Oto-Rhino-Laryngologie, Mar- Dupont: None. V. Michel: None. N. Wolff: None. A. seille, France, 14Centre Hospitalier National d’Ophtalmo- Bahloul: None. M. Niasme-Grare: None. A. Bouaita: logie des Quinze-Vingts, Centre d’Investigation Clinique, None. D. Oﬁcjalska-Pham: None. S. Chardenoux: None. Paris, France, 15Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Lille, Y. Bouyacoub: None. D. Bouccara: None. O. Deguine: Hôpital Roger Salengro, Service d’Otologie et Otoneur- None. B. Fraysse: None. L. Collet: None. H. Thai-Van: ologie, Lille, France, 16Laboratoire d’Audiologie Renard, None. E. Ionescu: None. J. Kemeny: None. F. Giraudet: Lille, France, 17Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bor- None. J. Lavieille: None. A. Devèze: None. A. Roude- deaux, Hôpital Pellegrin, Service d’Oto-Rhino-Laryngolo- vitch-Pujol: None. V. Christophe: None. C. Renard: gie et Chirurgie Cervico-Faciale, Bordeaux, France, None. V. Franco-Vidal: None. C. Thibult-Apt: None. V. 18Laboratoire de Correction Auditive, Paris, France, Darrouzet: None. E. Bizaguet: None. A. Coez: None. A. 19Laboratoire de Correction Auditive and CEA-Inserm Aubois: None. G. Lefèvre: None. N. Michalski: None. P. U1000 Neuroimaging and Psychiatry and DRM, DSV, Avan: None. C. Bonnet: None. C. Petit: None. Service Hospitalier Frédéric-Joliot, Paris, France, 20INSERM UMR 1107, Laboratoire de Biophysique Neu-  P02
.59.A rosensorielle,Universitéd’Auvergne,FacultésdeMédecine GeneticanalysisofaDutchdiscoverycohortsuggestsan et de Pharmacie, Clermont Ferrand, France, 21INSERM association between primary open-angle glaucoma and UMR S1120
, Institut de l’Audition, Pasteur Institute and the mitochondrial variant m.11915G/A in the MT-ND4 Collège de France, Paris, France gene Introduction: Presbycusis is a major public health issue V. Lo Faro1, I. Nolte1, J. ten Brink2, H. Snieder1, N. world wide with half its variance due to genetic predis- Jansonius1, A. Bergen2 position. The aim of this study was to identify presbycusis causative genes by whole exome sequencing (WES). 1UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2AMC, Amsterdam, Patients and methods: We analysed 105 families, Netherlands 122 simplex cases and 120 normal-hearing controls. After an in silico bioinformatic analysis to select predicted Introduction:Todetermineapossibleassociationbetween pathogenic variants, and according to the autosomal mitochondrial variations and primary open-angle glaucoma dominant mode of inheritance in 95% of the families, we (POAG) in a Dutch discovery cohort. studied very rare heterozygous variants (allele frequency : Materials and Methods: 140 mtDNA single nucleotide AF≤0.0001). polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped using the Illumina Results: We found a signiﬁcative higher ratio of InﬁniumGlobalScreeningArray-24(GSA)700Karrayset. pathogenic variants in autosomal dominant deafness genes Geneticanalysis wasperformed inacase-controldiscoveryAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 203 cohort of 734 patients with POAG and 1,417 controls. The knowntocauseIRD.Thediagnosticyieldofthisapproach, variants were classiﬁed and analyzed both as single SNPs however, did not exceed 60%. The pilot sequencing of the and as haplogroups. SNP association was performed using targeted retinal panel resulted in a signiﬁcantly higher logistic regression. The bioinformatics software HaploGrep coverage (389x vs 78x), 98-99% concordance of identiﬁed was used to determine the haplogroup. The Chi-square test variants and allowed to develop a CNV analysis pipeline. andFisher’stwo-sidedexacttestwereusedforhaplogroups Dataobtainedusingthesetwoapproacheswerecompared association. andsupportthedecisionofapplyingthelargetargetedpanel Results: For discovery, a nominal association with forroutinediagnosticsofretinaldystrophies.Thisapproach, POAG was found for the allele A of m.11915G/A focusedonthecompletesetofretinalgenes,assuringahigh (rs2853496, p=0.016), within the MT-ND4 gene. The odds qualitycoverageandallowingforreliableanalysisofCNVs ratiowas0.80(95%conﬁdenceinterval0.67-0.95)percopy and deep intronic variants, should be most efﬁcient and of the rare allele and adjusted for gender. No haplogroup cost-effective for a large cohort of Polish patients. was associated with POAG in our cohort. Partially supported by STRATEGMED1/234261/2/ Conclusions: The present study reinforces the concept NCBR/2014. that mitochondrial variation contributes to POAG suscept- E. Matczyńska: None. P. Łyszkiewicz: None. A. ibility.Furthergeneticandfunctionalstudiesarerequiredto Wasowska: None. R. Szymańczak: None. K. Stra- highlight the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying domska: None. E. Suchecka: None. M. Jędrzejowska: primary open-angle glaucoma. None. S. Teper: None. M. Wiącek: None. A. Macha- V. Lo Faro: None. I. Nolte: None. J. ten Brink: None. lińska: None. A. Boguszewska-Chachulska: None. H.Snieder:None.N.Jansonius:None.A.Bergen:None.  P02
.63.B  P02
.61.C A genetic and clinical study of families with non- WholeExomeanalysisversusatargetedpanelforPolish syndromic retinopathy consequent upon sequence var- patients with retinal dystrophies iants in HGSNAT, the gene causing Sanﬁlippo C mucopolysaccharidosis E. Matczyńska1,2, P. Łyszkiewicz1, A. Wasowska1,2, R. Szymańczak1, K. Stradomska1, E. Suchecka1, M. E. R. Schiff1,2, G. Arno1,2,3, K. Pierpoint1, R. Ba-Abbad1,2, Jędrzejowska1, S. Teper2, M. Wiącek3, A. Machalińska3, A. S.Nutan4,O.A.Mahroo1,2,5,M.Michaelides1,2,K.Harvey6, Boguszewska-Chachulska1 A. R. Webster1,2 1Genomed SA, Warsaw, Poland, 2Chair and Clinical Dept. 1GeneticsService,MoorﬁeldsEyeHospital,London,United ofOphthalmology,MedicalUniversityofSilesia,Katowice, Kingdom, 2UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, Poland, 3Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, United Kingdom, 3North East Thames Regional Genetics Poland Service, Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 4London North Genomic AWholeExomeSequencing(WES)approachwasadopted, Laboratory Hub, Great Ormond Street NHS Foundation asapartoftherecentlyaccomplishedNeuStemGenproject, Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5Section of Ophthalmol- for identifying genetic causes of inherited retinal dystro- ogy, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, phies(IRD)inacohortofPolishpatients.Projectoutcomes 6Enzyme Unit, Chemical Pathology, Paediatric Laboratory prompted the development of a targeted retinal panel, Medicine,GreatOrmondStreetHospitalforChildrenNHS covering most pathogenic variants occurring in the Polish Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom population. WES was performed for 105 patients with clinical Distinctgenotypes inseveralgenes(e.g.USH2A,FLVCR1, symptoms of retinal dystrophies. A targeted panel, consist- CE P290
,CLN3,MFSD8)havebeenshowntobeassociated ing of 278 IRD genes (including deep intronic regions for with either syndromic or non-syndromic forms of retinitis ABCA4), was used to sequence 29 IRD samples, including pigmentosa (RP), a progressive degenerative condition 6samplesnotresolvedbyWES.Bioinformaticanalysiswas initially affecting rod photoreceptors with subsequent cone performed using standard BWA-GATK best practice pipe- phototreceptor loss; RP is the most prevalent form of line and several databases, including POLGENOM, for inherited retinal disease (IRD), which is the commonest variant frequency ﬁltration. Copy number variants (CNVs) cause of blindness in the working-age population of Eng- were analysed using the CoNVaDING program. land and Wales. HGSNAT (heparan-α-glucosaminide N- Over 50 pathogenic/potentially pathogenic variants were acetyltransferase) sequence variants cause mucopoly- identiﬁed using the WES analysis, involving genes already saccharidosis type IIIC (MPS-IIIC) or Sanﬁlippo  C204
 J.delPicchia syndrome - a severe childhood-onset lysosomal storage 2017). Additional analysis methods were used (Sanger, disorder.Speciﬁcgenotypeshave,however,beenassociated MLPA, array-CGH) in 6 cases. with isolated retinal disease in a few reported individuals, Results: Potentially pathogenic mutations were detected thereby further extending the genes that can result in both in 45 retinal dystrophy genes including ABCA4, PRPF31, syndromic and non-syndromic IRD. We have identiﬁed SPATA7, MERTK, FAM161A, CDHR1, USH2A, likely pathogenic variants in 13 individuals (11 families) CNGB1, PROM1 and R P2
 genes. The detection mutation with late onset (30s to 60s) and slowly progressing RP. rateswere46.15%(6/13)and81.6%(71/87)forthe105and None showed any other symptoms of MPS-IIIC. 7/11 287 gene panels, respectively. These mutation rates were families were compound heterozygotes with the allele achieved using complementary methods in 6 cases. Final c.1843G>A, p.(Ala615Thr). We detected 6 novel sequence diagnoses included retinitis pigmentosa, Usher syndrome, variants (p.(Ser296Leu); p.(Phe428Cys); p.(Gly248Ala); p. cone-rod dystrophy and Leber congenital amaurosis and (Gly418Arg), c.1543-2A>C; c.1708delA), and 5 variants two rare cases of Knobloch and Oliver-McFarlane syn- thatwerepreviouslydescribedinMPS-IIICpatients.Inone dromes due to mutations in the CO L18
A1 and PNPLA6 family, two siblings,genetically identical for theHGSNAT genes, respectively. locus, were discordant for retinal disease. A mild but sig- Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst systematic investigation of niﬁcant reduction of HGSNAT enzyme activity in leuko- the molecular identity of 100 Greek patients with various cytes was observed in affected individuals but urinary subforms of IRDs by NGS and complementary methods glucosaminoglycans were not elevated. This case series leading to an overall mutation rate of 77%. A plethora of expands the phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of non- novel mutations was documented further expanding the syndromic HGSNAT-associated retinopathy, and in one genetic heterogeneity. The molecular identiﬁcation estab- family suggests the inﬂuence of trans-acting modifying lished the complete diagnosis of the patients thus factors.Funding:NIHRBRC,MoorﬁeldsEyeHospitaland contributing to family making decision, prognosis and UCL Institute of Ophthalmology. candidacy to current and future treatments. E.R.Schiff:None.G.Arno:None.K.Pierpoint:None. S.Kamakari:None.S.Koukoula:None.V.Kokkinou: R. Ba-Abbad: None. S. Nutan: None. O.A. Mahroo: None. L. Haer-Wigman: None. I. Datseris: None. M. None. M. Michaelides: None. K. Harvey: None. A.R. Tsilimbaris: None. Webster: None.  P02
.65.A  P02
.64.C A possible epistatic interaction of two variants in First systematic molecular genetic analysis using NGS autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa analysis of 100 Greek patients with retinal dystrophy R. A. Zinchenko, T. A. Vasilyeva, V. V. Kadyshev, A. V. S. Kamakari1, S. Koukoula2, V. Kokkinou1, L. Haer- Marakhonov Wigman3, I. Datseris4, M. Tsilimbaris5 Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian 1Ophthalmic Genetics Unit, Athens, Greece, 2Ophthalmica Federation InstituteofOphthalmologyandMicrosurgery,Thessaloniki, Greece, 3Department of Human Genetics, Donders Centre Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) refers to a heterogeneous group for Neuroscience, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical of inherited ocular diseases that result in a progressive ret- Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Retinal inal degeneration affecting 1 in 3,000 to 5,000 people. To Disorders, OMMA Ophthalmological Institute of Athens, date,morethan80geneticformsofRParedescribed.Here Athens,Greece,5DepartmentofOphthalmology,University we perform genetic analysis of the two-generation family of Crete School of Medicine, Heraklion, Greece with 5 affected members with the terminal severe stage of RP.Wholeexomesequencing(WES)ofoneofthepatients Purpose: Inherited Retinal Dystrophies (IRDs) are char- revealedtwocandidatevariants.Theﬁrstoneispathogenic acterized by clinical variability and genetic heterogeneity. variant in the exon 16 of SNRN P200
 gene The aim of this study was to molecularly diagnose 100 (chr2:96958829G>A), leading to the missense substitution Greek patients with different forms of IRDs. (p.Arg681Cys, NM_014014.4) in the heterozygous state. Materials and Methods: 100 unrelated Greek patients Mutations in the SNRN P200
 gene in heterozygous state were analyzed by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), 13 weredescribedinpatientswithR P33
(OMIM610359).The and 87 of them using a 105 retinal and a 287 ophthalmic secondvariantisanovelsinglenucleotidevariantinexon1 genepanel,respectivelyasdescribed(EllingfordJMetal.J of the PRPH2 gene (chr6:42689991C>T) resulting in the Med Genet 2016, Haer-Wigman L et al. Eur J Hum Genet. missense substitution (p.Val28Met, NM_000322.4) in aAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 205 heterozygous state. Mutations in the PRPH2 gene in het- Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Créteil (CHIC), erozygous,compoundheterozygousandhomozygousstates Créteil, France, 12Ophthalmology Department, University were described in patients with Leber congenital amaurosis Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 18 (OMIM:608133), R P7
 (OMIM:608133), retinitis punc- 13Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Pitts- tata albescens (OMIM:136880), in heterozygous state - in burgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, patients with choroidal dystrophy, central areolar 2 14CentreHospitalierNationald’OphtalmologiedesQuinze- (OMIM:613105), macular dystrophy, patterned, 1 Vingts, INSERM-DHOS CIC 1423, Paris, France, 15Insti- (OMIM:169150), macular dystrophy, vitelliform, 3 tute of Ophthalmology, University College of London, (OMIM:608161).SegregationanalysisrevealedSNRN P200
 London, United Kingdom to be co-segregated with the disease while PRPH2 variant was not found in 2 out of 5 patients. Nevertheless, it could Introduction: Anomalies in pre- and post-synaptic trans- make an impact on the clinical presentation by aggravation mission of visual information from photoreceptors to of clinical picture in patients bearing two variants. Sup- bipolar cells are responsible for stationary congenital night ported by grant RFBR № 18-015-00090 and state task of blindness (CSNB). Pre-synaptic disorders, characterized by the Ministry of education and science of Russia. congenitalnystagmusandphotophobia,nightblindness,are R.A. Zinchenko: None. T.A. Vasilyeva: None. V.V. known as cone-rod synaptic disorder (CRSD) can be mis- Kadyshev: None. A.V. Marakhonov: None. taken for Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA). Full-ﬁeld electroretinogram is crucial for the differential diagnosis,  P02
.68.A butitcanbedifﬁculttoperforminyoungchildren.Here,we Loss of function of RIM S2
, a synaptic membrane report (i) the identiﬁcation of biallelic mutations in the exocytosis gene, causes a new phenotype characterized RIM S2
 gene encoding a pre-synaptic protein not yet asso- by congenital cone-rod synaptic disease associated with ciated with human diseasesin 3/4 families initiallyreferred neurodevelopmental and pancreatic involvement for LCA and (ii) the diagnostic adjustment to CRSD with variable associated alteration including autistic behavior S.Mechaussier1,B.Almoallem2,C.Zeitz3,K.VanSchil2,L. and insulinopathy. Jeddawi4, J. Van Dorpe5, C. Condroyer3, O. Pelle6, M. Methods: Exome sequencing combined with targeted Polak7, N. Boddaert8, N. Bahi-Buisson9, M. Cavallin10, J. RIM S2
 testing were performed in 46 prescreened patients Bacquet11, A. Mouallem-Bézière11, O. Zambrowski11,12, J. with CRSD and 94 with LCA. Biallelic RIM S2
-mutated Sahel3,13,14, I. Audo3,14,15, J. Kaplan1,11, J. Rozet1, E. De cases underwent ophthalmologic, neurologic and metabolic Baere2, I. Perrault1 assessment. RIM S2
 immunostaining was performed on human retina, brain and pancreas. Nonsense variants were 1Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), functionally investigated in mammalian cells. INSERM UMR1163, Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine Results:BiallelicRIM S2
sequencevariantswerefoundin and Paris University, Paris, France, 2Center for Medical four unrelated families. RIM S2
, a protein regulating Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, synaptic membrane exocytosis localizes in the human Ghent, Belgium, 3Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, retinal outer plexiform layer, Purkinje cells and pancreatic InstitutdelaVision,Paris,France,4PediatricOphthalmol- islets. Apart from CRSD, neurodevelopmental disease was ogy Division, Dhahran Eye Specialist Hospital, Dhahran, observedinallcases, andabnormalglucosehomeostasisin Saudi Arabia, 5Department of Pathology, Ghent University the eldest patient. Nonsense variants lead to truncated and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 6Cell RIM S2
anddecreasedinsulinsecretioninmammaliancells. Sorting Facility, INSERM UMR1163, Institute of Genetic Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report of syndromic CRSD Diseases, Imagine and Paris University, Paris, France, with neurodevelopmental or pancreatic involvement due to 7Endocrinology, Gynecology and Pediatric Diabetology RIM S2
 loss-of-function. The disease presentation is con- Department, University Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades, sistent with the localization and function of RIM S2
. Paris,France,8DepartmentofPediatricRadiology,Hôpital S. Mechaussier: None. B. Almoallem: None. C. Zeitz: Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris University, Paris, France, None. K. Van Schil: None. L. Jeddawi: None. J. Van 9Pediatric Neurology Department, University Hospital Dorpe: None. C. Condroyer: None. O. Pelle: None. M. Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10Laboratory of Polak:None.N.Boddaert:None.N.Bahi-Buisson:None. Embryologyandgeneticsofhumanmalformation,INSERM M. Cavallin: None. J. Bacquet: None. A. Mouallem- UMR1163,InstituteofGeneticDiseases,ImagineandParis Bézière: None. O. Zambrowski: None. J. Sahel: None. University, Paris, France, 11Service d’Ophtalmologie,206 J.delPicchia I. Audo: None. J. Kaplan: None. J. Rozet: None. E. De None. M. Skopkova: None. M. Profant: None. Baere: None. I. Perrault: None. D. Gasperikova: None.  P02
.69.B  P02
.70.C Whole exome sequencing in Slovak patients with Genotype-phenotype correlations ina Spanish cohort of bilateral sensorineural hearing impairment 506 families with bi-allelic ABCA4 mutations Z.Slobodova1,2,L.Varga1,2,S.Borecka2,I.Masindova1,D. M.delPozo-Valero1,R.Riveiro-Álvarez1,F.Blanco-Kelly1, Danis1, L. Langova3, M. Skopkova1, M. Profant2, D. J. Aguirre-Lamban1, I. Martín-Mérida1, I. Iancu1, S. Gasperikova1 Swaﬁri1, I. Lorda-Sanchez1, E. Rodriguez-Pinilla1, M. Trujillo-Tiebas1, B. Jiménez-Rolando2, E. Carreño2, I. 1BiomedicalResearchCenter,SlovakAcademyofSciences, Mahillo-Fernandez3, C. Rivolta4, M. Corton1, A. Avila- Bratislava,Slovakia,2DepartmentofOtorhinolaryngology– Fernandez1, B. García-Sandoval2, C. Ayuso1 Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Pediatric ENT Department of Medical Faculty 1Department of Genetics, Instituto de Investigación and National Institute of Child Diseases, Bratislava, Sanitaria–Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospi, Slovakia Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria–Fundación Jiménez Díaz Uni- Background: The genetic heterogeneity of sensorineural versity Hospi, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Epidemiol- hearing loss (SNHL) is a major hurdle to the discovery of ogy, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria–Fundación disease-causing variants. Whole exome sequencing (WES) Jiménez Díaz University Hospi, Madrid, Spain, 4Institute is a method that allows an efﬁcient analysis of all known of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel (IOB), genes associated with hereditary hearing loss. Basel, Switzerland, Basel, Switzerland Aim: Using WES to identify new genetic causes of hearingimpairmentintheCaucasianandRomapopulations Introduction:ABCA4isthemostmutatedgeneininherited in Slovakia, where standard genetic tests performed so far retinal dystrophies. A genotype-phenotype correlation have not elucidated the etiology of deafness. modelwasdescribedin1999withfewcasesreported.Here, Patients and methods: We collected 1,369 individuals we deﬁne genotype-phenotype correlations in the largest from 870 families with bilateral SNHL. The previous cohort study worldwide of patients: 434 with Stargardt analysisrevealedthat30%ofthefamilieshavemutationsin disease (STGD1) and 72 with cone-rod dystrophy (CRD), the DFNB1 locus. From the DFNB1 negative patients we all carrying biallelic ABCA4 mutations. selected 52 families, 42 of Caucasian and 10 of Roma Methods: Conventional genetic tools and Next Genera- ethnicity, for WES. tionSequencingtechnologies.Medicalhistoryandophthal- Results:UsingWES,weidentiﬁedthegeneticetiologyin mological data were obtained for 372 patients. Genotype- 22 probands of Caucasian ethnicity and in 1 proband of phenotype correlation studies were carried out for the Roma ethnicity. The detected variants were found in 18 followingvariables: variant type, ageat onset ofsymptoms genes(COCH,CO L4
A5,CREBBP,EDNRB,EYA4,ILDR1, (AO), and clinical phenotype (STGD1 or CRD). LOXHD1, MYO6, MYO15A, OTOA, OTOG,  P2
RX2, SIX1, Results: Genotype-phenotype correlations showed that TECTA,TM C1
,TMPRS S3
,DIAPH1,USH1C)harboring17 patients with biallelic truncating variants represented 41% pathogenic variants and 11 likely pathogenic variants of CRD and 6.5% of STGD1 patients in our cohort; these responsible for hearing impairment. 16 variants have not cases had a signiﬁcantly earlier AO than patients carrying yetbeendescribedintheliterature.InoneRomafamilythe two mutations, one of which is a missense variant. CRD causal variants were found in two genes (PTPRQ and patients presented earlier AO than STGD1 patients. MYO15A) in one individual. Conclusions: Our study, conducted in the largest Conclusion: Using WES, we detected the genetic ABCA4-associateddiseasecohort reported todate, supports etiology of hearing impairment in 52% probands of the genotype-phenotype model established for ABCA4 Caucasian ethnicity and 10% of Roma probands. WES variants, and broadens the mutational spectrum of the dramatically increases the detection of pathogenic variants gene. ABCA4 truncating variants were mostly associated in known genes associated with HL. Supported by: VEGA with earlier AO and a CRD phenotype. According to 1/0214/16, APVV 15-067 our observations, ABCA4 patients presenting with two Z. Slobodova: None. L. Varga: None. S. Borecka: truncating variants may ﬁrst present features of STGD1 None.I.Masindova:None.D.Danis:None.L.Langova: but eventually develop rod dysfunction, underscoring the importance of an accurate genetic diagnosis.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 207 Grants: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), CIBERER Results: Rcbtb1−/− animals showed changes in the RPE, (06/07/0036), IIS-FJD Biobank PT13/0010/0012, and FIS similar to observations in human cases, including loss of (PI16/00425) RAREGenomics-CM (CAM, B2017/BMD- apical-basal cell polarity, cuboidal cell morphology, 3721), Conchita Rábago Foundation, Autonomous Com- spreading of the pigment granules and vacuolisation. munityofMadrid(CAM,PEJ-2017-AI/BMD7256),Miguel NRF2 downstream targets and several metallothioneins Servet Program (C P12
/03256) from ISCIII were found to be differentially expressed, both in the KO M. del Pozo-Valero: None. R. Riveiro-Álvarez: None. and cellular models. Functional assays in ARPE-19 cells F. Blanco-Kelly: None. J. Aguirre-Lamban: None. I. revealed that RCBTB1 depletion affects cellular responses Martín-Mérida: None. I. Iancu: None. S. Swaﬁri: None. to external insults of oxidative stress. I.Lorda-Sanchez:None.E.Rodriguez-Pinilla:None.M. Conclusions: We showed that the Xenopus tropicalis Trujillo-Tiebas: None. B. Jiménez-Rolando: None. E. rcbtb1−/− KO recapitulates the human IRD phenotype. Carreño:None.I.Mahillo-Fernandez:None.C.Rivolta: Bothinvivoandinvitrofunctionaldatashowinvolvement None. M. Corton: None. A. Avila-Fernandez: None. B. ofRCBTB1inthecellularresponsetooxidativestress.This García-Sandoval: None. C. Ayuso: None. provides insight into the mechanism underlying RCBTB1- associated IRD and uncovers potential therapeutic  P02
.73.C opportunities. Functional characterization of a Xenopus tropicalis Funding: FWO/1802220N; FWO/1 S52818
N; BOF15/ knockout and a human cellular model of RCBTB1- GOA/011; BOF20/GOA/023. associatedinheritedretinaldiseaseshowsinvolvementof M.Carron:None.T.Naert:None.G.Ascari:None.S. RCBTB1 in the cellular response to oxidative stress Demuynck: None. T. Van Nieuwenhuyzen: None. T. Rosseel: None. D. Priem: None. A. Kremer: None. H. M. Carron1,2, T. Naert1, G. Ascari2, S. Demuynck1, T. Van Van Landeghem: None. S. Hoogstoel: None. F. Coppi- Nieuwenhuyzen1, T. Rosseel2, D. Priem3,4, A. Kremer4, H. eters: None. C. Guérin: None. K. Vleminckx: None. E. Van Landeghem1, S. Hoogstoel2, F. Coppieters2, C. De Baere: None. Guérin5, K. Vleminckx1, E. De Baere6  P03
 Internal Organs & Endocrinology (Lung, Kidney, 1Ghent University, Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent, Liver, Gastrointestinal) Belgium, 2Ghent University, Center for Medical Genetics and Dept of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium,  P03
.01.A 3Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 4VIB-UGent Center A cost effective experience in diagnosis of autosomal- for Inﬂammation Research, Ghent, Belgium, 5VIB Bioima- dominant polycystic disease by custom-target NGS ging Core, Ghent, Belgium, 6Ghent University and Ghent panel in a reference center. University Hospital, Center for MedicalGenetics and Dept of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium J. NEVADO1,2, R. Mena1, R. Peces3, M. Melgosa4, A. Alonso4, R. Selgas3, L. Espinosa4, P. Barruz1, P. D. Introduction: The function of RCBTB1, recently impli- Lapunzina1,2 cated in syndromic and non-syndromic inherited retinal disease (IRD), remains unknown so far. Patients with 1INGEMM-IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, biallelic missense variants in RCBTB1 display diverse IRD Spain, 3Sº Nefrología Adultos, HULP, Madrid, Spain, 4Sº phenotypessuchasretinitispigmentosa.Here,wetestedthe Nefrología Infantil, HULP, Madrid, Spain hypothesis that RCBTB1 is involved in NRF2-regulated protection against reactive oxygen species in the eye, more ADPKD is the most common inherited kidney disease that speciﬁcally in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). iscausedbymutationsinthePKD1/PKD2.Mostmutations MaterialsandMethods:AXenopustropicalisrcbtb1−/− take place in PKD1. Its molecular diagnosis is a challenge knockout (KO) was generated using CRISPR/Cas9 editing. by the high allelic heterogeneity and overlap of pseudo- Histology and three-dimensional electron microscopy was genes between 1-32 exons. So far, there are few data on performed on retinas of rcbtb1−/− frogs. RNA-seq analysis PKD1/PKD2 variants in the Spanish population. The main wasperformedonRCBTB1-mutatedpatients’lymphocytes, objective of this study has been to establish and know the treated with H O , as well as on embryos from the rcbtb1 mutations in ADPKD in our cohort. Mutational analysis of 2 2 −/− KOs treated with CdCl . An RCBTB1 knockdown cell both PKD1 and PKD2 was performed on 158 unrelated 2 line was generated in ARPE-19 cells and functional assays families, by NGS using a custom exon-target panel from (ﬂow cytometry, MTT-assay, cell death kinetics) assessed inherited nephropathies, Nephroseq®. To conﬁrm SNVs, the consequences of RCBTB1 loss-of-function. Long-Range-PCR and Sanger sequencing were performed208 J.delPicchia on PKD1 or PCR, and Sanger sequencing for PKD2. In Results:6patientshadbiallelicAIREmutationswiththe addition, MLPA was used to rule out CNVs. SNVs were common c.769C>T (p.R257*) allele being detected in 4 identiﬁed in 122 families (77.23%): 96 families in PKD1 individuals.Onepatientwashomozygousforc.173C>T(p. (78.7%) and 26 families in PKD2 (22.3%). Globally: 64 A58V) variant recently described in Russian patients frameshift and nonsense; 11 splicing, 36 missense, 8 in (Orlova et al, 2017). Rare c.32T>C (p. L11
P) mutation frame ins/del, and 4 large-deletions). Overall, 15% of var- was reported in Russian population for the ﬁrst time. All iantsweredenovoand50%werenotpreviouslydescribed. monoallelic mutations (n = 4) were represented by the This study demonstrates that NGS is a cost-effective c.901G>A (p.V301M) allele. This variant altering func- experimental approach for simultaneous analysis of the tional properties of the protein was once reported in a PKD1 and PKD2. The analysis of mutations in the Russian female with late-onset classical APECED (Oftedal ADPKD-Spanish population expands the understanding of et al, 2015). thegeneticdiversityofthedifferentethnicgroups,enriches Conclusions:OurstudyindicatesthatsomeGOFvariants the databases with the new mutations, and contributes to of AIRE are common in young Russian patients with their genetic counselling. As well as, reproductive (six manifestations of autoimmune disease. pregnancies were currently successful) and/or therapeutic This work was supported by RFBR grant 17-29-06069 decision-making (a signiﬁcant number of patients with E.N. Suspitsin: None. L.V. Ditkovskaya: None. T.V. highly pathogenic variants are currently under treatment Gabrusskaya: None. N.B. Ulanova: None. D.L. Streka- with Tolvaptan). lov: None. M.N. Guseva: None. J. Nevado: None. R. Mena: None. R. Peces: None. M. Melgosa: None. A. Alonso: None. R. Selgas: None. L.  P03
.05.B Espinosa: None. P. Barruz: None. P.D. Genetic and molecular analysis of urinary magnesium Lapunzina: None. concentration in Scottish and Croatian populations  P03
.04.A C. B. Joseph1, C. M. Stanton1, C. Drake1, T. S. Boutin1, J. Clinical and molecular characteristics of young Russian F. Wilson2, O. Polasek3, O. Devuyst4, T. Hurd1, C. patients with homo- and heterozygous AIRE mutations Hayward1 E. N. Suspitsin1,2, L. V. Ditkovskaya1, T. V. Gabrusskaya1, 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and N. B. Ulanova1, D. L. Strekalov1, M. N. Guseva1 Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Global Health Research, 1St.-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, St.- Usher Institute for Population Health Sciences and Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2N.N. Petrov Institute of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Oncology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation Kingdom,3SplitMedicalSchool,Split,Croatia,4Instituteof Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Introduction: Hereditary defects of the AIRE gene are associated with a rare autoimmune polyendocrinopathy- Magnesium is the second most abundant bivalent cation in candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome (APECED). thebodyandisessentialformanycellularprocesses.Renal The disorder has been found in many populations world- magnesiumhandlingplaysanimportantroleinmaintaining wide. The clinical manifestations are quite variable even magnesium homeostasis, however the exact biological within families, but major features include hypoparathyr- mechanisms remain unclear. A recent genome-wide asso- oidism, Addison disease, and mucocutaneous candidiasis. ciation study (GWAS) identiﬁed an association between Althoughtheconditionusuallyfollowsautosomal-recessive urinarymagnesiumconcentration(uMg)andvariantsinthe inheritance there is an increasing body of evidence that AR L15
 gene on chromosome 5. AR L15
 encodes a GTP- some cases may be caused by monoallelic gain-of-function binding protein that regulates the magnesium transporter (GOF) mutations. channelTRPM6,andotherproteinsinvolvedinmagnesium Materials and methods: 10 Russian patients (age 3-18 homeostasis in physiologically relevant cell lines. We years) were subjected to the AIRE gene analysis. Of those, conductedmeta-analyses for urinary magnesiumin11, 617 5 had clinical signs of APECED syndrome suspected by individuals from Scottish and Croatian populations to immunologist, gastroenterologist or endocrinologist. In determine possible genes involved in these traits. Mass these patients Sanger sequencing of AIRE was performed. spectrometry analysis was conducted to determine inter- Another 5 patients underwent targeted sequencing of actors of Arl15 and in-vitro knockout models of Arl15 was primary immunodeﬁciency (PID) genes including AIRE established using CRISPR-Cas9. The top SNP associated because of suspected PID condition. with uMg in our meta-analyses lies within a transcriptionAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 209 factor binding site in an enhancer region of AR L15
. Indi- blood chimerism which is relatively common, or as an viduals homozygous for the alternate allele of rs35931 has exceedingly rare reported tissue chimerism has to be eluci- lower urinary magnesium levels compared to individuals dated by studies of other tissues. with the homozygous reference allele. Arl15 interacts with B. Lorenz-Depiereux: None. U. Ahting: None. G. magnesium transporters within the distal convoluted tubule Eckstein: None.K.Warncke:None.T.Meitinger:None. segment of the kidneys. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that homo- S. Andres: None. zygous deletion of Arl15 is lethal at the organismal level. Wehypothesisethatthevariantfoundaffectstheexpression  P03
.10.A of AR L15
, which, in turn modulates magnesium transport Ultra-rare variants in the TRPV6 gene cause autosomal by regulating magnesium transporters. We are performing dominant chronic pancreatitis furtherfunctionalstudiestoelucidatetheroleAR L15
plays in magnesium homeostasis both in vitro and in vivo. E. Masson1,2, J. M. Chen1, V. Rebours3, M. Le Rhun4, H. C.B. Joseph: None. C.M. Stanton: None. C. Drake: Audin5, A. Lachaux6,B. Caumont7, D.Lorenzo3,M. Fron8, None.T.S.Boutin:None.J.F.Wilson:None.O.Polasek: K. Billiemaz9, R. Besnard10, L. Buscail11, GREPAN None. O. Devuyst: None. T. Hurd: None. C. (Genetic REsearch on PANcreatitis) Study Group, C. Hayward: None. Férec1  P03
.08.B 1UnivBrest,Inserm,EFS,UMR1078,GGB,Brest,France, Blood chimerism in monochorionic dizygotic twins 2CHRUBrest,ServicedeGénétiqueMédicaleetdeBiologie (MCDZT) identiﬁed at molecular genetic testing of de laReproduction, Brest, France, 3Department ofGastro- permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus enterology and Pancreatology, Beaujon Hospital, APHP, Clichy, and Paris-Diderot University, Paris, France, 4Ser- B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, U. Ahting2, G. Eckstein1, K. vice d’Hépato-Gastro-Entérologie, Cancérologie Digestive Warncke3, T. Meitinger1,2, S. Andres2 et Assistance Nutritionnelle, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 5Médecine ‘Chauvet’ à Orientation Gastro-Entérologique, 1Helmholtz Zentrum München German Research Center for CH Gabriel Martin, Saint Paul, France, 6Service de EnvironmentalHealth, Institute ofHumanGenetics, Neuher- Gastroentérologie, Hépatologie et Nutrition Pédiatriques, berg, Germany,2TechnicalUniversity ofMunich,Instituteof HCL, Bron, France, 7Service de Médecine à Orientation HumanGenetics,Munich,Germany,3TechnicalUniversityof Hépato-–Gastro-Entérologique,CHSudGironde,Langon, Munich School of Medicine, Kinderklinik München Schwab- France, 8Service d’Hépato-Gastro-Entérologie, CHD Ven- ing, Department of Pediatrics, Munich, Germany dée, La Roche-Sur-Yon, France, 9Service de Pédiatrie, CHUSaint-Etienne,Saint-Etienne,France,10Serviced’Hé- In most cases dizygotic (DZ) twins have a dichorionic pla- pato-Gastro-Entérologie et Oncologie Digestive, CHR centa,butinsomecases-especiallyinthecontextofassisted Orléans, Orléans, France, 11Service de Gastroentérologie reproduction-bloodchimerisminDZtwinsduetoplacental et Pancréatologie, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France sharing has been shown, identifying them as monochorionic dizygotic twins (MCDZT). Here we report the ﬁrst case of Until very recently, variants in the so far reported chronic bloodchimerisminMCDZTdetectedasanadditionalﬁnding pancreatitis (CP) genes such as PRS S1
 have been found to at molecular genetic testing. Dizygotic twin brothers were cause/predispose to the disease through increasing trypsin born to a female couple after assisted reproduction (IVF, activity or eliciting endoplasmic reticulum stress. In January invitrofertilization).Onepresentedwithpermanentneonatal 2020, an international collaboration reported association of diabetes mellitus. Molecular genetic analysis identiﬁed a functionally deﬁcient variants in the TRPV6 gene with CP, heterozygouspathogenicvariantwithintheinsulingene(INS, identifying a novel mechanism of pancreatitis due to Ca2+ dominantinheritance).Interestingly,thedonoroftheoocytes dysregulation. This discovery was made essentially by ana- forIVFhadbeendiagnosedwithtype1diabetesasaninfant. lyzing young patients with idiopathic CP. Whether TRPV6 ScreeningfortheINSvariantinherbloodDNAwaspositive variants are responsible for autosomal dominantly inherited and altered the diagnosis to permanent neonatal diabetes CP remains unknown. Herein, we analyzed the TRPV6 gene mellitus.TestingoftheunaffectedbrotherfortheINSvariant inprobandsof235suchfamiliesbyNGS.Allfamilieshadat surprisingly showed that he also carried the INS variant in least two affected members and had remained genetically blood DNA but not in DNA from buccal membrane cells. unexplained prior to the current analysis. We identiﬁed 11 Additional microsatellite studies conﬁrmed blood chimerism ultra-rarevariants(allwereabsentin570Frenchcontrolsand in both twins but ruled out chimerism in buccal membrane had an allele frequency of 0-0.000008 in gnomAD) in 11 cells. Whether our ﬁndings should be classiﬁed as conﬁned families.Ofthe11variants,5werepreviouslyreportedtobe210 J.delPicchia pathogenic. All the remaining six variants were novel, com- university education. Trio exome sequencing identiﬁed a prising a clear loss-of-function variant, a single amino acid homozygous frameshift-mutation in LBX1 (hg19: deletion variant, and four missense variants. All these four chr10:102987166del, NM_006562.4:c.707del, p. missense variants were predicted to be of pathogenic rele- (Val236Alafs*59)). Our patient corroborates the role of C- vance by Polyphen and/or SIFT and had a CADD score terminal LBX1 mutations in CCHS and emphasizes the comparable to known pathogenic missense variants. In sum- favorableclinical outcomeincase ofconsequenttreatment. mary, we identiﬁed ultra-rare TRPV6 variants in ~5% of the M. Elbracht: None. M. Begemann: None. I. studied families. This establishes TRPV6 as a relatively fre- Kurth: None. quentautosomaldominantCPgeneforwhichgenetictesting is warranted. Our results also suggest that haploinsufﬁciency  P03
.13.A oftheTRPV6geneissufﬁcienttocauseCP.(Worksupported Deletionandduplication:unusualcaseofdiagnosticsfor by INSERM). patient with cystic ﬁbrosis E.Masson:None.J.M.Chen:None.V.Rebours:None. M.LeRhun:None.H.Audin:None.A.Lachaux:None. S. Deryabina1,2, O. Lagutina1, N. Nikitina1, E. Nikolaeva1 B. Caumont: None. D. Lorenzo: None. M. Fron: None. K.Billiemaz:None.R.Besnard:None.L.Buscail:None. 1Medical Center “Health Care of Mother and Child”, C. Férec: None. Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 2Federal State Auton- omous Educational Institution of Higher Education «Ural  P03
.12.C FederalUniversitynamedaftertheﬁrstPresidentofRussia TruncatingLBX1mutation in Congenital Central Hypo- B.N. Yeltsin, Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation ventilation Syndrome Background:Cysticﬁbrosis(CF)isanautosomalrecessive M. Elbracht, M. Begemann, I. Kurth disease caused by a mutation in the CFTR (cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) gene. Newborn Institute of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany screening for CF was introduced in the Russian Federation in 2006. The incidence of CF varies among different Undine syndrome, a congenital central hypoventilation regions, in Sverdlovsk region it is 1:9,500. The vast syndrome (CCHS), derivesits name from the legend of the majorityofrecurrentCFTRvariantsarepointmutations,but water nymph Ondine/Undine who punished her mortal several populations have larger deletions and duplications, husband for his unfaithfulness with a curse of stopping involving one or more complete exons. Here we want to breathing and dying when he fell asleep. Normally, report a case of CF with simultaneously existing deletion increasing CO blood levels induce the hypercapnic reﬂex and duplication of different regions of 11 exon CFTR. 2 which accelerates breathing via specialized neurons of the Case presentation: The patient (a 1-month-old girl) was pre-Bötzingercomplexintheventralhindbrain.Polyalanine bornattermtonon-consanguineousparents.Fornewborn’s expansions in PHOX2B and rarely other genes have been diagnostics CF we use a three-step IRT/IRT1↑/DNA describedtocausegeneticformsofCCHSbydisturbingthe algorithm. Our patient had elevated levels of immunor- breathing reﬂex. Recently, a homozygous mutation in the eactive trypsinogen both times (328.6 ng/ml and 299.8 ng/ homeodomain transcription factor LBX1 was reported in ml respectively). Moreover, the girl had pathological sweat two brothers with neonatal hypoventilation and complex chlorides - 110 mmol/L. autonomic symptoms. The mutation affects the C-terminus Results: The trio genetic sequencing of the CFTR gene of the protein and impairs cooperativity with PHOX2B, showed heterozygous delF508 mutation in exon 11 for the without disrupting the DNA-binding domain. We here child and her father. For searching another variant we were report a female patient with severe hypoventilation who done Multiplex Ligation-mediated Probe Ampliﬁcation required continuous mechanical ventilation immediately (MLPA) of the CFTR gene. We have found heterozygous afterbirth.Duringherﬁrst11yearsoflifeshewassupplied deletionofexon9forthegirlandhermotherandhaveproved with a tracheostomy and mask ventilation at night because thedeletionF508forfather,butthisanalysishasshownalso of episodes of apnea. In childhood, she had severe con- duplication of exon 11 and 2 copies F508 for proband. stipation and, developed a paralytic ileus like Hirschsprung Conclusions: We assume the proband has 3 copies of disease.Sincetheageof11sheusedarespiratorymaskfor exon 11: two normal and one with del508F, and it is the sleeping and showed normocapnia. With consequent defect copy, that is crucial for protein synthesis. breathing control starting immediately after birth the now S. Deryabina: None. O. Lagutina: None. N. Nikitina: 23yearsoldwomandevelopedexcellentlyandcompletesa None. E. Nikolaeva: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 211  P03
.14.B Georgiou: None. L.A. Phylactou: None. P. Genotypic spectrum of cystic ﬁbrosis in Cyprus with Yiallouros: None. emphasis on the endemic  L346
P and the novel  P03
.16.A CFTRdup2 cases Distinct regulatory elements enhance SL C6
A14 expres- sion modifying cystic ﬁbrosis pancreas and lung A. Matthaiou1, P. Anagnostopoulou1,2, P. Kouis1, V. phenotypes Neocleous3,T.Adamidi4,P.Ioannou5,P.Fanis3,C.Costi3, A. Georgiou4, L. A. Phylactou3, P. Yiallouros1,5 M. Esmaeili1, N. Panjwani1, G. He1,2, F. Lin1, J. M. Rommens1,3, L. J. Strug1,2 1Medical School, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Institute of Anatomy, University of Bern, Bern, Switzer- 1Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital land,3CyprusInstituteofNeurologyandGenetics,Nicosia, for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Division of Cyprus, 4Department of Pulmonology, Nicosia General Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, Uni- Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 5Pediatric Pulmonology Unit, versity of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Department of Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada Introduction: The aim of this study was to describe the epidemiology of CFTR mutations in the cystic ﬁbrosis Introduction: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) individuals with the population in Cyprus with particular emphasis on the same CFTR mutations have variable lung and pancreatic endemic  L346
P (p.Leu346Pro) cases and a novel case diseaseseverity.Genomewideassociationstudies(GWAS) which bears the poorly described CFTRdup2 in haveindicatedthatSNPclustersintheimmediatepromoter homozygosity. region and far upstream of SL C6
A14 modify meconium Materials and Methods: The national cystic ﬁbrosis ileus(MI)occurrenceatbirthandprogressivelungdisease, patients’ registry in Cyprus was searched for the demo- respectively.SL C6
A14isasodium-andchloride-dependent graphic, diagnostic, and genotypic data of all cases whose neutralandcationicaminoacidtransporterthatisexpressed diagnosiswasgeneticallyconﬁrmedviatheidentiﬁcationof in several tissues including lung and pancreatic duct. twomutantCFTRalleles.Inallcases,genotypingwasdone Materials and Methods: We are using public data and by Sanger sequencing for the detection of common in vitro transcriptional reporter studies to understand how mutationsandwasfollowedbynext-generation sequencing the SL C6
A14 promoter and upstream SNPs contribute to for the identiﬁcation of uncommon mutations. modiﬁcation of CF. Results: From an overall of 47 cases, the most common Results: Colocalizing SL C6
A14 promoter SNPs with mutation was p.Phe508del with an allelic frequency of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) of multiple organs 46.9%, which is compatible with its northwest-to-southeast fromGenotype-TissueExpression(GTEx)suggeststhatthe decreasing frequency gradient in Europe. Most mutations pancreas drives MI susceptibility and indicates that the were classiﬁed as CFTR protein processing (class II, 50%) eQTL effect is driven primarily by males. Reporter assays or conductance (class IV, 12.3%) defects. Multiple muta- in the CFPAC-1 pancreas cell line with a 2.4kb segment tions were detected in 3 cases. Seven patients with mild containing MI-associated SNPs display increased gene clinical manifestations, mostly presenting with dehydration expressionwiththeriskhaplotypes,andexhibittransrepres- and/orelectrolyteimbalance,carriedp.Leu346Pro(7.1%),a sion with a steroid hormone receptor. The core promoter class IV mutation detected solely in individuals of Cypriot activity and haplotype effects were also evident in the lung descent. A novel case of a patient homozygous for the cell lines Calu-3 and HBE. Analyses of ReMap and CFTRdup2 mutation was associated with a severe pheno- JASPAR databases pinpoint a series of transcription type with hepatic involvement, biliary cirrhosis and binding elements in the upstream region for ongoing eventually hepatic failure leading to death. investigations to understand how these segments crosstalk Conclusions: The small population of cystic ﬁbrosis with the core promoter of SL C6
A14 in the lung. patients in Cyprus follows the regional genotypic trends, Conclusions: Our studies implicate differences in gene although several cases bear unique mutational proﬁles, regulationofSL C6
A14inthelungversusthepancreas,with which contribute to the wide genotypic and phenotypic increased expression level being detrimental to CF spectrum of the disease. phenotypes in both organs. A. Matthaiou: None. P. Anagnostopoulou: None. P. M. Esmaeili: None. N. Panjwani: None. G. He: None. Kouis: None. V. Neocleous: None. T. Adamidi: None. P. F. Lin: None. J.M. Rommens: None. L.J. Strug: None. Ioannou: None. P. Fanis: None. C. Costi: None. A.212 J.delPicchia  P03
.17.B None. O. Seda: None. B. Chylikova: None. J. Impact of next-generation sequencing on diagnosis of Stekrova: None. cystic kidney diseases  P03
.18.C Circulating miRNA as a predictive biomarker of type 2 L. Obeidová1, T. Seeman2, V. Elisakova1, K. diabetes in prediabetic patients-outcomes of 5-year Hirschfeldova1, I. Zednikova1, B. Janosikova1, M. prospective observational study Urbanova1,F.Liska1,O.Seda1,B.Chylikova1,J.Stekrova1 I.Sidorkiewicz,M.Niemira,K.Maliszewska,A.Bielska,A. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Szałkowska, J. Raczkowska, G. Sokołowska, M. Górska, A. Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General Krętowski University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics, 2nd Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, Introduction: Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) remains Prague, Czech Republic the most prevalent form of diabetes. The detection of cur- rent T2DM diagnostic markers is generally late and occurs Introduction: Cystic kidney diseases are a very hetero- when displaying metabolic imbalance thus, novel bio- geneous group of chronic kidney diseases with sometimes markersthatcouldbeusefulasanewtoolforpredictingthe ambiguous phenotype. Thus, the clinical diagnosis is often progression from prediabetes to T2DM are needed. The difﬁcult to be made. The aim of our study was to test the goal of this study was to conduct a baseline comparison of abilityofnext-generationsequencing(NGS)toimprovethe serum-circulating miRNA in prediabetic individuals with diagnosis precision in a heterogeneous group of children distinction between those who later progressed to T2DM with clinically suspected cystic kidney diseases. and those who did not. Materials and Methods: Next-generation sequencing of Materials and methods:The study group was divided – genes responsible for the formation of cystic kidneys was patients with newly diagnosed T2DM over 5 year performed in 32 unrelated patients with various clinically observational period (n = 18) and control group (n = 12) diagnosed cystic kidney diseases without a deﬁnitive with no known history of dysglycemia. The expression genetic diagnosis. level of 798 miRNAs in serum samples using the Nano- Results: The underlying pathogenic variants were String technology was examined. detected in 69% of patients (n = 22). The result of NGS Results: The study revealed that 18 miRNAs were correlated with the clinical diagnosis made before the NGS deregulated in serum samples of patients who developed in 53% of patients (n = 17), in the remaining 15 children T2DM after 5 years versus non T2DM patients. Pathway (47%) the result of NGS revealed another type of cystic analysis showed that miRNA target genes were mainly kidney disease than clinically suspectedor did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcantly enriched in homeostasis, neuronal signaling, causal mutation. The most common unexpected ﬁndings proteincomplexoligomerization andcore matrisome. ROC werevariantsinnephronophthisis(NPHP)genesinchildren analysis demonstrated that miR-491-5p, miR-1307-3p, with clinically suspected autosomal recessive polycystic miR-298 and miR-1290 can be introduced as a diagnostic kidney disease (n = 4). Overall, we found 25 (probably) tool for the prediction of T2DM (AUC=0.940; 0.894; pathogenic variants in the PKHD1 gene, 8 variants in the 0.877; 0.722, respectively). TMEM67 gene, 4 variants in the PKD1 gene, 2 variants in Conclusions: The results suggest that circulating miR- theHNF1Bgeneand2variantsinBB S1
andNPH P1
genes, NAs could potentially be used as predictive biomarkers of respectively. T2DM in prediabetic patients. Conclusions:NGSisavaluabletoolinthediagnosticsof I. Sidorkiewicz: None. M. Niemira: None. K. Mal- various forms of cystic kidney diseases. Its results changed iszewska:None.A.Bielska:None.A.Szałkowska:None. the clinically based diagnoses in 15% of the children. J.Raczkowska:None.G.Sokołowska:None.M.Górska: Supported by the ESIF - Operational programme Prague None. A. Krętowski: None. CZ.07.1.02/0.0/0.0/17_049/0000828, GAUK 1015 and PROGRES- Q25/LF1  P03
.20.B L. Obeidová: None. T. Seeman: None. V. Elisakova: Identiﬁcation of a germline interstitial deletion None. K. Hirschfeldova: None. I. Zednikova: None. in14q32.13 in a child and mother with DICER1 B. Janosikova: None. M. Urbanova: None. F. Liska: syndromeAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 213 I. Wieland1, I. Schanze1, A. Gnekow2, M. Kuhlen2, F. V.Karaman1,E.KarakılıçÖzturan2,F.Baş2,S.Başaran1, Maier3, D. Wahl3, M. Frühwald2, M. Zenker1 Z. Uyguner1 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Otto- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Faculty of von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Swabian Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Depart- Children’s Cancer Center, University Children’s Hospital, ment of Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul Faculty of Augsburg, Germany, 3Praxis für Humangenetik, Augsburg, Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey Germany Introduction: Gonadotropin-dependent or central pre- Introduction: DICER1 syndrome (MIM 601200) is a rare cociouspuberty(CPP)iscausedbypremature activationof tumor predisposition syndrome with autosomal dominant the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis. There are inheritance usually manifesting in childhood and adoles- severalgenesplayingrolesinthispathwayandtwoofthem cence. Tumor development follows Knudson’s two-hit are maternally imprinted; 1) MKRN3 gene, located at model involving the gene DICER1 located on chromo- 15q11.2, upstream suppressor of HPG axis, 2) DLK1 gene, some 14q32.13. Predisposing germline pathogenic variants located at 14q32, affecting kisspeptin signaling pathway (ﬁrst hit) are mainly small loss-of-function mutations. hence important role for regulating pubertal timing. Tumor-related driver mutations are speciﬁc hot-spot mis- Materials and Methods: Coding regions of the MKRN3 sense mutations in trans (second hit) located in the RNAse (NM_005664.3) and DLK1 (NM_003836.6) genes were IIIb domain of the DICER1 protein. Sanger sequenced in 17 patients (15 female, 2 male). In Patients: We report on a female child with cystic presence of pathogenic variant, segregation analysis were nephroma of the right kidney and developmental delay at performed in families. age 1 year. Facial features included frontal bossing, ﬂat Results: We identiﬁed two novel heterozygous variants nasal bridge, hypertelorism and small mouth with thin lips. in two unrelated cases in DLK1 gene. The ﬁrst variant was Body measurements were unremarkable. Her mother was inexon4(c.357C>G(p.Tyr119Ter))andthesecondwasin reported with Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor (SLCT) and multi- intron1(c.67+78C>T),bothwereclassiﬁedunderprobably nodulargoiteratage12to16years.Clinicalpresentationof pathogenic by in silico analysis. Segregation analysis mother and child suggested familial inheritance of presented the paternal inheritance of both, complying with DICER1 syndrome. the inheritance model of the genes. No pathogenic variant Results: No typical DICER1 loss-of-function germline identiﬁed in MKRN3 gene in our cases. mutation was detected in the child by standard Sanger Conclusions: Previously, three small and one gross sequencing. The child’s tumor tissue of the right kidney deletionsofDLK1wereassociatedwithCPP.Nonsenseand revealed DICER1 hot-spot mutation c.5437G>A p. splicing variant have ﬁrst time presented in our study. The Glu1813Lys. Subsequent molecular karyotyping of DNA alterationidentiﬁedinintrononeneedsfurtherinvestigation from blood of the child using Affymetrix CytoScan HD ontranscriptleveltoshowwhetheritcausessplicingdefect. SNP-Array showed a 2.31MB interstitial contiguous gene Nevertheless, inheritance pattern complies with imprinted deletion in 14q32 (arr[hg19] 14q32.12q32.13 gene model of DLK1. These results suggest that investiga- (93835222_96155830)x1). The interval harbors 23 tion of DLK1 gene may contribute to the elucidation of the OMIM-listed genes including DICER1. The array result genetic assosiation of familial CPP. This study was was ﬁnally conﬁrmed in the blood of child and mother supported by Scientiﬁc Research Projects Coordination by MLPA. Unit of Istanbul University (TDK-2018-32682) Conclusions: Patients with DICER1 syndrome and V. Karaman: None. E. Karakılıç Özturan: None. F. germline 14q32 contiguous gene deletions infrequently Baş: None. S. Başaran: None. Z. Uyguner: None. have been detected. In the few patients reported to date various deletion intervals were identiﬁed suggesting no  P03
.23.B consistent chromosomal breakpoints. Elucidating the molecular mechanism underlying later- I.Wieland:None.I.Schanze:None.A.Gnekow:None. ality defects M. Kuhlen: None. F. Maier: None. D. Wahl: None. M. Frühwald: None. M. Zenker: None. D. Antony1,2,3, A. Maver4, M. A. Deardorff5,6, L. Slagter2, K. Wu2, Z. Bakey1,2, E. Y. Gulec7, A. Gezdirici7, H.  P03
.22.A Brunner2,3, M. Schmidts1,2,3 Two cases with central precocious puberty caused by paternally inherited novel variants in DLK1gene 1CenterforPediatricsandAdolescentMedicine,University HospitalFreiburg,Freiburg,Germany,2Genome Research214 J.delPicchia Division, Department of Human Genetics, Radboud UMC,  P03
.24.C Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Radboud Institute of Molecular Insights into the proteomics of renal function: a trans- Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Centre for Mende- ethnic meta-analysis and Mendelian randomization lianGenomics,ClinicalInstituteofMedicalGenetics,UMC study Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 5Department of Pediatrics and Pathology, The Perelman School of Medicine, P. R. Matias-Garcia1,2,3, R. Wilson1,2, Q. Guo4, S. B. University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA, United Zaghlool5, S. Sharma1,2, P. Schlosser6, A. Köttgen6,7, A. States, 6Laboratory Medicine, The Perelman School of Peters2,8,9, D. O. Mook-Kanamori10, J. Graumann11,12, W. Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA, König8,13,14, K. Hveem15,16, C. Jonasson15,16, A. United States, 7University of Health Sciences, Kanuni Butterworth4, K. Suhre5, C. Gieger1,2,8, A. Teumer17,18, M. Sultan Suleyman training and research Hospital, Depart- Waldenberger1,2,8 ment of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey 1Research Unit of Molecular Epidemiology, Helmholtz Introduction: Laterality defects are rare developmental Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environ- disorders, occurring isolated or as part of complex syn- mental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Institute of Epide- dromes. Underlying cause is frequently dysfunction of miology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research motile cilia causing Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) and Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, rarely, non-motile cilia defects or non-ciliary causes. In 3School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, additiontorandomizationoftheleftrightbodyaxis,PCDis Munich, Germany, 4Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, characterized by frequent respiratory infections and DepartmentofPublicHealthandPrimaryCare,University infertility. of Cambridge, Strangeways Research Laboratory, Wort’s Methods: We used Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) to Causeway, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Department of delineate the underlying molecular cause in 37 mainly Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, consanguineous families with laterality defects. Doha,Qatar,6InstituteofGeneticEpidemiology,Facultyof Results: We identiﬁed causative variants in 32% with Medicine and Medical Center-University of Freiburg, majority of mutations detected in genes previously Freiburg, Germany, 7Department of Epidemiology, Johns associated with PCD, including 2 small homozygous Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, CNVs. Variants in non PCD genes, PKD1l1 and GJA1 MD, United States, 8German Research Center for Cardi- were also detected. We further identiﬁed homozygous null ovascular Research (DZHK), partner site Munich Heart mutations in two genes not previously associated with Alliance, Munich, Germany, 9German Center for Diabetes humandisease,MN S1
andDNAH9,bothincaseswithsitus Research (DZD), München-Neuherberg, Neuherberg, Ger- inversus but little or no respiratory symptoms. Gene many, 10Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden matcher database revealed two additional families with University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 11Scienti- biallelic DNAH9 mutation and immunoﬂuorescence analy- ﬁc Service Group Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Max sis revealed complete absence of DNAH9 from respiratory Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, W.G. cilia of one affected while DNAH9 localises to the distal Kerckhoff Institute, Bad Nauheim, Germany, 12German halfofciliaincontrols.Further,wefounddirectinteraction Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site of DNAH9 with the ODA docking complex protein Rhine-Main, Max Planck Institute of Heart and Lung CCD C114
 using Y2H screening also interaction with Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany, 13Deutsches Herzzen- DNAH5 and DNAI2 using co-Immunoprecipitation. trum München, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Conclusions:Wecouldonlysolveathirdofthelaterality Germany, 14Institute of Epidemiology and Medical Biome- cases genetically using WES, pointing towards non coding try, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 15K.G. Jebsen variations,geneticmosaicismorepigeneticeffectswhilewe Center for Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public were able to identify two novel human disease causing Health, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, genes, MN S1
 and DNAH9, both causing laterality defects Trondheim, Norway, 16HUNT Research Center, Depart- with no or little respiratory disease.ERC: TreatCilia ment of Public Health, Norwegian University of Science D. Antony: None. A. Maver: None. M.A. Deardorff: and Technology, Levanger, Norway, 17Institute for Com- None. L. Slagter: None. K. Wu: None. Z. Bakey: None. munity Medicine, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifs- E.Y. Gulec: None. A. Gezdirici: None. H. Brunner: wald, Germany, 18German Center for Cardiovascular None. M. Schmidts: None. Research (DZHK), partner site Greifswald, Greifswald, GermanyAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 215 Introduction: Renal health is reﬂected in the kidneys’ Coburg, Germany, 3University of Würzburg, Division of ability to ﬁlter blood, clinically measured as the estimated Nephrology, University Hospital, Würzburg, Germany, glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR). A number of plasma 4Medical University Innsbruck, Department of Internal proteins have been found to be associated with renal phe- Medicine IV, Nephrology and Hypertension, Innsbruck, notypes, but prior studies have been limited by smaller Austria sample sizes and fewer proteins. Moreover, the causal mechanisms underlying these associations have not been Introduction: Patients with end-stage kidney disease investigated. require renal replacement therapy, i.e. dialysis or kidney Methods: We conducted the largest observational study transplantation, for survival. Here we report for the ﬁrst of plasma proteins and renal function in terms of sample time a genetic variant which is associated with longer sur- size (up to N=5,285 across four studies: KORA, INTER- vival on renal replacement therapy in Caucasian patients. VAL,HUNT,QMDiab)andnumberofproteins(k=1,100). Materials and Methods: We conducted a survival AssociationswitheGFRandchronickidneydisease(CKD) analysisofthreeEuropean end-stagekidneydiseasepatient were tested using regression models in a trans-ethnic populationsinAustriaandBavaria.198patients(118male, discovery-replication approach. We further examined the 80 female) were genotyped for three variants of the causal nature of these associations using two-sample calcium-sensing receptor gene after signing the consent bidirectional Mendelian randomization. form. The study started in 2005 and survival analysis was Results: 57 proteins were found to be consistently performed in 2018. During these years all patients received associated with eGFR in population samples of European careaccordingtothestandardsoftheAustrianandGerman and admixed ancestry; of these, 18 were associated with societies of nephrology. CKD. Many well-known biomarkers of renal function (e.g. Results: Survival on renal replacement therapy was cystatin-C)wereidentiﬁed,aswereJAM-Bandcontactin-4 signiﬁcantlydifferent (age and sexadjustedCox regression as novel biomarkers. The strongest evidence of causality p=0.04)betweencarriersoftheglycineandargininealleles was observed in the positive effect of eGFR on testican-2 at position 990 of the calcium-sensing receptor molecule (p=2.84E-04), a ﬁnding consistent with the biological role (rs1042636.) The two rs1042636 cohorts AA (two arginine of testican-2 in glomeruli remodeling and kidney injury alleles) and GA/GG (at least one glycine allele) were in repair. Hardy Weinberg equilibrium with a minor allele Conclusions: Our study uncovers novel plasma proteo- frequency of 7%. micbiomarkersforrenalfunctionandpresentsevidencefor Conclusions: The glycine variant of rs1042636 calcium- selectedcausalrelationships.Plasmalevelsoftestican-2are sensing receptor molecules has been shown to result in a reﬂective of mechanisms underlying progressive renal gain-of-function, as compared with the arginine variant, in function loss, thus suggesting its applicability as a cell culture studies with transfected human embryonic biomarker of early renal dysfunction and disease progres- kidney cells. It was also associated with lower baseline sion in the general population. parathyroid hormone levels in the Caucasian patient cohort P.R. Matias-Garcia: None. R. Wilson: None. Q. Guo: of the Evaluation of Cinacalcet Hydrochloride Therapy to None. S.B. Zaghlool: None. S. Sharma: None. P. Lower Cardiovascular Events (EVOLVE) trial. Our study Schlosser: None. A. Köttgen: None. A. Peters: None. D. shows that it is associated with longer survival on renal O. Mook-Kanamori: None. J. Graumann: None. W. replacement therapy in Caucasian patients. König: None. K. Hveem: None. C. Jonasson: None. A. H.M. Rothe: None. S. Komolka: None. C. Wanner: Butterworth:None.K.Suhre:None.C.Gieger:None.A. None. G. Mayer: None. Teumer: None. M. Waldenberger: None.  P03
.26.B  P03
.25.A Genes regulating enteric nervous system development Gain-of-functionvariantofthecalcium-sensingreceptor are impacted by Copy Number loss and modify gene is associated with longer survival on renal penetrance in epistasis with RET replacement therapy in Caucasian patients L.Kuil1,C.S.Tang2,J.D.Windster1,3,T.Le4,5,A.Karim2,6, H. M. Rothe1,2, S. Komolka2, C. Wanner3, G. Mayer4 B. M. de Graaf1, R. van der Helm1, Y. van Bever1, C. E. J. Sloots3, C. Meeussen3, D. Tibboel3, A. de Klein1, R. M. H. 1Centre for Nephrology and Metabolic Disorders, Weiss- Wijnen1, J. Amiel4,7,5, S. Lyonnet4,7,5, M. Garcia-Barcelo2, wasser,Germany,2CoburgUniversityforAppliedSciences,216 J.delPicchia P. K. H. Tam2, M. M. Alves1, A. S. Brooks1, R. M. W. Klein: None. R.M.H. Wijnen: None. J. Amiel: None. S. Hofstra1,8, E. Brosens1 Lyonnet: None. M. Garcia-Barcelo: None. P.K.H. Tam: None. M.M. Alves: None. A.S. Brooks: None. R.M.W. 1Clinical Genetics department, Erasmus Medical Centre – Hofstra: None. E. Brosens: None. Sophia Children’s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine,  P03
.27.C University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 3Paediatric Identiﬁcationofdisease-causingvariantsinchildrenand Surgery department, Erasmus Medical Centre – Sophia adolescents with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis Children’s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Paris Des- cartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, S. Draut1, M. C. Braunisch1,2, K. M. Riedhammer1,2, P. M. Paris, France, 5Laboratory of embryology and genetics of Herr1, R. Günthner1,2, M. Wagner1,3,4, B. Alhaddad1, L. congenital malformations, INSERM UMR1163, Paris, Renders2, U. Heemann2, C. Schmaderer2, J. Hoefele1 France, 6Chittagong Research Institute for Children Surgery (CRICS), Chittagong, Bangladesh, 7Service de 1Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Génétique, Necker Enfants Malades University Hospital, Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, APHP, Paris, France, 8Stem Cells and Regenerative Munich, Germany, 2Department of Nephrology, Klinikum Medicine, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child rechts der Isar, Technical University of Munich, School of Health, London, United Kingdom Medicine,Munich,Germany,3InstituteofHumanGenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is characterized by absence 4Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, of enteric ganglia, primarily in the distal colon. Approxi- Neuherberg, Germany mately 18% of patients have additional anatomical mal- formations or associated neurodevelopmental disorders Introduction: A monogenic cause can be identiﬁed in (HSCR-complex). We hypothesized that genes affected by approximately 30% of young patients (< 25 years of age) rare Copy Number Variants contribute to disease develop- withsteroid-resistantnephroticsyndrome(SRNS).SRNSin ment in “HSCR-complex” patients. Indeed, we could con- childrenandadolescentsismostlyinheritedinanautosomal ﬁrmthatCopyNumber(CN)losses(n=11)areenrichedin recessive pattern. The histological correlate of SRNS is these patients (n = 23), if no other causal variant was often focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). The aim identiﬁed(p=3.64E−7).Atleastﬁvepatientshadalargede of this study was to identify genetic causes in a cohort of novoCNV(3losses,2gains).TheidentiﬁedrareCNlosses children and adolescents with FSGS. are enriched for variant intolerant genes, overexpressed in Material and Methods: 35 unrelated individuals with the developing mouse enteric nervous system (p=1.760E- disease onset <18 years of age and suspected hereditary 10): SL C8
A1, GN L1
, GABBR1, MAPK8, UFD1L, AKT3, FSGS were analyzed using exome sequencing. Suspected TBX2, US P32
 and TUBB. Additionally, a loss of function hereditaryFSGSwasdeﬁnedifatleastoneofthefollowing variantinTUBBwasidentiﬁedinaHSCRpatientwithouta criteria was present: absence of a secondary cause, <18 deleteriousCNV,andAKT3aswellasUFD1Lareimpacted years of age, kidney biopsy with suspicion of a hereditary by CN losses in other patients. The contribution of the cause, extrarenal manifestations, and/or positive familial knownHSCRpredisposingriskhaplotypeswascomparable history/consanguinity. Variants were rated according to the between patients with a pathogenic coding variant and ACMG classiﬁcation. The clinical phenotype was assessed controls (P=0.826). All other HSCR subgroups differed using a standardized questionnaire. signiﬁcantly with controls and between each subgroup Results: In seven patients, (likely) pathogenic variants (P=0.02 or lower), patients with isolated HSCR and with- according to ACMG were identiﬁed in known disease- outaRETcodingvarianthadthehighestburden,unaffected causing genes (diagnostic yield: 20%). Three variants in controls the lowest. Our zebraﬁsh model reveals that dis- two different FSGS genes (INF2, TRP C6
) had to be ruption of six of these 9 genes - alone or via epistasis with classiﬁed as VUS (Table 1). ret- results in a HSCR phenotype. This conﬁrms the epi- Conclusions: The diagnostic yield of 20% highlights the static effect of losing a copy of a gene regulating enteric importance of genetic testing in patients <18 years of age nervous system development with the predisposed down- with nephrotic syndrome. Early genetic diagnosis could regulation of RET expression. allow a personalized treatment approach with weaning of L.Kuil:None.C.S. Tang:None.J.D.Windster: None. unnecessary immunosuppressive treatment, avoidance of T. Le: None. A. Karim: None. B.M. de Graaf: None. R. renal biopsies and provision of well-informed genetic vanderHelm:None.Y.vanBever:None.C.E.J.Sloots: counselling. None. C. Meeussen: None. D. Tibboel: None. A. deAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 217 Table 1. Results of exome sequencing Hereditary pulmonary arterial hypertension (hPAH) is an autosomal dominant disease caused, in most cases, by Study- Gen Nucleotide Amino Segregation Zygosity Solved/ ID (transcript) change acidchange VUS mutations in the BMPR2 gene. However, not all BMPR2 HN- WT1 c.598G>T p.(Gly170Cys) denovo heterozygous solved mutation carriers develop the disease, highlighting the F19- (NM_024426.4) II-1 presence of reduced penetrance. In order to identify geno- HN- INF2 c.224_256del p. n.d. heterozygous VUS mic regions that could be contributing to incomplete F20- (NM_022489.3) (Asp75_Ser85del) II-1 penetrance, high-throughput genotyping arrays and next ATS- CO L4
A3 c.1831G>A p.(Gly611Arg) p heterozygous solved F29- (NM_000091.4) c.4421T>C p.(Leu1474Pro) m heterozygous generation sequencing were conducted in an hPAH family. III-1 The family comprises 65Spanish individualsspanning ﬁve HN- NPH S2
 c.413G>A p.(Arg138Gln) n.d. heterozygous solved F201- (NM_014625.2) c.467dup p. heterozygous different generations. One BMPR2 mutation (c.1472G> A; II-1 (Leu156Phefs*11) HN- NPH S1
 c.515_517del p.(Thr172del) p,m homozygous solved p.Arg491Gln) was identiﬁed in 22 members, but only 9 of F227- (NM_004646.3) them developed the disease. The SNP arrays analysis was II-1 ATS- CO L4
A5 c.645+1G>T p.(?) n.d. heterozygous solved performed in 33 family members and we identiﬁed a F261- (NM_000945.4) II-1 genomic region in 2q24.3, located at 38 Mb from the HN- TRP C6
 c.2392G>C p.(Asp798His) n.d. heterozygous VUS BMPR2 gene, which could contribute to increase the sus- F324- (NM_004621.5) II-1 ceptibility of pulmonary hypertension in mutation carriers HN- TRP C6
 c.253_264dup p. p heterozygous VUS F327- (NM_004621.5) (Phe88_Ser89ins (Puigdevall et al., J Med Genet, 2019). Several genetic II-1 SerAspArgSer) association studies have identiﬁed variants in this region HN- LMX1B c.917_926del p. n.d. heterozygous solved F485- (NM_002316.3) (Met306Thrfs*50) associated with phenotypes involved in cardiovascular II-3 HN- PLC E1
 c.3346C>T p.(Arg1116*) n.d. homozygous solved pathology, such as hypertension or ischemic cardiomyo- F487- (NM_016341.3) pathy, which could be related to some of the symptoms of II-2 pulmonary hypertension. In order to identify the speciﬁc variant/s that may act as genetic modiﬁers of hPAH within m, maternal; n.d., not determined; p, paternal; VUS, the candidate region, we have performed whole-genome variant of unknown signiﬁcance sequencing in 16 BMPR2 mutation carriers: 6 affected S. Draut: None. M.C. Braunisch: None. K.M. Ried- individuals and 7 asymptomatic carriers. The identiﬁcation hammer: None. P.M. Herr: None. R. Günthner: None. ofapossiblegeneticmodiﬁerinthisfamilywillallowusto M. Wagner: None. B. Alhaddad: None. L. Renders: advance in our understanding of reduced penetrance None. U. Heemann: None. C. Schmaderer: None. J. in hPAH. Hoefele: None. Acknowledgments: ISCIIII (PI15/00483), ‘fondos FEDER’, Agència de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris i de  P03
.29.B Recerca (2017SGR1134), “CERCA Programme / General- Genetic linkage analysis identiﬁes a genomic region in itat de Catalunya” 2q24.3 as a candidate modulator of reduced penetrance I.Madrigal: None.I.Blanco:None.J.Barberà: None. in heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension. C.Badenas:None.D.Geiger:None.P.Puigdevall:None. L. Piccari: None. R. Castelo: None. I.Madrigal1,2,I.Blanco3,4,J.Barberà3,4,C.Badenas1,2,D. Geiger5, P. Puigdevall6, L. Piccari3, R. Castelo6,7  P03
.32.B HNF1B-related syndrome: genotype-phenotype 1Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, IDIBAPS, Hospital correlation Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomé- dica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barce- C. P. Cristalli1,2, A. Mattiaccio2, C. Graziano3, I. Capelli1, lona, Spain, 3Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Institut O. Baraldi1, G. Comai1, M. Pariali2,3, L. Gargano2,3, d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDI- M. Seri3, G. La Manna1, V. Mantovani2,3 BAPS), Barcelona, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación Biomé- dica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), 1Nephrology Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, DIMES, Madrid, Spain, 5Faculty of Computer Science, Technion Bologna University, Bologna, Italy, 2Center for Applied IsraelInstituteofTechnology,Haifa,Israel,6Departmentof Biomedical Reasearch (CRBA), Bologna University, Experimental and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Bologna, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 7nstitut Hospital del Mar University Hospital, Bologna, Italy d’Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain Molecular defects of HNF1B are associated with RCAD syndrome,aclinicallyheterogeneousdisordercharacterized218 J.delPicchia by diabetes (MODY5), kidney abnormalities (cysts), cho- Immunochipgenotypeswereavailable.Weightedpolygenic lestasis and uro-genital malformations. We performed tar- risk scores (PRS) were calculated using PRSice-2.0 across getedNGSof15genesandMLPAon118patientsrecruited different p-value thresholds (pTs), and compared between bynephrologyordiabetologyunits.19indexcasesshowed groups.TheassociationbetweenPRSandfamilialIBDwas molecular defects in HNF1B gene (10 pediatric and 9 further evaluated in age- and sex-adjusted generalized adult).Sixpatientscarriedalikelypathogenicnovelvariant mixed regression models including family id as random (p.G83D p.R295C, c.-67C>T, c.1207-1G>A, p. S379
*, p. effect. Using pT=0.05, the affected relatives had a higher Q484Sfs*22)and4aVUS(p.G76C,p. E105
K,p.A453T,p. PRS than unaffected relatives (P=1.0x10−02), sporadic M532V). A functional analysis for c.-67C>T indicated cases (P=4.6x10−02), and non-IBD controls (P < 2.2x reduced activity in Caco2 and Mcf7 cells. Nine cases 10−16). The risk of IBD in families increased by 1.23-fold showed the whole HNF1B gene deletion (de novo in ﬁve for every incremental standard deviation in PRS. However, patients). The median age of diagnosis was 19 (SNVs) and the proportion of the explained variance between affected 6 (deletion) years old, respectively. Clinical presentation and unaffected family members was smaller than that included earlier onset in deleted patients (median 6 vs 19 between sporadic IBD and non-IBD controls (5% versus years) and different spatial cysts localization (cortical for 17%, respectively). Of note, in familial IBD, variance SNVs and medullary in at least 3 deleted cases). Diabetes explainedbythePRSdroppeddramaticallyforpT>0.01.A was present in six patients only, possibly due to the young plausible hypothesis is that while familial cases differ from age of many cases involved. Two patients with urogenital sporadic cases in low-risk (high p-value) variants, familial malformation and 3 with cholestasis were identiﬁed. A 21- cases differ from their unaffected relatives mostly in high- year-old woman had mild developmental delay: additional risk (low p-value) variants. Higher PRS increases the risk array-CGH was performed and a large (1.3 Mb) deletion forfamilialIBDasitdoesforsporadicIBD.Theproportion was found. Contrary, a 29-years-old man homozygous for of the explained variance in families however is limited, p.G83D did not show intellectual disability. In conclusion, because of shared genetic background between family the patients with SNVs developed a milder phenotype than members. BIRD Grant those deleted, and the molecular defects were frequently of H. Lee: None. L. Hannes: None. M. Vancamelbeke: de novo origin. We conﬁrm the wide phenotypic hetero- None. V. Ballet: None. M. Ferrante: B. Research Grant geneity of HNF1B-related disorders and we point out that (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and liver disease can be a major complication. pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; C.P. Cristalli: None. A. Mattiaccio: None. C. Gra- Amgen, Biogen, Janssen, Pﬁzer, Takeda. D. Speakers ziano: None. I. Capelli: None. O. Baraldi: None. G. Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert Comai: None. M. Pariali: None. L. Gargano: None. M. witness); Modest; Abbvie, Amgen, Biogen, Boehringer- Seri: None. G. La Manna: None. V. Mantovani: None. Ingelheim, Falk, Ferring, Janssen, Lamepro, MSD, Mylan, Pﬁzer, Takeda. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;  P03
.33.C Abbvie, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Janssen, MSD, Pﬁzer, Impact of common genetic risk variants on familial Sandoz,Takeda.S.Vermeire:B.ResearchGrant(principal aggregation of inﬂammatory bowel disease investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; MSD, Abbvie, H. Lee1,2, L. Hannes1, M. Vancamelbeke1, V. Ballet3, M. Takeda, Janssen, Pﬁzer. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria Ferrante3,4, S. Vermeire3,4, I. Cleynen1 (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; AbbVie, MSD, Takeda, Ferring, Hospira, Pﬁzer, Janssen, 1KULeuven,Leuven,Belgium,2UniversityofUlsanCollege and Tillots. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Abb- of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3University Vie,MSD,Takeda,Ferring,Genentech/Roche,Shire,Pﬁzer Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4KU leuven, Leuven, Inc, Galapagos, Mundipharma, Hospira, Celgene, Second Belgium Genome, Progenity, Lilly, Arena, Gilead and Janssen. I. Cleynen: None. Family history is the strongest risk factor for inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD). The contribution of common genetic  P03
.34.A variants to familial aggregation in multiple-affected IBD Combined exome/genome sequencing with in-house families, however, remains unclear. We included 54 variant data repository mining conﬁrm US P53
 as a multiple-affected families (≥ 3 ﬁrst-degree relatives affec- causal gene for intrahepatic cholestasis ted),including189affected(IBD),and133unaffectedﬁrst- degree relatives; as well as 1768 sporadic cases and 868 S. Alawbathani1, M. Rocha1, H. Arshad Cheema2, R. unrelated non-IBD controls. For all individuals, Boustany3, S. Nampoothiri4, A. Alswaid5, N. El Koofy6,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 219 V.Karageorgou1,I.Hövel1,S.Khan1,C.Beetz1,A.Rolfs1,7, part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. P. Bauer1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1 P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. A. M. Bertoli-Avella: 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Children’s Hospital A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene and Institute of Child Health, Lahore, Pakistan, 3AUBMC AG, Rostock, Germany. American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon, 4Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Kerala,  P03
.35.B India,5KingAbdulazizMedicalCity,Riyadh,SaudiArabia, A common haplotype of the alternative serotonin 6Abu El Reesh Children’s Hospital, Cairo, Egypt, 7Uni- transporter gene SL C6
A4 promoter  P2
 impacts gene versity of Rostock, Rostock, Germany expressionandshowsdiseaseassociationinwomenwith Irritable Bowel Syndrome Cholestatic liver disease is a signiﬁcant cause of morbidity and mortality in the paediatric population, starting in the S.Mohr1,N.Hattensperger1,C.Hammer2,C.Martinez3,S. early postnatal life. Severity is variable, from benign idio- Berens4, S. Schmitteckert1, L. A. Houghton5,6, M. Goebel- pathic neonatal hepatitis to intrahepatic cholestasis leading Stengel7, I. Vulic8, M. D’Amato9,10, T. Zheng9,10, H. to liver failure and transplant. There are several genes Mönnikes11, F. Engel4, A. Gauss12, J. Tesarz4, described for different genetic diseases that lead to choles- V. Andresen13, T. Frieling14, J. Keller13, C. Pehl15, tasis. US P53
 has been recently suggested as a candidate G. Clarke16, R. Spiller17, T. G. Dinan16, E. M. Quigley16, gene for paediatric intrahepatic cholestasis based on one C. Beltrán18, E. A. Mayer19, G. Sayuk20, M. Gazouli21, family with two affected siblings. Interestingly, US P53
 L. Kapur-Pojskic8, M. Bustamante22, K. Rabionet22, interacts with tight junction protein 2 (TJ P2
) for which X. Estivil22, G. Boeckxstaens23, M. M. Wouters23, pathogenicvariantsareknowntocauseprogressivefamilial M. Simrén24, G. A. Rappold1, M. Vicario25, J. Santos25, intrahepatic cholestasis. To date, the US P53
 gene has not R. Schäfert4,26, J. Lorenzo Bermejo27, B. Niesler1 beenlinkedtoanOMIMphenotype.Bycombiningexome/ genome sequencing and mining our in-house variant data- 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg basewe identiﬁedﬁvepatients fromunrelatedfamilies.All University, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Department of Cancer affected individuals display a similar phenotype, mainly Immunology, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, United including early onset intrahepatic cholestasis. Moreover, States, 3Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida, Lleida, onefamilyshowedhearinglossasanadditionalphenotype. Spain, 4Department of General Internal Medicine and Allpatientswerehomozygotesfordifferentloss-of-function Psychosomatics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidel- variants in the US P53
 gene. US P53
 (ubiquitin speciﬁc berg, Germany, 5Division of Gastroenterology & Surgical peptidase 53) is a tight junction-associated protein that is Sciences, Leeds, United Kingdom, 6Mayo Clinic, Jackson- known to involve in the survival of auditory hair cells and ville, FL, United States, 7Helios Klinikum Rottweil, hearing. Our results conﬁrm US P53
 as a novel gene for Rottweil, Germany, 8Institute for Genetic Engineering and autosomal recessive intrahepatic cholestasis. Additionally, Biotechnology,Sarajevo,BosniaandHerzegovina, 9School we demonstrate that combined exome/genome sequencing of BioSciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, and variant database mining is an effective approach to 10Karolinska Institute, Solna, Sweden, 11Martin-Luther- discoverandconﬁrmnovelgenesrelatedtohumandiseases. Krankenhaus, Berlin, Germany, 12Department of Gastro- Thisacceleratetheprocessofgenediscoveryandultimately enterology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, shortens the diagnostic odyssey in rare genetic disorders. Germany, 13Israelitisches Krankenhaus, Hamburg, Ger- S. Alawbathani: A. Employment (full or part-time); many, 14Helios Klinik Krefeld, Krefeld, Germany, 15Kran- Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG,Rostock,Germany.M.Rocha: kenhaus Vilsbiburg, Vilsbiburg, Germany, 16Department of A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Science, University Col- AG, Rostock, Germany. H. Arshad Cheema: None. R. lege Cork, Cork, Ireland, 17Nottingham Digestive Diseases Boustany: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. A. Alswaid: Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United None. N. El Koofy: None. V. Karageorgou: A. Employ- Kingdom, 18Laboratory of Immuno-Gastroenterology, Uni- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG, versidaddeChile,SantiagodeChile,Chile,19Oppenheimer Rostock, Germany. I. Hövel: A. Employment (full or CentreforNeurobiologyofStress,UniversityofCalifornia, part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. Los Angeles, CA, United States, 20Washington University S. Khan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; SchoolofMedicine,St.Louis,MO,UnitedStates,21Biology Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. C. Beetz: A. Employ- National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG, School Athens, Athens, Greece, 22Centre for Genomic Rostock, Germany. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 23TARGID, University220 J.delPicchia Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 24Institute of Medicine, None.G.A.Rappold:None.M.Vicario:None.J.Santos: University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 25Institut None. R. Schäfert: None. J. Lorenzo Bermejo: None. de Recerca Vall d’Hebron, Hospital Vall d’Hebron, B. Niesler: None. Barcelona, Spain, 26Universitätsspital Basel, Basel, Swit- zerland, 27Institute of Medical Biometry and Informatics,  P03
.36.C Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany Application of NGS sequencing for improved diagnosis in the pediatric nephrology setting Background:Irritablebowelsyndrome(IBS)isagut-brain disorder in which imbalances within the central and per- O. Beltcheva1, K. Kamenarova1, K. Mihova1, G. ipheral serotonergic systems contribute to disease patho- Zlatanova2,F.Shakola1,D.Roussinov2,M.Gaydarova2,V. physiologyandtherebyshapethephenotype.Theserotonin Mitev1, R. Kaneva1 transportergeneSL C6
A4hasearlierbeenimplicatedinIBS. Material and Methods: We sequenced the alternative 1Molecular Medicine Center, Dept. of Medical Chemistry promoter P2
thatprimarilydrivesSL C6
A4expressioninthe and Biochemistry, Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bul- gut and analyzed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) garia, 2SBAL Pediatric Diseases, Nephrology and Hemo- for association with IBS. We also assessed their functional dialysis Clinic, Department of Pediatrics, Medical relevance by gene reporter assays, in silico analysis and University - Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria comparative expression studies. In addition, we correlated detected SNPs with expression data and IBS symptoms. Introduction: Renal disease ﬁrst diagnosed in childhood Results: Detected SNPs were linked in different haplo- oftenprogressestowardschronicorend-stagekidneyfailure types and the tagging SNP rs2020938 associated with inadults.Identifyingthemolecularcauseoftheconditionin femaleIBSwithconstipation(IBS-C)inadiscoverysample each case may allow a more personalized approach to comprising 287 individuals. Subsequent validation and therapy and consequently increase the likelihood of pre- meta-analysis of rs2020938 in 2175 IBS patients and 6128 serving the renal function of the patients in adulthood. controlsfromeightcountriesconﬁrmedtheassociationwith Materials and Methods: TruSight One Sequencing female IBS-C. Expression data obtained from different Panel (Illumina) on MiSeq platform was used for mutation intestinal regions showed that the alternative promoter screening in 10 children with hematuria, proteinuria and/or drives SERT expression primarily in the small intestine. compromised renal function, who did not respond well to Additionally, gene reporter assays pointed to a functional standard treatment or presented with unusual course of the impact of the SNPs within this region. In silico analyses disease. Sanger sequencing was applied for conﬁrmation indicated differential expression regulation by transcription and establishing the origin of the mutations. The patho- factorsthathavepreviouslybeenimplicatedinGIdisorders. genicity of each novel variant was evaluated according to Further follow up in tissue samples and clinical data from the established ACMG criteria. IBSpatientsandcontrolsrevealedthatrs2020938correlates Results: The NGS yielded both known and novel with differential expression in the jejunum and stool mutations in the sample set. In addition to well-known consistency. genes, such as WT1, GATA3, SAL L1
, AGXT and Conclusions: Our results indicate differential expression CO L4
A4/5,theanalysisofthedatarevealedthatpathogenic regulation driven by a functionally relevant polymorphic variants in CD96, HNF1? and TREX1 may also contribute promoter in female IBS-C and consolidates the importance to the etiology of renal disease in children. of SL C6
A4 in IBS pathogenesis. Conclusions:Theapplicationofmassiveparallelsequen- S. Mohr: None. N. Hattensperger: None. C. Hammer: cing of a large gene panel allowed us to identify the None. C. Martinez: None. S. Berens: None. S. Schmit- molecular cause of renal disease in a number of pediatric teckert:None.L.A.Houghton:None.M.Goebel-Stengel: patients where diagnoses were hindered by atypical None. I. Vulic: None. M. D’Amato: None. T. Zheng: presentation. In several of the cases the ﬁndings allowed None. H. Mönnikes: None. F. Engel: None. A. Gauss: us to expand the clinical spectrum of the phenotypic None. J. Tesarz: None. V. Andresen: None. T. Frieling: presentation of the mutations in certain genes. None. J. Keller: None. C. Pehl: None. G. Clarke: None. Grant references: D-73/2019; D01-285/17.12.2019 R.Spiller:None.T.G.Dinan:None.E.M.Quigley:None. O. Beltcheva: None. K. Kamenarova: None. C. Beltrán: None. E.A. Mayer: None. G. Sayuk: None. K. Mihova: None. G. Zlatanova: None. F. Shakola: M. Gazouli: None. L. Kapur-Pojskic: None. M. Busta- None. D. Roussinov: None. M. Gaydarova: None. V. mante: None. K. Rabionet: None. X. Estivil: None. G. Mitev: None. R. Kaneva: None. Boeckxstaens: None. M.M. Wouters: None. M. Simrén:Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 221  P03
.37.A candidategene,re-sequencingofLUTOpatientstoidentify New LUTO-candidate genes identiﬁed by systematic further mutation carriers and functional characterization in analysis of copy number variations in 152 patients zebraﬁsh is warranted. Acknowledgment: A.C.H. is supported by BONFOR L. M. Schierbaum1,2, J. Fabian2, S. Herms3, S. grant O-149.0123. Sivalingam2,3, S. Schneider2, S. Weber4, W. Rösch5, W. M. L.M. Schierbaum: None. J. Fabian: None. S. Herms: Merz6,M.Feldkötter7,H.Reutter8,2,B.Hoppe1,G.Schalk1, None. S. Sivalingam: None. S. Schneider: None. S. M. Zaniew9, A. Hilger1,2 Weber: None. W. Rösch: None. W.M. Merz: None. M. Feldkötter:None.H.Reutter:None.B.Hoppe:None.G. 1Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pedia- Schalk: None. M. Zaniew: None. A. Hilger: None. trics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Children’s Hospital, University of  P03
.38.B Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Genomics, Life & ZSCAN12,acandidategeneforcongenitallowerurinary Brain Centre, Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics, tract obstruction (LUTO) UniversityHospital Marburg,Marburg,Germany,5Depar- ment of Pediatric Urology, St. Hedwig Krankenhaus L. Waffenschmidt1, S. Schneider1, J. Altmüller2,3, H. Barmherzige Brüder, Regensburg, Germany, 6Department Thiele4,S.Weber5,W.Rösch6,W.M.Merz7,M.Feldkötter8, of Obstetrics and Prenatal Medicine, University of Bonn, B. Hoppe9, G. Schalk9, M. Zaniew10, H. Reutter1,11, M. F. Bonn, Germany, 7Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Schreuder12,13,G.M.A.Beckers14,J.A.E.vanWijk12,A.C. Children’s Hospital, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzer- Hilger1,9 land, 8Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, Children’s Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Children’s Hospital, Uni- Germany, 9Department of Pediatrics, University of Zielona versity of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Center for Molecular Góra, Zielona Góra, Poland Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Cologne Center for Genomics, Uni- Introduction: Lower urinary tract obstruction (LUTO) is versity of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4University of caused by anatomical blockage of the bladder outﬂow tract Leipzig-Heart Center, Department of Internal Medicine/ or by functional impairment of urinary voiding. For ana- Cardiology, Leipzig, Germany, 5Department of Pediatrics, tomical blockages so far only variants in BN C2
 have been University Hospital Marburg, Marburg, Germany, described as causal. Genomic copy number variations 6Department of Pediatric Urology, St. Hedwig Kranken- (CNVs) have been previously described as a cause of hausBarmherzigeBrüder,Regensburg,Germany,7Depart- congenital anomalies of the kidneys and the urinary tract. ment of Obstetrics and Prenatal Medicine, University of Used Methods: Array-based molecular karyotyping was Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 8Division of Pediatric Nephrology, performed in 152 LUTO patients. Raw intensity data were Children’s Hospital, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzer- collected for all persons and CNVs were called with land, 9Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of CNVPartition, QuantiSNP and PennCNV. Using PLINK Pediatrics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, version1.07andExceltheCNVs,identiﬁedinthepatients, 10Department of Pediatrics, University of Zielona Góra, were compared to CNVs of 4168 controls. Overlapping Zielona Góra, Poland, 11Department of Neonatology and CNVs between both groups were discarded. Further PediatricIntensiveCare,Children’sHospital,Universityof ﬁltering steps were used. Bonn,Bonn,Germany,12DepartmentofPediatricNephrol- Results: We identiﬁed 30 potential disease causing ogy, VU University Medical Center, Pediatric Nephro- CNVs: 8 deletions and 22 duplications. Based on expres- urology Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 13Department of sion of the comprised genes in developing mouse urethra Pediatric Nephrology, Erasmus MC – Sophia Children’s we prioritized 6 CNVs. One of those CNVs comprised the Hospital, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Nether- gene GP C5
 (MIM 602446), located on chromosome lands, 14Department of Pediatric Urology, VU University 13q31.3.Interestingly,of8patientsreportedintheliterature Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands with 13q duplications that comprise GP C5
, four showed urogenital malformations. So far, GP C5
 was not yet Congenital lower urinary tract obstruction (LUTO) is correlated with a speciﬁc clinical phenotype. usually characterised by urinary bladder outﬂow obstruc- Conclusions: Systematic analysis of copy number tion,itcanbefunctional,basedonacongenitaldysfunction variations in patients with LUTO is suitable for the invoidingoronanatomicalblockageoftheurethra.LUTO identiﬁcation of new candidate genes. We prioritized has a birth prevalence of about three per 10.000 GP C5
 as candidate gene. For further veriﬁcation of this pregnancies.222 J.delPicchia Whole-Exome-Sequencing (WES) in eight families yearsofage,whole-exomeanalysisofthesamplesfromthe revealed two rare variants in the ZSCAN12 gene. The ﬁrst patient and her parents was performed. The de novo non- variant (c.1695-2A>C, minor allel frequency (MAF): synonymousvariant(c.602C>T)andthematernallyderived 0,00005814) was identiﬁed in three affected brothers, the heterozygous frameshift variant (c.1396dup) were detected second variant (c.62T>C; p.Ile21Thr, MAF: 0,00002595) intheLSRgene.Immunohistochemicalstainingusinganti- wasidentiﬁedinanaffectedfatherandhisaffectedson.Re- LSR antibodies showed absent expression of LSR at the sequencing of ZSCAN12 in 263 LUTO patients identiﬁed tricellular tight junctions in the patient. Documentation of three further patients who all carried the same variant biallelic pathogenic variants of the LSR gene and lack of c.637T>C,p.Phe213Leu(MAF:0.0002046).Ithasnotbeen LSR protein expression in the liver in our patient with reported homozygous. Currently no genetic material of the infantile intrahepatic cholestasis presented in this report parents is available for testing. establishes LSR deﬁciency as a novel cause of infantile ZSCAN12isexpressedinthedevelopingmouseurethraat intrahepatic cholestasis. embryonic day 15.5 (GUDMAP: 5824; GUDMAP Con- T.Uehara:None.M.Yamada:None.S.Umetsu:None. sortium)andhasbeenfoundtobedifferentiallymethylated H. Nittono: None. H. Suzuki: None. T. Fujisawa: None. in prostate carcinoma. T. Takenouchi: None. A. Inui: None. K. Kosaki: None. Basedonthesepreliminarydata wesuggestZSCAN12 as a novel LUTO candidate gene. Further functional studies  P03
.40.A are warranted. Neo-TAD formation on 7q36.3 causes lung agenesis in A.C.H. is supported by BONFOR grants O-149.0123. three affected fetuses L. Waffenschmidt: None. S. Schneider: None. J. Altmüller: None. H. Thiele: None. S. Weber: None. W. U. Melo1, J. Piard2, M. Klever3, M. Mensa4, R. Schöpﬂin3, Rösch: None. W.M. Merz: None. M. Feldkötter: None. M.Holtgrewe3,F.Arbez-Gindre2,V.Guigue2,D.Gaillard2, B. Hoppe: None.G. Schalk: None.M. Zaniew: None. H. V. Kremer2, R. Ramanah2, C. Cabrol2, D. Beule3, F. Reutter: None. M.F. Schreuder: None. G.M.A. Beckers: Harms3, K. Kutsche3, M. Spielmann3, B. Fischer-Zirnsak3, None. J.A.E. van Wijk: None. A.C. Hilger: None. L. Van Maldergem3, S. Mundlos3  P03
.39.C 1MPI, Berlin, Germany, 23Centre de Génétique Humaine, BiallelicmutationsintheLSRgenecauseanoveltypeof Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, 31Max infantile intrahepatic cholestasis Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development & Disease, Berlin, Germany, Berlin, Germany, 41Max T. Uehara1, M. Yamada1, S. Umetsu2, H. Nittono3, H. Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development Suzuki1, T. Fujisawa2, T. Takenouchi4, A. Inui2, K. Kosaki1 &Disease,Berlin,Germany,Berlin,DominicanRepublic 1Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University Hospital, Lung development is a tightly regulated process under the Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Pediatric Hepatology and controlofalargenumberofsignalingmolecules.Thesonic Gastroenterology, Saiseikai Yokohama-shi Tobu Hospital, hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is one of the main Kanagawa, Japan, 3Junshin Clinic BA Institute, Tokyo, regulators of lung development during embryogenesis and Japan, 4Department of Pediatrics, Keio University Hospi- mutations in SHH-related genes can lead to lung mal- tal, Tokyo, Japan formation.Herewereport onthree fetuses fromonefamily with severe malformation of the respiratory system. By LSR is expressed in the liver and other organs, and repre- ultrasound screening and autopsy after termination, a sentsacomponentproteinoftricellulartightjunctions.The completebilaterallungagenesisandnear-completeagenesis roles of LSR in human health and disease have not been of the tracheae was observed in all fetuses. Using a com- established. Only one patient with intrahepatic cholestasis binationofarray-CGH,Illuminawhole-genomesequencing with a rare variant of LSR has been reported. Herein, we andHi-Cweidentiﬁedacomplexrearrangementat7q36.3, reportapatientwhofulﬁlledthiscriterionestablishingLSR ~580 kb downstream the SHH gene. The rearrangement deﬁciency as a novel cause of human liver disease. The consistedofa449kbtriplication,a232kbduplicationanda proband was a 5-year-old female patient. At 5 months of 61 kb deletion, involving parts of the SHH and NOM1/ age,theinfantdevelopedsevereanduncontrollableitching. MNX1/UB E3
C topologically associated domains (TADs). Theresultsofbloodexaminationat9monthsofageshowed Due to incorporation of a boundary between two TADs in elevatedserumAST,ALTandTBA.Herverbalmilestones the triplicated CNV, the rearrangements lead to the forma- were slightly delayed. A needle biopsy of the liver at 5 tion of two neo-TADs each containing the known SHH years of age showed paucity of interlobular bile duct. At 6 enhancer MAC S1
 which is now placed next to MNX1, aAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 223 transcription factor involved in caudal development. This affected allele was identiﬁed: N S1414
 had a stop-gain var- situationcanbeexpectedtoresultinanectopicactivationof iant, c.1084C>T;p.(R362*), located on kelch-5 domain; MNX1 in the lung at a time and place where SHH is nor- N S895
presentedc.742G>A;p.(G248R),whichliesinkelch- mally expressed; a misexpression that likely explains the 4 domain; N S883
 presented c.851G>A;p.(R284H), located lungaplasia.Therearrangementwaspresentinmosaicstate on kelch-5 domain; N S1199
 presented a splicing variant, intheclinicallyunaffectedfather,explainingtherecurrence c.791+1G>T; and the patient 99 was heterozygous for of the phenotype in his offspring’s. Thus, whole-genome c.905C>T;p.(Ala302Glu), located on kelch-5 domain. sequencing in combination with Hi-C is a powerful tool to Overall, these cases provide more evidence on the clinical resolve and functionally interpret complex rearrangements. phenotype of NS associated with LZTR1 variants. These U. Melo: None. J. Piard: None. M. Klever: None. M. results are in accordance with the model that speciﬁes that Mensa: None. R. Schöpﬂin: None. M. Holtgrewe: None. the location throughout the gene determines the inheritance F. Arbez-Gindre: None. V. Guigue: None. D. Gaillard: form of NS. Our experience indicates that LZTR1 is a not None.V.Kremer:None.R.Ramanah:None.C.Cabrol: infrequent cause of NS, so this gene should be included in None. D. Beule: None. F. Harms: None. K. Kutsche: next-sequencing panels for molecular diagnosis of NS. None.M.Spielmann:None.B.Fischer-Zirnsak:None.L. Van Maldergem: None. S. Mundlos: None. Patient N S1564
 N S960
 N S1414
 N S895
 N S883
 N S1199
 N S99
 Sex Male Male Female Male Female Female Female Face Typical Suggestive Suggestive Typical Suggestive Suggestive Typical  P03
.41.B dismorphology Short/webbedneck Yes Yes No No Yes No No Recessive and dominant patterns in Noonan Syndrome Chestwall Broad No No Pectus Pectus No No deformity thorax excavatum carinatum associated with LZTR1 variants Shortstature Yes Yes No No No No Yes Cardiacdefect HCM HCM HCM PVS(mild) HCM HCM HCM Cryptorchidism Yes Yes Yes A. Cambra1, M. López-Blázquez2, J. Sánchez del Pozo3, J. Ddeelvayelopmental Yes No Yes No No Yes No Prenatalﬁndings Yes No No No No No No Cruz-Rojo3, M. Güemes4, A. Carcavilla5, V. Seidel6, C. Medrano2, B. Ezquieta1 A. Cambra: None. M. López-Blázquez: None. J. 1Molecular DiagnosticLaboratory, DepartmentofLabora- Sánchez del Pozo: None. J. Cruz-Rojo: None. M. tory Medicine, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Güemes: None. A. Carcavilla: None. V. Seidel: None. Marañón, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio C. Medrano: None. B. Ezquieta: None. Marañón (IiSGM), Madrid, Spain, 2Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital General Universitario  P03
.42.C Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 3Pediatric Endocrinol- Proﬁling of microRNA isoforms in ulcerative colitis ogy,DepartmentofPediatrics,HospitalUniversitario12de Octubre,Madrid,Spain,4PediatricEndocrinology,Depart- D. Nikitina1, S. Juzėnas1,2, V. Šaltenienė1, A. Franke2, G. ment of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario Niño Jesús, Kiudelis3, J. Kupčinskas1,3, L. Kupčinskas1,3, J. Madrid, Spain, 5Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Skiecevičienė1 Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 6Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital 1Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Medical Acad- GeneralUniversitarioGregorioMarañón,Madrid,Spain emy, Institute for Digestive Research, Laboratory of Clinical and Molecular Gastroenterology, Kaunas, Lithua- Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disease nia, 2Kiel University, Institute of Clinical Molecular causedbygermlinemutationsingenesinvolvedintheRas/ Biology, Kiel, Germany, 3Lithuanian University of Health MAPK pathway. Nevertheless, a recessive form related to Sciences, Medical Academy, Department of Gastroenterol- biallelic variants in LZTR1 gene was described in 2018. ogy, Kaunas, Lithuania Followingpublicationsdiscussedphenotypeandinheritance patterns associated with this gene. Here we report seven Introduction:Recentresearchhasshownthatsofarwidely unrelated patients with clinically suspected NS and LZTR1 studied reference miRNA sequences in miRNA databases variants. Clinical features are provided in table1. Three have a large number of isoforms that can be involved in novel variants and four previously reported variants were other physiological pathways compared to the reference identiﬁed. Two patients, N S1564
 and N S960
, presented a miRNA. Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic disease of the recessive form of NS. In the ﬁrst patient, c.2074T>C;p. digestivesystemoftheautoimmuneoriginandisattributed (F692L) and c.2070-2A>G were identiﬁed and the second to the group of inﬂammatory bowel diseases. The aim of onewashomozygousforc.2074T>C;p.(F692L),bothaffect this study was to perform isomiRNA analysis in ulcerative the BTB/POZ domain. In the rest of patients only one colitis tissue.224 J.delPicchia Materials and Methods: In total, 76 individuals were performed followed by direct sequencing using BigDye included in this study (32 controls, 24 patients with active Terminator v.3.1 Cycle Sequencing kit. UC and 20 patients with UC in remission phase). Small Results: The GCKR  P446
L gene polymorphism was RNAsequencingwasperformed usingtheTruSeqprotocol found in 75.0% (24/32) of the study participants (homo- or and the HiSeq2500 platform (Illumina, USA). Bioinfor- heterozygous carriers). It was signiﬁcantly higher in matic microRNA analysis was performed using the homozygouspatientswithNAFLDthaninhealthycontrols followingsoftwaretools:MiRDeep2,mirAligner,Cutadapt, (54.5%vs.10.0%,p=0.025).PNPLA3I148Mwasdetected FASTX, RNAfold, Bowtie, BioPerl, BLASTn and R. in 9 of the patients and 7 of the controls. TM6SF2  E167
K Results: The analysis revealed that the reference micro- was the rarest genetic variant, only 3 children (2 patients RNAsequencesmakeup2.1%ofallmicroRNAsequences and1healthychild)werecarriers.Twoofthepatients,who and 97.9% are microRNA isoforms. Altered microRNAs underwent liver biopsy had signiﬁcant ﬁbrosis F2. Patient and their isoforms (padj <0.01, log2FC> | 0.9 |) were N1washomozygousforPNPLA3I148Mandheterozygous detected in three groups: (i) active UC group compared to for GCKR  P446
L. Patient N2 was GCKR  P446
L hetero- the HC (healthy control group) - 874; (ii) UC in the zygous carrier. remission group compared to the HC - 93; (iii) active UC Conclusions: GCKR  P446
L polymorphism is associated group compared to UC remission group - 632. The with development of NAFLD in Bulgarian children. expression of 9 isomiRNA was strongly correlated with Medical University Soﬁa, Grant "Young Investigator" the intensity of the inﬂammation (rho> 0.7). Contract № D-142/02.05.2017 Conclusions: An altered proﬁle of microRNAs and their D. Koﬁnova: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, isoforms was found in UC colon tissue, which also collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as correlated with inﬂammation intensity. grantsalreadyreceived);Modest;MedicalUniversitySoﬁa, D. Nikitina: None. S. Juzėnas: None. V. Šaltenienė: Grant"YoungInvestigator"Contract№D-142/02.05.2017. None. A. Franke: None. G. Kiudelis: None. J. Kupčins- I. Yordanova: None. P. Hadzhiyski: None. R. Shentova- kas:None.L.Kupčinskas:None.J.Skiecevičienė:None. Eneva: None. M. Baycheva: None. P. Yaneva: None. M. Panayotova: None. A. Todorova: None. D. Avdjieva-  P03
.43.A Tzavella: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Screening for genetic polymorphisms in Bulgarian collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as children with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease grantsalreadyreceived);Modest;MedicalUniversitySoﬁa, Grant"YoungInvestigator"Contract№D-142/02.05.2017. D. Koﬁnova1, I. Yordanova2, P. Hadzhiyski1, R. Shentova- Eneva1, M. Baycheva1, P. Yaneva1, M. Panayotova3, A.  P03
.44.B Todorova2, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1 Molecular characterization of familial intrahepatic cholestasis by multi-gene panel analysis 1University Children’s Hospital "Prof. Ivan Mitev", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, A.Mattiaccio1,2,G.Vitale3,C.P.Cristalli1,M.Pariali1,4,L. Soﬁa,Bulgaria,3TrakiaHospital,StaraZagora,Bulgaria Gargano1,4, M. Seri4, P. Andreone5,2, V. Mantovani1,4 Introduction:Non-alcoholicfattyliverdisease(NAFLD)is 1CenterforAppliedBiomedicalResearch(CRBA),Bologna a highly prevalent liver disease in children. NAFLD is University, Bologna, Italy, 2DIMEC, Bologna University, associated with insulin resistance, obesity, and dyslipide- Bologna, Italy, 3Internal Medicine for the Treatment of mia. NAFLD is a multifactorial disease. Growing evidence Severe Organ Failure, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, suggest theleading role of certaingene variants, associated Bologna, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi withrapidprogressionoftheliverdiseaseanddyslipidemia. University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 5Department of Med- The aim of this study was to investigate whether various ical and Surgical Sciences, Maternal, Child and Adult single-nucleotide polymorphisms play any role in the Sciences, University Hospital, Modena, Italy development of NAFLD in Bulgarian children. Materials and Methods: We prospectively included 22 Introduction:ProgressiveFamilialIntrahepaticCholestasis patients with NAFLD and 10 healthy controls. Ten of the (PFIC) is a group of autosomal recessive diseases that children with NAFLD underwent liver biopsy. PCR affects especially newborns and children, with progression ampliﬁcation with speciﬁc primers pairs for variants in the toliverfailure intheﬁrstdecadesoflife. PFIC isclassiﬁed genesPNPLA3(c.444C>G,p.I148M),GCKR(c.1337C>T, into ﬁve types (PFI C1
-5) based on the genetic defect p. P446
L) and TM6SF2 (c.499C>T, p. E167
K) was involved in bile transport. Other benign late-onset pheno- types and non-progressive forms (BRIC, LPAC, DIC andAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 225 ICP) are caused by heterozygous mutations in the same wasextractedfromhealthycontrolmice,Nnt-deﬁcientmice gene pattern. and Nnt-rescued mice (Nnt reinserted at the blastocyst Materials and Methods: DNA analysis of 15 candidate stage) and their telomeres analysed. Two qPCR methods genesinvolvedinPFICandotherrelatedbenignphenotypes were used: mmQPCR to assess relative telomere length was carried out. Amplicon-based NGS on 80 patients was (RTL), and a formamidopyrimidine DNA glycosylase performed. Bioinformatic and statistic pipelines were (FPG) enzyme-based qPCR method to directly determine applied. the extent of telomere oxidation. Analysis of RTL from Results: A total of 184 different variants has been kidney revealed no signiﬁcant difference (p>0.05) between identiﬁed in our cohort: 18 pathogenic, 46 VUS, 44 likely the three groups. This is predictable since rapidly dividing benign and 76 benign. P/LP mutations were found in 12% leucocytes probably best represent early life replicative of patients: 2 in AT P8
B1, 3 in ABCB11, ABCB4 and TJ P2
 responses and tissues such as kidney, a slowly dividing each, one in ABC C2
, JAG1, NOTCH2. Many patients had tissue, represents the heritable load of TL. QPCR analysis multiplevariantsinseveralgenes.Patientshadfrom7to35 oftheDNAextracts,beforeandafterFPGdigestionshowed variants each and some SNPs were signiﬁcantly associated there was no signiﬁcant difference in the ΔCT values with biochemical parameters and phenotypic features that between the three groups (p>0.05), implying there was no couldbetterexplainclinicsandacceleratetheprogressionto discernible difference in telomere oxidation levels. Further liver failure. analysiswillinvestigatetissueswithvariablemetabolicand Conclusions: Our detection rate is according to other cellular turnover rates such as the brain, spleen, liver, heart studies proposing multi-gene panels. Our analysis may be and adipose tissue. useful for the molecular diagnostics of PFIC and a better E. Kidd: None. J. Pender: None. M.J. Gatt: None. J. characterization and understanding of the linking between Williams: None. A.A.I.F. Blakemore: None. E. Meimar- moleculardefectsanddifferentsubtypesofthedisease.The idou: None. A.J. Walley: None. U.L. Fairbrother: None. high SNPs prevalence let us to hypothesize a synergistic haplotype effect in determining different multifactorial  P03
.46.A cholestasis phenotypes and overlapping features. Molecularmarkersofseverityofnonalcoholicfattyliver A. Mattiaccio: None. G. Vitale: None. C.P. Cristalli: disease None. M. Pariali: None. L. Gargano: None. M. Seri: None. P. Andreone: None. V. Mantovani: None. D. Sidorenko, V. Nazarov, S. Lapin, V. Emanuel  P03
.45.C Pavlov First Saint Petersburg State Medical University, Telomere length (TL) and oxidative stress in  C57
BL/6J Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation mice Introduction:Nonalcoholicfattyliverdisease(NAFLD)is E. Kidd1, J. Pender1, M. J. Gatt1, J. Williams2, A. A. I. F. oneofthemostcommonparenchymalliverdisorders.There Blakemore3, E. Meimaridou1, A. J. Walley4, U. L. are no reliable markers for assessment of progression of Fairbrother1 NAFLD from steatosis to steatohepatitis that leads to liver ﬁbrosis and cirrhosis. Polymorphism I148M in PNPLA3 1London Metropolitan University, London, United King- gene is associated with inhibition of lipid hydrolysis. dom, 2Queen Mary, London, United Kingdom, 3Brunel Pathological variants of SERPINA1 gene promote accu- University, London, United Kingdom, 4St George’s Uni- mulation of mutant alpha-1-antitrypsin in endoplasmic versity of London, London, United Kingdom reticulum. Polymorphisms in HFE gene leads to intracel- lular iron accumulation and fatty degeneration of liver. Highlevelsofoxidativestressmayleadtoanincreasedrate Materials and Methods: Group of 59 patients with of telomere shortening and contribute to loss of telomere NAFLDwasselected.Theassessmentofstructuralchanges integrity. Most in vivo studies have looked for correlations in liver was carried out by transient elastometry with between biomarkers of oxidative stress and TL, and have controlled attenuation parameter. Polymorphisms in used leucocytes. We have used a murine model to investi- PNPLA3, SERPINA1 and HFE genes were determined by gate the potential impact of oxidative stress on TL in a real-time PCR. tissue-speciﬁc manner and to assess telomere oxidation Results: Association between homozygous carriage of directly. Our model is a  C57
BL/6J mouse strain with a I148M polymorphism and increase of ALT was found naturally occurring nicotinamide nucleotide transhy- (p=0.011). A connection was established between the drogenase (NNT) deﬁciency. The absence of Nnt results in presence of the polymorphism and more severe steatosis highlevelsofreactiveoxygenspecies(ROS)incells.DNA (p=0.045). AST activity was higher in PiZ carriers than in226 J.delPicchia patientswithoutchangesinthisgene(p=0.049).H63Dand they can be a target for personalized medicine in the treat-  C282
YpolymorphismsoftheHFEgeneareassociatedwith ment of obesity by weight loss surgery. higherALT(p=0.020andp=0.030).Acorrelationbetween M. Tessarech: None.E. Mileti: None. K.Kwok:None. changes in mentioned genes and more severe ﬁbrosis was P. Arner: None. D. Bonneau: None. E. Colin: None. M. not demonstrated. Rydén: None. C. Daub: None. Conclusions: Polymorphisms in the PNPLA3, SER- PINA1, and HFE genes are associated with an increase in  P03
.49.A ALT and AST in patients with NAFLD. The homozygous Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease in variant of the I148M polymorphism in PNPLA3 gene and Israel: Genetic diagnosis reveals recurrent pathogenic the heterozygous  C282
Y in HFE gene are associated with variants more severe steatosis. However, conﬂicting data regarding liver ﬁbrosis rates need further study. T. Paperna1, A. Mory1, A. Oﬁr1, N. Damouny1, D. D. Sidorenko: None. V. Nazarov: None. S. Lapin: Magen2,3, I. Maya4,5, K. Weiss1, H. Baris Feldman6,5 None. V. Emanuel: None. 1The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus,  P03
.47.B Haifa, Israel, 2Pediatric Nephrology Institute, Rambam Gene expression differences in non-obese, obese and Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 3Faculty of Medicine, previously obese subjects. Technion, Haifa, Israel, 4The Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah M. Tessarech1, E. Mileti2, K. Kwok2, P. Arner3, D. Tikva, Israel, 5Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv Bonneau1, E. Colin1, M. Rydén3, C. Daub2 University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 6The Genetics Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Haifa, Israel 1CHU Angers, Angers, France, 2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Karolinska University Hospital Hud- Introduction: The genetic diagnosis of Autosomal Domi- dinge, Stockholm, Sweden nantPolycysticKidneydisease(ADPKD)iscomplicatedby the genomic structure of the main causative gene PKD1, Obesity is a worldwide public health issue associated with due to the presence of overlapping pseudogenes. Classiﬁ- many comorbidities. Understanding its underlying causes cation of the missense variants is challenging as allelic andmechanismsisoneofthekeystopreventandtreat this heterogeneity is rife, and few recurrent variants are known. condition. Besides obvious environmental causes, as phy- Data on ADPKD in Israeli populations is yet unavailable. sicalinactivityorpoornutrition,geneticsisoneofthemain Materialsandmethods:Patientsamples(n=112)From component of obesity. Here, we perform a transcriptomic Israel were referred to Rambam Genetics Institute for study by 5′Cap-mRNA sequencing of subcutaneous white ADPKD gene panel testing (PKD1, PKD1, HNF1B). Next adipose tissue of non-obese (NO), obese (OB) and pre- generation sequencing (NGS) was performed using either viously obese (POB) subjects, at fasting and hyper- TrusightOne(Illumina,n=77),orexomesequencing(ES, insulinemia states. Differential gene expression analysis n=35);analysisemployedtheGenooxplatform.NGSwas showed few difference in the analysis of NO compared to supplemented by Sanger sequencing to achieve full cover- POB subjects, while the comparison of OB subjects versus age of panel. GANAB, DNAJB11 were included in ES NO and versus POB displayed many transcriptomic chan- testing. ges,withmostofthegenesincommoninbothcomparison. Results: A clinically signiﬁcant variant (CSV) was Moreover, many genes were speciﬁcally involved in identiﬁed in 82% of the patients (PKD1-88%, PKD2-7%, expression changes between OB and POB subjects. Gene HNF1B-5%). Three PKD1 CSVs were identiﬁed only ontology analysis revealed that those genes were involved following Sanger sequencing. Truncating CSVs comprised in metabolic and cellular process pathways and in cardio- ~55% of pathogenic variants. Most CSVs (72%) were vascular diseases. Fasting and hyperinsulinemia metabolic unique; however, eight PKD1 CSVs recurred in two or states had little inﬂuence on the results. This study more patients, notably, in Jews of Persian and Ethiopian demonstrates that a major gene expression difference is descent. HNF1B-related kidney disease was diagnosed in observed between obese and lean subjects, whether they four individuals. Positive family history was linked with were never obese or got rid of their fat mass after a weight higherCSVdetectionrates,81%,comparedwith60%when loss surgery, and that after this kind of surgery, many negative. changes in gene expression appear. Further studies are Conclusions: This ﬁrst report on ADPKD genetics in neededtoidentifypreciselywhichgenesareinvolvedandif Israel highlights recurrent CSVs in Israeli sub-ethnicities. HNF1B CSVs can account for an ADPKD-like phenotype.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 227 Family history was a strong predictor for detection of a stratiﬁed analyses for PUV and UPJO, and Kaplan-Meier CSV. Our experience underscores the importance of and Cox regression analyses in the discovery and two utilizing ES as well as Sanger sequencing for variant replication samples of 102 PUV patients each. For the detection. associatedgene,weperformedRNAandproteinexpression T. Paperna: None. A. Mory: None. A. Oﬁr: None. N. analyses in fetal tissues. Damouny: None. D. Magen: None. I. Maya: None. K. Results: We observed suggestive associations with six Weiss: None. H. Baris Feldman: None. SNPs in three loci, of which rs6874819 in CDH12 was the strongest (P = 7.5×10−7). This SNP also seemed to be  P03
.50.B associated with time to renal injury in the PUV discovery Genome-wide association study identiﬁes CDH12 as and replication samples. RNA expression analyses showed candidate gene for renal injury in patients with poster- clear expression in fetal kidneys, which was conﬁrmed by ior urethral valves protein immunolocalization. Conclusions: This study identiﬁed CDH12 as candidate L.F.M.vanderZanden1,I.A.L.M.vanRooij1,J.S.L.T. gene for renal injury in PUV. CDH12 is a target of the Quaedackers2, R. Nijman2, M. Steffens3, L. L. L. de Wall1, proinﬂammatory MCP-1-MCPIP pathway. We hypothesize E. M. H. F. Bongers1, F. Schaefer4, M. Kirchner5, R. that in PUV, MC P1
 pathway upregulation due to increased Behnisch5, A. K. Bayazit6, S. Caliskan7, L. Obrycki8, G. urinarytractpressureisaugmentedincarriersoftheCDH12 Montini9,10, A. Duzova11, M. Wuttke12, R. Jennings13,14, N. variant, exacerbating renal injury. A. Hanley13,14, N. J. Milmoe15, P. J. D. Winyard15, K. Y. Grant support: Dutch Kidney Foundation (13OKJ36), Renkema16,M.F.Schreuder1,N.Roeleveld1,W.F.J.Feitz1 Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research (91618036). 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Nether- L.F.M. van der Zanden: None. I.A.L.M. van Rooij: lands, 2University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, None. J.S.L.T. Quaedackers: None. R. Nijman: D. Netherlands, 3Isala, Zwolle, Netherlands, 4University Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 5University of and expert witness); Modest; Astra Zeneca. M. Steffens: Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 6Cukurova University, None.L.L.L.deWall:None.E.M.H.F.Bongers:None.F. Adana, Turkey, 7Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Schaefer: None. M.Kirchner: None. R.Behnisch: None. Turkey, 8Children`s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, A.K. Bayazit: None. S. Caliskan: None. L. Obrycki: Poland, 9Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda – Ospedale None.G.Montini:F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest; Maggiore Policlinico di Milano, Milan, Italy, 10University Merck.A.Duzova:None.M.Wuttke:None.R.Jennings: of Milan, Milan, Italy, 11Hacettepe University Faculty of None. N.A. Hanley: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 12University of Freiburg, Frei- Modest; APIS Assay Technologies. N.J. Milmoe: None. burg, Germany, 13University of Manchester, Manchester, P.J.D. Winyard: None. K.Y. Renkema: None. M.F. UnitedKingdom,14ManchesterUniversityNHSFoundation Schreuder: None. N. Roeleveld: None. W.F.J. Trust,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,15UCLGreatOrmond Feitz: None. Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 16University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Nether-  P03
.51.C lands RNA-seq approach to detect splicing alterations in primary ciliary dyskinesia and non-CF bronchiectasis Introduction: Posterior urethral valves (PUV) and ureter- opelvic junction obstruction (UPJO) are congenital J. Legebeke1, G. Wheway1, H. Wai1, W. Walker1,2, J. S. obstructive uropathies that may impair renal development. Lucas1,2, D. Baralle1,2 We performed the ﬁrst GWAS for renal injury in obstruc- tive uropathy patients. 1University of Southampton, Southampton, United King- Methods:WeincludedpatientswithpyeloplastyorPUV dom, 2University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, resection before age 18. Signs of renal injury were deﬁned United Kingdom as dialysis, nephrectomy, kidney transplantation, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate<60 ml/min/1.73m2, high blood MutationsthatcausePCDhavebeenreportedin>40genes. pressure, antihypertensive medication use, proteinuria, and/ Most cases are recessive, caused by biallelic changes in or one kidney functioning<45%. In the GWAS, we these genes. These account for around 70% of cases, sug- compared 141 and 216 obstructive uropathy patients with gesting that additional genes, and non-coding or synon- and without signs of renal injury 5 years post-surgery, ymous changes in known genes, remain to be identiﬁed. respectively. For the associated SNPs, we performed Non-CF bronchiectasis is a heterogeneous group of228 J.delPicchia disorders and adults may need to be investigated for PCD. Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Here we present an optimised pipeline for RNA analysis Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Department of Endocrinol- from nasal brushings taken from the inferior turbinate of ogy, Northwick Park Hospital, London North West patientswithsuspectedPCDor non-CF bronchiectasis. We University Hospital NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, present analysis pipelines to investigate differences in gene 9Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy’s and St Thomas’ expression, alternative splicing and the identiﬁcation of NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, deleterioussplicing events.Wedevelopedgene-neutraland 10Department of Endocrinology, Guy’s and St Thomas’ gene-speciﬁc analysis protocols, from both nasal brushings NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom storedinRNA-laterandcellsfromnasalbrushingscultured at the air-liquid interface (ALI). We present this RNA-seq Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is common with a approach as a particularly useful diagnostic tool to inves- prevalence of 0.86%. 10% are familial. Syndromic PHPT tigatepatientsinwhomasinglepathogenicvarianthasbeen includes multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)1, MEN4, identiﬁed in a known PCD gene and where we suspect an MEN2A and CD C73
-related disorders. Non-syndromic alteration in splicing of the same gene due to a second causes include familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia intronic or synonymous / non-synonymous exonic variant. (FHH), familial isolated HPT and neonatal severe PHPT. This represents a step towards using RNA analysis for Establishing the underlying genetic cause allows for tar- increasing diagnostic yield in rare recessive respiratory geted, cost effective management. The 2019 National disease.JL,DBandHTaresupportedbyaNIHRResearch Genomic Test Directory PHPT testing criteria are PHPT Professorship to DB (RP- 2016-07-011). JL is further sup- and calcium creatinine clearance ratio (CCCR) >0.02 pre- ported by Southampton NIHR BRC. GW is funded by a senting <35y or <45y with one of a) multi-glandular dis- WellcomeTrustSeedAwardinScience(GrantNo.204378/ ease, or b) hyperplasia, or c) ossifying ﬁbromas of the jaw, Z/16/Z) and a University of Southampton Faculty of Med- ord)afamilyhistory(FH)ofPHPT.Thetestingcriteriafor icine Research Management Committee research grant. FHH is CCCR <0.02. J. Legebeke: None. G. Wheway: None. H. Wai: None. Wereviewed121PHPTpatientsfromtheCambridgeand W. Walker: None. J.S. Lucas: None. D. Baralle: None. Guy’s Endocrine Genetics clinic over a 4y period referred with multi-glandular disease, relevant FH, CCCR <0.01,  P03
.52.A age <50y, or >1 risk factor. We offered NGS panel gene Genetictestingforhereditaryhyperparathyroidismina testingofallknownPHPTgenes.Ofthe121patients,(92F, large UK cohort mean age 41y), a pathogenic variant was identiﬁed in 16% (11CASR,6MEN1,1CD C73
,1A P2
S1 )andwedetected4 S.Mariathasan1,K.Andrews2,E.Thompson3,B.Challis1,4, VUS’s.ThemeanCCCRwas0.0073inthosewithaCASR S. Wilcox2, H. Pierce2, J. Hale1, S. Spiden3, G. Fuller5, H. pathogenic variant vs 0.016 in those without (p 0.003). A Simpson6, B. Fish7, P. Jani7, I. Seetho8, R. Armstrong2, L. CCCR <0.01 had a sensitivity of 82% and speciﬁcity of Izatt9, M. Joshi10, A. Velusami10, R. Casey1, S. Park2 81% for FHH. A positive FH was a strong predictor of a pathogenicvariantwhereasmulti-glandulardiseasewasnot. 1Department of Endocrinology, Cambridge University In summary, genetic testing is recommended in PHPT at Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United any age with i) syndromic PHPT, ii) relevant FH iii) a Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Cambridge CCCR<0.01 and iv) multiple risk factors. University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, S. Mariathasan: None. K. Andrews: None. E. Thomp- UnitedKingdom,39.10.EastMidlandsandEastofEngland son:None.B.Challis:None.S.Wilcox:None.H.Pierce: NHS Genomic Laboratory Hub, Cambridge University None. J. Hale: None. S. Spiden: None. G. Fuller: None. Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United H. Simpson: None. B. Fish: None. P. Jani: None. I. Kingdom, 4Translational Science & Experimental Medi- Seetho: None. R. Armstrong: None. L. Izatt: None. M. cine, Research and Early Development, Cardiovascular, Joshi: None. A. Velusami: None. R. Casey: None. S. Renal and Metabolism, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, Astra- Park: None. Zeneca,, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 59.10. East Mid- landsandEastofEnglandNHSGenomicLaboratoryHub, 
P03 .55.A Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, BialleliclossoffunctionGFRA1variantscausebilateral Cambridge, United Kingdom, 64. Department of Endocri- renal agenesis nology, University College Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of Head and Neck Surgery,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 229 S.Khan1,I.Verma2,V.Arora2,R.Puri2,A.El-Hattab3,M. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Rocha1,R.Merdzanic1,O.Paknia1,C.Beetz1,A.Rolfs1,4,A. Germany. P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Bertoli-Avella1, P. Bauer1 Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. 1Centogene AG,, Rostock, Germany, 2Sir Ganga Ram 
P03 .56.B Hospital, Institute of Genetics and Genomics, Rajinder WES expands the mutational spectrum in patients with Nagar,NewDelhi,India,3DepartmentofClinicalSciences, Silver-Russell syndrome features CollegeofMedicine,UniversityofSharjah,Sharjah,United ArabEmirates,4UniversityofRostock,Rostock,Germany R. Meyer1, M. Begemann1, C. Hübner1, D. Dey1, A. Küchler2, M. Elgizouli2, P. Kroisel3, G. Fekete4, L. Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract com- Ambrozaityte5, A. Matuleviciene5, M. Elbracht1, T. prise a broad spectrum of renal and urinary tract mal- Eggermann1 formationswithrenalagenesisbeingatthemostsevereend ofthespectrum.Itusuallyresultsindeathinuteroorinthe 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH perinatal period. Only three genes have been identiﬁed so Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 2Institute of Human farascausingrenalagenesis.Byexome/genomesequencing Genetics, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, within a diagnostic setting, with combined database ana- 3Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, lyses, we identiﬁed two unrelated patients presenting with Graz, Austria, 4II. Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis congenital bilateral renal agenesis and homozygous loss of University,Budapest,Hungary,5DepartmentofHumanand function variants (LoF) in the GFRA1 gene. Both patients MedicalGenetics,InstituteofBiomedicalSciences,Faculty hadparentalconsanguinityandsimilarlyaffected,deceased of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania siblings, suggesting an autosomal recessive inheritance. Patient 1 was homozygote for the nonsense variant Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is one of the most promi- NM_001348097.1:c.676C>T, p.(Arg226*). The second nent growth retardation disorders. However, both, the patient was homozygote for a frameshift variant phenotype and underlying molecular alterations of SRS (NM_001348097.1:c.1294delA, p.(Thr432Profs*13)). Both show a marked heterogeneity. SRS itself is an imprinting variants are novel, identiﬁed for ﬁrst time in our database, disorder,mainlyassociatedwithspeciﬁcmolecularchanges and presumed to lead to LoF. The GFRA1 gene is not atspeciﬁcimprintedchromosomalregions.Diseasecausing reported to be associated to any human phenotype in pointmutationsarelesscommonandvarywidelyinmeans OMIM,butGFRA1missensevariantshavebeenreportedas of the affected gene. The suitability of panel-based NGS associatedtoHirschsprungdiseaseinseveralpatients,based assays to identify monogenetic causes of SRS-like pheno- on an oligogenic model. Gfra1-deﬁcient mice demonstrate typeshasalreadybeenproven.Thereasonablenessofwhole absence of enteric neurons and agenesis of the kidney, exome sequencing to identify point mutations in patients characteristics that are reminiscent of both Gdnf-and Ret- with Silver-Russel syndrome features however, is still the deﬁcient mice. The phenotype described in our patients is subjectofongoingdiscussions.Weexaminedsamplesof75 identicaltotherenalphenotypereportedinGfra1nullmice, patients referred for molecular testing for SRS using dif- however, no abnormalities of the enteric nervous system ferent NGS-based approaches. The typical SRS-associated was reported in these two cases. In conclusion, these ﬁnd- molecularalterationshadbeenexcludedbefore.Theresults ingsstronglysupportthecausalroleofGFRA1inactivating of multi gene panel, whole exome sequencing, and trio- variants for an autosomal recessive form of bilateral renal basedwholeexomesequencingapproacheswerecompared. agenesis. Taking together the results of all different approaches, in S. Khan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; 19/75patientsadisease-causingvariantcouldbeidentiﬁed. Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. I. Verma: None. V. Most of these variants are associated with monogenetic Arora: None. R. Puri: None. A. El-Hattab: None. M. differential diagnoses of Silver-Russell syndrome. The Rocha: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; diagnostic yield raised from panel to whole exome Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. R. Merdzanic: A. sequencing to trio-based whole exome sequencing. Broad- Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG, ening the molecular sequencing approach increases the Rostock, Germany. O. Paknia: A. Employment (full or mutation detection rate in patients referred for molecular part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. testing of SRS without one of the typical molecular C. Beetz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; alterations. Some of the monogenetic disorders detected in Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. A. Rolfs: A. Employ- our cohort have an important impact on the clinical man- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG, agementandgeneticcounselingofaffectedfamiliesmainly Rostock, Germany. A. Bertoli-Avella: A. Employment intermsofrecurrencerisks,tumordevelopment,andmental230 J.delPicchia development. Funding: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 
P03 .59.B (EG110/15-1). Cell free DNA as potential marker of inﬂammatory R. Meyer: None. M. Begemann: None. C. Hübner: diseases None. D. Dey: None. A. Küchler: None. M. Elgizouli: None. P. Kroisel: None. G. Fekete: None. L. Ambrozai- D. Smolak1,2, G. Roman3, J. Budis2,4,5, M. Maronek3, B. tyte: None. A. Matuleviciene: None. M. Elbracht: None. Gromova3, R. Liptak3, M. Harsanyova2,1, J. Radvanszky6,2, T. Eggermann: None. T. Szemes2,1,4 
P03 .57.C 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural ‘The pathogenicity analysis of mutations identiﬁed in Sciences,ComeniusUniversity, Bratislava,Slovakia,2Gen- AR gene in patients with AIS from Ukraine’ eton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, L. A. Livshits1, D. A. Sirokha1, O. V. Gorodna1, D. M. Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Comenius University Science Park, Lozhko1, G. B. Livshyts1, N. B. Zelinska2 Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Slovak Center of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Institute for 1IMBG NANU, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Ukrainian Scientiﬁc and Clinical and Translational Research, Biomedical Research PracticalCenterforEndocrineSurgery,Transplantationof Center,SlovakAcademyofSciences,Bratislava,Slovakia Endocrine Organs and Tissues of the Ministry of Health of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine Introduction: Ulcerative colitis is an inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) characterised by chronic inﬂammation of the Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (AIS) is a Disorder of human digestive tract. Despite efforts, the availability of Sex Development (DSD) that occurs at a frequency of 1 in effective non-invasive diagnostics assays is still limited. 20,000livebirths,isthemostcommonDSDinpeoplewith Cell free DNA (cfDNA) represents extracellular genetic karyotype 46, XY, caused by mutations in the Androgen informationthatalreadyshowedpromisesforvariousﬁelds Receptor (AR) gene. More than 1000 AR gene mutations of genetic testing, including, non-invasive prenatal testing have been described in patients with AIS and prostate (NIPT) and cancer testing. cancer. Almost 400 of them are located in ligand binding Materials and methods: Using a murine dextran sulfate domain (LBD). The pathogenicity of mutations detected in sodium (DSS) induced colitis model we collected blood AIS patients from Ukraine was analyzed. Directional from 46 laboratory mice, grouped by stage of ulcerative sequencing of the PCR products of LBD-coding exons 7 colitis modeled by the duration of DSS administration. and8wasperformedonDNAsamplesofAISpatientsafter cfDNA was isolated and sequenced using the MiSeq informed consent. The substitution X:67722905 T>C Illumina System. Preprocessed sequenced data were (rs9332970), exon 7, missense mutation Ile843Thr was mapped against mouse genome (GRCm38.p6). Statistical identiﬁed in PAIS-patient. In another PAIS-patient the analyseswereperformedbyin-housePythonandRscripts. substitution X: 67723745 C>T (rs137852594) samesence Results: Besides the observed different fragment length variantwasidentiﬁed.Itwaspredictedthecreationofanew distributions between control and colitis groups, we enhancer motif for SRp55 splisosome protein, and as a observed also a signiﬁcantly increasing amount of mouse consequence a new donor splice site at the end of the last genomic material with the advancing stage of the disease, exon8.The substitution X:67722943C> T(rs886041132), measuredbytheproportionofsequencedreadsmappableto exon 7 - missense mutation Arg856Cys, was identiﬁed in the mouse genome. In addition, to further investigate the CAIS-patient. Mutation X: 67722884 T> G, exon 7, a pathophysiological processes behind the observed changes, missense mutation Ile836Ser, was identiﬁed in CAIS- we performed a sequence based differentiation of reads patient was not annotated in Varsome, gnomAD and according to their mappability to the mouse nuclear and ARDBandidentiﬁedasnovel.Theeffectoflistedmissense mitochondrial genomes, as well as of the detected bacterial mutations was predicted according to SIFT and PolyPhen communities. valuesandclassiﬁedasdamaging.Analysisthesubstitution Conclusions: We observed signiﬁcant differences Ile836Seron3Dmodelshowedthatthemutantproteindoes between the control group and various disease stages in not get the correct conformation and binds dihy- sequenceddata.OurresultssuggesttheutilityofcfDNAas drotestosterone ~ 460 times worse than wild-type AR. a potential screening marker for IBD and even its speciﬁc L.A. Livshits: None. D.A. Sirokha: None. O.V. stages and pathophysiological processes behind them. Gorodna: None. D.M. Lozhko: None. G.B. Livshyts: Funded by: Slovak Research and Development Agency, None. N.B. Zelinska: None. grant APVV-17-0526.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 231 D. Smolak: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Supported by: DFG niﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.. G. Roman: None. J. Budis: A. A.Stalke: None.F.Hennig:None.E.Pﬁster:None.U. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.. Baumann: None. M. Eilers: None. V.Schäffer: None. B. M. Maronek: None. B. Gromova: None. R. Liptak: Vajen: None. N. Huge: None. T. Reinkens: None. B. None.M.Harsanyova:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Schlegelberger: None.T.Illig: None.B.Skawran:None. Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Radvanszky: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. T. Szemes: A. 
P04  Skeletal, Connective Tissue, Ectodermal and Skin Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.. Disorders 
P03 .60.C 
P04 .03.C Functional characterization of variants of unknown Geleophysic and acromicric dysplasias: clinical and signiﬁcance in the Wilson disease-associated AT
P7 B molecular review of 38 patients gene P.Marzin1,2,B.Thierry3,4,A.Dancasius1,2,C.Michot1,2,S. A.Stalke,F.Hennig,E.Pﬁster,U.Baumann,M.Eilers,V. Rondeau1,2, G. Baujat1,2, G. Phan5, M. Le Bourgeois6, D. Schäffer, B. Vajen, N. Huge, T. Reinkens, B. Khraiche7, C. Delacourt6, V. Cormier-Daire1,2 Schlegelberger, T. Illig, B. Skawran 1Fédération de Génétique et Institut Imagine, AP-HP, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades,, F-75015, France, 2Uni- versité de Paris, UMR1163, INSERM, F-75 015, Paris, Introduction: Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal France, 3Service d’ORL pédiatrique, AP-HP, Hôpital recessive disorder of copper excess due to pathogenic Necker-Enfants Malades, F-75015, France, 4Université de AT
P7 B variants. AT
P7 B codes for a copper-transporting Paris, UMR976, INSERM, F-75 010,, Paris, France, ATPase. Sequencing of AT
P7 B is an important tool to 5Laboratoire de Cristallographie et RMN Biologiques, diagnose the disease. However, variants of unknown sig- UMR 8015, CNRS, Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de niﬁcance (VUS) are detected frequently, impeding a clear Pharmacie, 4 Avenue de l'Observatoire, 75006, paris, diagnosis. Functional analyses can help to unambiguously France, 6Service de Pneumologie et Allergologie Pédiatri- classify VUS. We aimed to functionally characterize four ques, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, F-75 015, AT
P7 B VUS, detected in patients with clinically distinct or Paris, France, 7Unité Médico-Chirurgicale de Cardiologie suspected WD. Congénital et Pédiatrique, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Methods: The AT
P7 B open reading frame was cloned Malades, F-75 015,, Paris, France into an expression vector and the VUS were generated by site-directedmutagenesis.AfterHEK293Tcelltransfection, Introduction: Geleophysic dysplasia (GD) and acromicric AT
P7 BexpressionofthemutantswasquantiﬁedatmRNA dysplasia(AD)areskeletaldysplasiacharacterizedbyshort and protein level by qRT-PCR and western blot. To assess stature, brachydactyly and progressive joint limitation. the mutant’s ability to export copper a copper-sensitive Cardiorespiratory involvement may be responsible for a luciferase-based assay was used. severe prognosis in GD. Dominant mutations in the FBN1 Results: For all VUS AT
P7 B mRNA expression was andLTB
P3 genesareassociatedwithADandGD,whereas signiﬁcantly reduced compared to wild-type and a benign recessivemutations in theADAMTS
L2  gene only with GD. polymorphism. Three VUS also led to decreased protein These three genes encode for proteins of microﬁbrillar expression and copper transport capacity. These VUS had network.Theaimofthisstudyistoimproveunderstanding been detected in clinically distinct WD patients. One VUS of natural history and genotype-phenotype correlations. led to protein expression and copper transport capacity at Materials and methods: This retrospective study wild-type level. It had been detected in a patient with included patients with AD and GD followed in our center, suspected WD. with identiﬁed mutation(s). Data from the medical records Conclusions: Our results strongly suggest a pathogenic were abstracted, recorded in an Excel spreadsheet and effectforthreeoftheVUS.ForoneVUSourresultshintat analyzed using simple frequency analysis. a benign effect. On-going immunoﬂuorescence assays will Results: We described clinical and molecular data from further address a possible protein mislocalization. Besides 38 patients (20GD, 18 AD) with a mean age of 17 years. clarifying the clinical relevance of variants, functional MutationsintheFBN1,ADAMTS
L2 andLTB
P3 geneswere characterization will help to understand the variant’s identiﬁedin23,12and3patients,respectively.Earlydeath pathomechanism contributing to personalized treatment occurred in nine cases. 45% of patients presented with with fewer side effects. valvulopathy, progressive in half of cases. Respiratory232 J.delPicchia disorders were asthma (50%), non-cardiogenic restrictive ins TT, c.1163 G>A, c.3058 C>T, c.329 G>A) and two syndrome (30%), laryngo-tracheo-bronchial involvement novel nonsense (c.1213 delT fs*, c.14 C>A fs*) mutations. (18%) and acute non-cardiogenic pulmonary hypertension All new mutations identiﬁed in this group are likely (four cases). Patients with a variant involving a cysteine in pathogenicandmeaningfullwiththepatientstypicalclinical the FBN1 gene or mutations in the ADAMTS
L2  gene presentations. presented a higher proportion of severe cardiorespiratory Conclusions: Reporting new patients with novel muta- complicationscomparedtoamorebenigncourseinpatients tions would contribute to better clinical dealination of this with other mutations. rare dysplasia and would help to established pathogenic Conclusions:Geneticﬁndingscouldhaveimportancenot mutations. only in the diagnosis, but also in risk stratiﬁcation and References:1. Maroteaux P, Martinelli B, Campailla E. clinical management of patients with suspected acromelic [Acromesomelic dwarﬁsm]. Presse Med. 1971; 79:1839- dysplasia. 42.2. Khan S, Basit S, Khan MA, et al. Genetics of human P. Marzin: None. B. Thierry: None. A. Dancasius: isolated acromesomelic dysplasia. Eur J Med Genet. None. C. Michot: None. S. Rondeau: None. G. Baujat: 2016;59:198-203. None. G. Phan: None. M. Le Bourgeois: None. D. E. Kilic: None. B. Cavdarli: None. G. Buyukyilmaz: Khraiche: None. C. Delacourt: None. V. Cormier- None. M. Kilic: None. Daire: None. 
P04 .06.C 
P04 .04.A Severe congenital cutis laxa with generalized muscle Acromesomelic dysplasia Maroteaux type, nine patients hypotonia due to AT
P6 V1A mutations with seven novel NPR2 mutations G. Vogt1,2, N. El Choubassi1,2, M. Holtgrewe3, S. Krause4, E. Kilic1, B. Cavdarli2, G. Buyukyilmaz3, M. Kilic4 A. Lekaj1, R. Horvath5, M. Schülke6, T. Gardeitchik7, S. Mundlos1,2, Á. Herczegfalvi8, H. Lochmüller9,10, V. 1Division of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Karcagi11, U. Kornak1,2,12, B. Fischer-Zirnsak1,2 University of Health Sciences, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 3Division of Pediatric Charité - Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 2RG Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara City Development & Disease, Max Planck Institute for Mole- Hospital,Ankara,Turkey,4DivisionofMetabolism,Depart- cular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Core Unit Bioinfor- ment of Pediatrics, Sami Ulus Children Hospital, Ankara, matics-CUBI, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany, Turkey 4Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Munich, Germany, 5Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Background: Acromesomelic Dysplasia, type Maroteaux University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, (AMDM), is an autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Department of Neuropedia- caused by loss of function mutations of NPR2 gene which trics, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, encodes C-type natriureticpeptidreseptorB.Thisraretype 7Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University ofdwarﬁzmcharacterizedwithshorteningofthemiddleand Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8II. Department distal segments of the limbs. Herein we reported nine of Paediatric Neurology, Semmelweis Medical University, patients from eight families with seven novel NPR2 Budapest, Hungary, 9Division of Neurology, Children’s mutations. HospitalofEasternOntarioResearchInstitute,Ottawa,IL, Methods: Nine patients were diagnosed AMDM in a Canada, 10Brain and Mind Research Institute, Ottawa, IL, singlecentrefrom2015to2020wereenrolledinthisstudy. Canada, 11Department of Molecular Genetics and Diag- Their clinical, radiological and molecular genetic ﬁndings nostics, National Institute of Environmental Health, Buda- examined retrospectively. The mutations in NPR2 gene pest, Hungary, 12Institute of Human Genetics, University were conﬁrmed with direct sequencing. Medical Center, Göttingen, Germany Results: All nine patiens in this group were admitted to hospital with the complaint of short stature. All had short Introduction: Autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 2D is a limb type dwarﬁsm with marked shortening middle and severe multisystem disease due to pathogenic variants acral segment of the limbs. All had typical dysmorphic affecting AT
P6 V1A, encoding a component of the V-Type signs, brachydactyly, signiﬁcant greater toes and normal H+ATPase. Affected individuals show a strong cutis laxa intelligence. We identiﬁed one previously reported (c.2729 phenotype with large skin folds at birth, hypotonia and C>T), ﬁve novel missense (c.3029 A>G, c.1738-1739 del cardiac abnormalities.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 233 Material and Methods: We performed single whole (MIM 603248) or the GDF5 gene (MIM 601146) but may exome sequencing (WES) to identify the causative also depend on structural changes in 20p12.3 involving the molecular defect in our index patient. Furthermore, Sanger BM
P2  gene. Indeed, microduplications downstream of the sequencing, qRT-PCR and Immunoblot analyses were BM
P2  gene have been described in 5 families (2 German performed to further investigate causality of the variants and 3 Chinese). Using an SNP-array technique, we identi- identiﬁed. ﬁed a new duplication of 45kb downstream of the BM
P2  Results:Herewereportontwoaffectedindividualsfrom gene in a French family. We describe the phenotypic and a non-consanguineous family from Hungary suffering from genotypic characteristics of this family and review the a multisystem condition with severe, generalized muscle literature. hypotoniaandandstrongjuvenilecutislaxa.Onechilddied E. Colin: None. A. Guichet: None. F. Boussion: None. in infancy, while the other signiﬁcantly improved. Using M. Tessarech: None. A. Ziegler: None. M. Gorce: None. WESandco-segregationanalyseswefoundourprobandto C. Houdayer: None. S. Manouvrier: None. D. be compound heterozygous for a novel missense and the Bonneau: None. ﬁrst so far described nonsense pathogenic variant affecting AT
P6 V1A.Expressionstudiesrevealedastrongdegradation 
P04 .11.B of the allele carrying the nonsense alteration. Additionally, Loss-of-functionvariantsin
C3 ORF52resultinlocalized patients’ dermal ﬁbroblasts showed strong alteration of autosomal recessive hypotrichosis Cathepsin D processing indicating alterations of lysosomal function. N. Cesarato1, L. Malki2,3, O. Sarig2,3, J. Mohamad2,3, T. Conclusions: This is the second report on pathogenic Canter4,S.Assaf2,3,M.Pavlovsky2,D.Vodo2,3,Y.Anis5,O. variants in AT
P6 V1A as the cause for a severe condition Bihari2, K. Malovitski2,3, A. Gat2, H. Thiele6, B. E. Perez with cutis laxa. Our data expand the clinical spectrum of White4,L.Samuelov2,A.Nanda7,A.S.Paller4,R.C.Betz1, AT
P6 V1A-related phenotypes and show that beside mis- E. Sprecher2,3 sense, also nonsense pathogenic variants are a possible cause of AT
P6 V1A-ARCL. Funding: The study was 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (FI Germany, 2Division of Dermatology, Tel Aviv Sourasky 2240/1-1) to BF-Z and by EURO-CDG-2 to UK. Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Department of Human G.Vogt:None.N.ElChoubassi:None.M.Holtgrewe: Molecular Genetics & Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of None. S. Krause: None. A. Lekaj: None. R. Horvath: Medicine,TelAvivUniversity,RamatAviv,Israel,4Depart- None. M. Schülke: None. T. Gardeitchik: None. S. ment of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg Mundlos: None. Á. Herczegfalvi: None. H. Lochmüller: SchoolofMedicine,Chicago,IL,UnitedStates,5Instituteof None. V. Karcagi: None. U. Kornak: None. B. Fischer- Endocrinology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Zirnsak: None. Aviv, Israel, 6Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7As’ad Al-Hamad Dermatol- 
P04 .07.A ogy Center, Kuwait, Kuwait New duplication downstream of the BM
P2  gene in a French family with Brachydactyly type A2 (BDA2) Introduction: Localized autosomal recessive hypotrichosis has been associated with pathogenic variants in DSG4, E. COLIN1, A. GUICHET1, F. BOUSSION2, M. encoding a desmosomal protein as well as in LIPH and TESSARECH1, A. ZIEGLER1, M. GORC
E1 , C. LPAR6,encodingrespectivelylipaseH,whichcatalyzesthe HOUDAYER1, S. MANOUVRIER3, D. BONNEAU1 formation of 2-acyl lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), and lysophosphatidic acid receptor 6, a receptor for LPA. LPA 1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Angers Uni- promotes hair growth and differentiation. In this study, we versity Hospital, ANGERS, France, 2Department of Gyne- aimed at delineating the genetic basis of LAH in patients cology and Obstetrics, Angers University Hospital, without pathogenic variants in these three genes. ANGERS, France, 3Pole of Biology Genetic Pathology, MaterialsandMethods:Variantanalysiswasconducted Lille University Hospital - Center of Biology Genetic using exome and Sanger sequencing. We then performed Pathology, LILLE, France RT-qPCR, immunoﬂuorescence staining, immunoblotting, enzymatic and co-immunoprecipitation assays in cell Brachydactyly type A2 (BDA2, MIM 112600) is an auto- cultures and hair follicles to evaluate the consequences of somal dominant pathology characterized by deviation and the identiﬁed variants. shortening of the middle phalanx of the index and / or Results:Weidentiﬁedhomozygousvariantsin
C3 ORF52 secondtoe.ItmaybeduetomutationsintheBMPR1Bgene infourindividualsfromtwofamilieswithLAH.
C3 ORF52234 J.delPicchia wasfoundtobeco-expressedwithlipaseHintheinnerroot clinical features included brachydactyly and short Achilles sheathofthehairfollicleandthetwoproteinswerefoundto tendons resulting in toe walking in childhood. directlyinteract.TheLAH-causingvariantswereassociated Material and methods: We performed exome sequen- with decreased 
C3 ORF52 expression and resulted in cing and genome-wide linkage analysis to identify the markedly reduced lipase H-mediated LPA biosynthesis. pathogenic variant in this family. Several functional assays Conclusions: We could connect 
C3 ORF52 to the LPA- wereperformedtofurtherstudythecausalityofthevariant. mediated signaling pathway which, together with LPAR6 Inaddition,wesequencedacohortof216patientstoassess and LIPH, plays a crucial role in hair growth. LAH can be the role of this new candidate gene in the pathogenesis of causedbyabnormalfunctionofanyofthesethreeproteins. CTS in a larger population. N.Cesarato:None.L.Malki:None.O.Sarig:None.J. Results: We identiﬁed a heterozygous variant Mohamad: None. T. Canter: None. S. Assaf: None. M. (c.5009T>G; p.Phe1670Cys) in the ﬁbrillin-2 (FBN2) gene Pavlovsky: None. D. Vodo: None. Y. Anis: None. O. that co-segregated with the phenotype in the family. Bihari: None. K. Malovitski: None. A. Gat: None. H. Functional assays showed that the FBN2 variant impaired Thiele: None. B.E. Perez White: None. L. Samuelov: integrin-mediated cell adhesion and migration. Moreover, None. A. Nanda: None. A.S. Paller: None. R.C. Betz: we observed an increased TGF-β signaling and ﬁbrosis in None. E. Sprecher: None. the carpal tissues of affected individuals. A variant burden testinalargecohortofCTSpatientsrevealedasigniﬁcantly 
P04 .12.C increasedfrequencyofrareFBN2variantsinpatient alleles Evidence for a role of ﬁbrillin-2 in de pathogenesis of compared to controls. carpal tunnel syndrome Conclusions:OurdatastronglysuggestaroleofFBN2in the pathogenesis of CTS. S. Peeters1, A. Decramer2, S. Cain3, P. Houpt4, F. S. Peeters: None. A. Decramer: None. S. Cain: None. Verstreken5, J. Noyez2, C. Hermans6, W. Jacobs7, M. P.Houpt:None.F.Verstreken:None.J.Noyez:None.C. Lammens8, E. Fransen1, A. Kumar9, G. Vandeweyer1, B. Hermans: None. W. Jacobs: None. M. Lammens: None. Loeys1,W. Van Hul1,C. Baldock3, E. Boudin1,G.Mortier1 E. Fransen: None. A. Kumar: None. G. Vandeweyer: None. B. Loeys: None. W. Van Hul: None. C. Baldock: 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp None. E. Boudin: None. G. Mortier: None. and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2DepartmentofOrthopaedicsandTraumatology,AZDelta, 
P04 .14.B Roeselare, Belgium, 3Division of Cell-Matrix Biology and New pathways and variants in genes causing collageno- Regenerative Medicine, Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix pathies identiﬁed in patients with isolated cervical Research, the University of Manchester, Manchester, insufﬁciency United Kingdom, 4Department of Plastic Surgery, Isala clinic Zwolle, Zwolle, Netherlands, 5Department of Ortho- L. Volozonoka, D. Rots, I. Kempa, A. Kornete, D. paedic surgery, AZ Monica, Deurne, Belgium, 6Center for Rezeberga, L. Gailīte, A. Miskova Oncological Research Antwerp (CORE), University of Antwerp, Edegem (Belgium), Antwerp, Belgium, 7Depart- Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia ment of Forensic Medicine and Pathology, Antwerp University Hospital and University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Introduction: Cervical insufﬁciency is phenotypically Belgium, 8Department of Pathological Anatomy, Antwerp distinguishableconditioncausingpregnancylossorpreterm University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 9Department of delivery. A strong genetic component and few syndromic Paediatrics, Wellcome - MRC Cambridge Stem Cell forms of cervical insufﬁciency are described. Knowledge Institute Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom about the genetics of human cervix remodelling during pregnancy is scarce - only 12 maternal genes and their Introduction: Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is the most variants are implicated in cervical insufﬁciency so far as common form of peripheral entrapment neuropathy. identiﬁed by our systematic gene analysis before. Although CTS is quite common, its pathogenesis remains Material and methods: We sequenced DNA from 21 largely unknown. An estimated heritability index of 0.46 patients with clinical presentation of isolated cervical and a familial occurrence in 27-39% of the cases indicate insufﬁciency using Illumina’s TruSight One NGS kit. thatgeneticfactorsmustplayaroleinthepathogenesis.We Genes having rare deleterious variants identiﬁed in our report on a peculiar family in which CTS occurred in sub- patients (n = 694) were annotated for the pathway sequent generations at an usually young age. Additional enrichments using ConsensusPathDB. Variants in genes from enriched phenotype-relevant pathways were manuallyAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 235 curatedbased onvariant’spathogenicity, gene’sexpression Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 11Institut für Humangenetik, pattern, mode of inheritance and disease mechanism, to Universität Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 12Institute of assign likelihood for contribution to the patients’ Human Genetics, University Medical Centre of the phenotype. Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany Results:Pathway-enrichmentanalysisrevealedincreased variant burden in 15 pathways (max p-value 2.47E-03) Introduction: Chitayat Syndrome is characterized by hand playing roles in tissue mechanical and biomechanical hyperphalangism with shortened index ﬁngers and ulnar properties, i.e. collagen biosynthesis, cell-extracellular deviation, hallux valgus, severe respiratory distress requir- matrixcommunicationsandpreviouslyunnoticedpathways ing assisted ventilation and mild facial dysmorphism. It is of hemidesmosome assembly, laminins, integrins and focal caused by the recurrent heterozygous missense variant adhesion. Fourteen variants of unknown signiﬁcance and NM_006494.2:c.266A>G; p.Tyr89Cys in ERF, which (likely) pathogenic variants in 11 genes - TGM2, ITGA6, encodes the ET
S2  repressor factor (ERF) protein. The ETS COMP,CO
L11 A1,includingCO
L1 A1,CO
L1 A2,CO
L6 A3, family of transcription factors are involved in cellular pro- 
P3 H1,PLOD1,PPIBandTNXBcausingcollagenopathies- liferation and differentiation, embryological development, in 11 patients were classiﬁed as potential to increase hematopoiesis, lymphocyte function and apoptosis. The susceptibilitytothedevelopmentofnon-syndromiccervical exact pathomechanism of Chitayat syndrome remains insufﬁciency. unknown. So far, only seven individuals with molecularly Conclusions: Cervical insufﬁciency being an expression conﬁrmedChitayatsyndromehavebeendocumentedinthe pointinaphenotypiccontinuumofcollagenopathiesshould literature. be investigated further using multiple approaches. This Methods:Weperformedasystematicphenotypeanalysis might open up new opportunities to improve patient of six unpublished individuals with Chitayat syndrome. evaluation and management in the future. Results: We found unreported phenotypic features and a L.Volozonoka:None.D.Rots:None.I.Kempa:None. great variability of pulmonary manifestations. Only one A.Kornete:None.D.Rezeberga:None.L.Gailīte:None. individual presented with a history of assisted ventilation, A. Miskova: None. and one of the remaining presented with an atypical phenotype lacking any obvious pulmonary compromise. 
P04 .15.C Conclusions: Our ﬁndings extend the phenotype spec- The phenotypic spectrum of Chitayat syndrome: Six trum associated with the recurrent ERF variant c.266A>G additional affected individuals and contribute to improved diagnostic strategies in individuals with hand hyperphalangism. A. Suter1, A. Abad Perez1, F. Santos-Simarro2, P. A. Suter: None. A. Abad Perez: None. F. Santos- Toerring3, R. Ramos-Mejia4, K. Heath2, V. Huckstadt5, M. Simarro: None. P. Toerring: None. R. Ramos-Mejia: Parrón-Pajares6, M. Mensah1,7, W. Hülsemann8, M. None. K. Heath: None. V. Huckstadt: None. M. Parrón- Holtgrewe1,9, S. Mundlos1,10, U. Kornak1,11, O. Bartsch12, Pajares:None.M.Mensah:None.W.Hülsemann:None. N. Ehmke1,10 M. Holtgrewe: None. S. Mundlos: None. U. Kornak: None. O. Bartsch: None. N. Ehmke: None. 1Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of 
P04 .16.A Medical and Molecular Genetics and Skeletal dysplasia First family from Germany with early-onset chondro- multidisciplinary Unit (UMDE), Hospital Universitario La calcinosisandosteoarthritis(CCA
L1 ,OMIM%600668) Paz and CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of caused by TNFRSF11B gene mutation Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 4Growth and Development Department, Garra- A. C. Blumberg1, M. Wingendorf2, I. Spier3, V. Riehmer4, han Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 5Genetics Depart- O. Bartsch1 ment, Garrahan Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 6Department of Radiology and Skeletal dysplasia multi- 1InstituteofHuman Genetics,UniversityMedicalCentreof disciplinary Unit (UMDE), Hospital Universitario la Paz, the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Ger- Madrid, Spain, 7Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Anna- many, 2Practice for Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Louisa-Karsch-Str. 2, 10178, Berlin, Germany, 8Handchir- Kirchen/Sieg, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, urgie Kinderkrankenhaus Wilhelmstift, Hamburg, Ger- University Medical Centre Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Insti- many, 9Core Unit Bioinformatics – CUBI, Berlin Institute tute of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre of Health, Chariteplatz 1, Berlin, Germany, 10RG Devel- Cologne, Cologne, Germany opment & Disease, Max Planck Institute for Molecular236 J.delPicchia Chondrocalcinosis (CCAL) is a common condition caused (EDS). OI is characterized by bone fragility, whereas EDS by calcium pyrophosphate accumulation and resulting in affects the connective tissue resulting in joint hypermobi- destruction of articular cartilage, affecting 4-7% of adults. lity, skin hyperextensibility, and tissue fragility. Although, CCAL is usually seen in polygenic disorders (hypercalce- an OI/EDS overlap” syndrome characterized by clinical mia, gout, arthritis), but in rare cases runs in families as a hallmarks of EDS and mild or absent OI-phenotype is also dominant trait (usually CCA
L2 , MIM #118600, ANKH described. The underlying mutation spectrum is wide, but gene). CCA
L1  is extremely rare with only four families includes glycine substitutions. known to date: an Ashkenazy-Jewish kindred (PMIDs Material and Methods: Here, we report three patients 2383078 and 29578045), a family from Maine (PMID mainlyshowingjointhypermobilityandunusualskin.Panel 7887424),afamilyfromtheNetherlandsandFrance(PMID diagnostic via sequencing by synthesis was conducted 24743232), and a Long Island NY family (PMID including candidate genes contributing to connective tissue 29578045). These families all demonstrated a speciﬁc het- disorders. Sanger sequencing was used for analyses of erozygousTNFRSF11Bvariant,c.1205A>T,modifyingthe segregation patterns in parents. stop codon (AAT>ATT) and predicting an elongated pro- Results: All index patients carried each an undescribed, tein (p.Ter402Leuext*19). We report another 4-generation heterozygous glycine substitution. In two cases the variant CCA
L1  kindred from Rhineland-Palatinate (comprising 8 (c.1270G>A/p.(Gly424Ser) in CO
L1 A1 gene; c.434G>A/p. females and 3 males) also demonstrating the TNFRSF11B (Gly145Arg) in CO
L1 A2 gene) was maternal inherited and c.1205A>T variant. All patients (11/11, 100%) had early- segregatedwiththesymptomsinbothfamilies.Intheother onset osteoarthritis and chondrocalcinosis with an onset of case the substitution occurred de novo (c.179G>A/p. symptomsbetween16and30years,andallhadswellingof (Gly60Asp)in CO
L1 A2 gene). Comparable toour patients, joints, motion restriction, and intense pain. Three probands glycine substitutions in the more N-terminal region of both (3/10,30%;nodatainadeceasedfamilymember)alsohad genes are already described with “OI/EDS overlap” digital polyarthritis. First, knee, elbow, ankle and wrist syndrome. In detail, one of our families showed an EDS- joints were affected, followed by spinal destruction. phenotype with additional minimal OI-symptoms (short Remarkably, ball-and-socket joints (e.g. hip joints) were stature, blue sclera), whereas the others were clinical only minimally affected (only an affected 30-year-old classiﬁed as EDS-phenotype. male). The early onset and familial clustering led to the Conclusions: Despite the detection of glycine substitu- molecular diagnosis. This is the ﬁrst CCA
L1  family from tion, the patients could manifest a more typical EDS Germany, providing further understanding of the clinical phenotype rather than OI. Certainly, subclinical symptoms signs and treatment (including physical therapy, orthoses, for OI can additionally occur and should be considered. antirheumatic drugs, experimental treatment with inter- S. Döhnert: None. H. Reichenbach: None. S. Demuth: leukin inhibitors, and multiple joint surgery). None. S. Weidensee: None. K. Wilhelm: None. I. A.C.Blumberg:None.M.Wingendorf:None.I.Spier: Schreyer: None. B. Eichhorn: None. None. V. Riehmer: None. O. Bartsch: None. 
P04 .20.B 
P04 .17.B Morphological and molecular characterization of ecto- Three families with suspected Ehlers-Danlos syndrome pic cartilage in Crouzon Syndrome andglycinesubstitutioninCO
L1 A1andCO
L1 A2genes E. Candelo S. Döhnert1, H. Reichenbach2, S. Demuth3, S. Weidensee3, K. Wilhelm4, I. Schreyer4, B. Eichhorn1 Fundacion Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia 1MVZ Mitteldeutscher Praxisverbund Humangenetik MVZ, Background: Craniosynostosis is the premature closure of Dresden, Germany, 2MVZ Mitteldeutscher Praxisverbund the skull sutures. Patients with these condition undergo Humangenetik MVZ, Leipzig, Germany, 3MVZ Mittel- several surgical procedures, which are not able to fully deutscher Praxisverbund Humangenetik MVZ, Erfurt, restoreappearanceandfunctionalityduetoinsufﬁcientbone Germany, 4Zentrum für ambulante Medizin, Uniklinikum growth and suture refusion. Most mutations disrupt genes Jena gGmbH, Jena, Germany that encode for members of the ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) family. Introduction: Glycine substitutions in the Gly-X-Y-triplet Materials and Methods: A knock out mouse with disruptthetypeIcollagentriplehelixstructureandfolding, Fgfr2c342Y/
C342 Y was generated for phenotypic analysis and typically result in osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) and by histological staining of sections of WT, Fgfrc342y/+ have not yet been associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome heterozygous (HET) and Fgfr2c342Y/
C342 Y homozygousAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 237 (HOM)mouseembryosfromembryonicday(E)14.5andE pesequinovarus,ﬂatface,micrognathia,cleftpalateandthe 16.5 stages. Morphological characterisation of the ectopic historyofrespiratorydistressininfancy.Shewasdiagnosed cartilages in the mutant specimens was done against the as DDRD given milder skeletal ﬁndings and a prolonged HET and WT by calculating the surface area, perimeter, survival in comparison to DDSH. Whole exome analysis widthontheparietalcartilageineachgenotypeandcellular revealed a homozygous NM_005529.7:c.9970G>A(p. characterisation by obtaining the cellular density and shape Gly3324Arg) variant on HSPG2 which was predicted to descriptors. Molecular characterisation was determined by be pathogenic by in silico analyses. mmunohistochemistry of Collagen I and II. Conclusions: The phenotypic heterogeneity and clinical Results: We identiﬁed a signiﬁcant parietal cartilage overlap between DDSH and DDRD raise the question of expansion in HOM embryos since 
E14 .5 with higher whether HSPG2 variants lead to distinct DD forms or perimeter, surface area, and high cellular density. Addi- represent a single disorder with variable phenotypic tionally, characteristic cell morphology comprised; high spectrum. In a review of the literature, we recognised three cellular area and perimeter and circular or rounded shape. patientsreportedasDDSHwhereastheyhadmilderskeletal Theseﬁndingswereassociatedwithabnormalintensityand ﬁndings and survival age between 13 months and 7 years, localization pattern of Collagen type I and II. compatible with DDRD. Strikingly, they harboured novel Conclusions: A possible switch off on the intramem- HSPG2 variants, one of which was detected in our case. In branous ossiﬁcation of the parietal and frontal primordial the light of all these ﬁndings, we conclude that DDSH and bone and switch on of endochondral ossiﬁcation process DDRD are allelic and represent a single disorder with a supported by the cellular, morphological and molecular spectrum of severity. ﬁndingsoftheabnormalcartilageexpansionleadtoanovel T. Kalayci: None. N. Balanda: None. C.R. Ferreira: hypothesis of coronal suture fusion that can future drug None. U. Altunoglu: None. target on this condition. E. Candelo: None. 
P04 .23.B FROM CEREBRAL HEMORRAGE AND SUSPIC- 
P04 .22.A TION OF CHILD ABUSE TO DIAGNOSIS OF The ﬁrst case of Dyssegmental Dysplasia Rolland- FAMILIAR EHLERS DANLOS SYNDROME DUE Desbuquois type with a variant in HSPG2 TO DELECION IN CO
L5 A1 GENE T. Kalayci1, N. Balanda2, C. R. Ferreira3, U. Altunoglu1,4 P.MarinReina1,A.ZuñigaCabrera1,A.ParraLlorca1,P. Molina Aguilar2, J. Blasco2, A. Monzo Blasco2, M. Evole 1Istanbul University, Istanbu Faculty of Medicine, Medical Buselli1 Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, National Institutes of 1Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Forensic Depart- Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Medical Genomics ment, Valencia, Spain and Metabolic Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Introduction:ThemisdiagnosisofEhlerDanlossyndrome MD, United States, 4Koc University, School of Medicine, (EDS) and child abuse is well known, usually in relation- Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey ship to skin lesions or bone fractures. At our case, the ﬁrst manifestationwasanabortedlethalepisodeinaninfantdue Introduction: Dyssegmental dysplasia (DD) is a rare, to a cerebral hemorrhage. autosomal recessive disorder characterized by micromelia Clinical Case: A 4-month-old boy was founded uncon- and anisospondyly. Two distinct forms are described; sciousaftersleep.Hewasadmittedtothepediatricintensive Silverman-Handmaker (DDSH) characterized by severe careunitwithasubduralandsubarachnoidhemorrhageand shortening of limbs and perinatal lethality, and Rolland- severecerebraledema.Childabusewassuspected.Familiar Desbuquois (DDRD) with survival beyond infancy and antecedents: Mother, 34 years, ﬁrst gravida. She was milder skeletal ﬁndings. DDSH is caused by biallelic var- followed up during infancy due to smallsize. She has joint iants in HSPG2 but the aetiology of DDRD has not been hypermobility. Her brother died at sixth month due to explained.Here,wepresenttheﬁrstDDRDpatientreported supposed sudden infant death. One 50 years old aunt to have an HSPG2 variant. presented a cerebral hemorrhage. Healthy father, 30 years MaterialsandMethods:Detailedphenotypingandnext- old. No consanguinity. The child presented hypermovility generation sequencing were performed. and skin hyperextensibility. EDS vascular type was Results: The patient isa 15-month-old female with short suspected. NGS analysis was performed using Illumina bones, ﬂared metaphyses, camptodactyly, anisospondyly, (NextSeq 500) technology with a ClearSeq Inherited238 J.delPicchia Disease panel (Agilent Thecnologies) and consisted in the mutation. We also found same mutation (c.321_353del) in analysis of the coding and intronic regions of collagen ﬁve patient with OIEBS who lives same city. Pamidronate deﬁciency related gene. The study did not show any treatment was given to 16 follow-up patients. pathogenic variant and was completed by analysis of gene Conclusions: The clinical course of the patients was dosage by MLPA (
P331 ; 
P332 ), resulting in patient progressive; bone fractures were started in the infantile HETEROZYGOUS for deletion of exons 5-7 of the period(15/18)andcontinuedasmorethan1fracture(9/16) CO
L5 A1 gene. Presence of deletion was conﬁrmed in per year. During the follow-up period, severe limb affected familial members. deformity (7/16) and scoliosis (11/16) developed and no Conclusions: Vascular complications in nonvascular patient could walk (16/16). Although most families are not subtypes of the EDS could be life-threatening. - Misdiag- related, they had the same mutation which is attributed to nosis of child abuse should be considered in EDS - The the founder effect. relevanceofstudymicrodeletionsincasesnotdiagnosedby A. Yüksel Ülker: None. D. Uludag Alkaya: None. G. gene sequencing. Yeşil: None. G. Toksoy: None. Z. Uyguner: None. B. P. Marin Reina: None. A. Zuñiga Cabrera: None. A. Tüysüz: None. ParraLlorca:None.P.MolinaAguilar:None.J.Blasco: None. A. Monzo Blasco: None. M. Evole Buselli: None. 
P04 .26.B Widesuturesandfontanels,delayedspeechdevelopment 
P04 .25.A and a hoarse voice useful signs in diagnosing KBG Follow-up ﬁndings and genotype-phenotype correlation syndrome, clinical, molecular and cytogenetic descrip- in 18 Turkish patients with biallelic mutation in the tion of 12 patients. FKB
P10  gene A. Kutkowska-Kazmierczak1, M. Gos1, J. Castaneda1, M. A.YükselÜlker1,D.UludagAlkaya1,G.Yeşil2,G.Toksoy3, Boczar1, A. Barczyk1, A. Pietrzyk1, O. Kordowska1, T. Z. Uyguner3, B. Tüysüz1 Gambin1, P. Własienko1, B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik1, K. Kowalczyk1, M. Bartnik-Głaska1, M. Smyk1, M. 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istan- Paczkowska1, I. Plaskota1, K. Niepokój1, J. Kelly2, B. bul,Turkey,2BezmialemVakifUniversity,MedicalFaculty, Nowakowska1, E. Obersztyn1, J. Bal1 Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istan- bul University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical 1InstituteoftheMotherandChild,Warsaw,Poland,2Quest Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey Diagnostics Nichols Institute, Chantilly, VA, United States Introduction: Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI)-typeXI and Bruck syndrome type-I are two very rare disorders caused Introduction: KBG syndrome is a neurodevelopmental by biallelic FKB
P10  gene mutations. While both disorders disorder characterized by short stature, macrodontia, are characterized by early onset bone fractures, progressive developmental delay,behavioralproblems ashyperactivity, bone deformity and scoliosis, Bruck syndrome type 1 also velopharyngealinsufﬁciency causing feeding problems and has congenital contractures and pterygium. FKB
P10 / speech delay and by delayed closing of sutures and fonta- KRT14 mutations have been reported to be present in nels. Most of the patients with KBG syndrome have a patientswithOI-typeXI andEpidermolysisbullosasimplex mutation of ANKRD11 gene or micro-rearrangement (OIEBS).Theaimofthisstudyistoinvestigatetheclinical encompassing this gene. ﬁndings andgenotype-phenotype correlationintheTurkish Patientsandmethods:Wepresentclinicalevaluationsof cohort with FKB
P10  mutation. 12 patients with the clinical features of KBG syndrome at Materials and Methods: Eighteen patients from ﬁfteen theagefrom4monthsto17years.Themutationanalysisin families were enrolled. FKB
P10  mutations studied via these patients was performed using panel next generation sanger sequencing or next generation sequencing. The sequencing (6pts), whole exome sequencing (WES) (2pts) parents of all patients had consanguineous marriages. 16 and array CGH (4pts). patients were followed up for 6.2 years (7 months-15.5 Results: Besides typical dysmorphic features for KBG years). syndromefound inall patients, themajorityofpatients had Results: We identiﬁed p.Gly300Ter in eleven patients wide sutures and fontanels (7/12), delayed speech (9/11), andp.Gly278Argfs*95inonepatientwholivesameregion. feeding problems (9/12). Hoarse voice was noticed in 4 Ten of these patients were compatible with OI-XI, two patients and short stature, below 2 SD in two patients, patients had Bruck1 phenotype. One patient with Bruck1 between -1-2 SD in 7 patients. Abnormal behavior was who lives different region had a novel (c.1256+1G>A) noted in 4 patients, macrodontia in 3 patients.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 239 Conclusions:Thefactthatthedelayedclosingofsutures Conclusions: It is remarkable, that all seven tested andfontanelswasobservedinmorethanhalfofourpatients affected family members from three generations carry both with KBG syndrome caused by mutations or rearrange- variants in GJB3 and KRT10. Although the KRT10 variant ments of ANKRD11 gene conﬁrms the role of this gene in is pathogenic, it cannot be excluded that the GJB3 variant skull and suture formation. Speech delay is found in has an impact on the phenotype, since the initial suspected majority of patients with this syndrome. Rarely described diagnosis was EKV. However, it cannot be excluded that sign - hoarse voice could reinforce clinical knowledge in theGJB3variantisneutral.Inthiscase,analysisofpatients diagnosing KBG syndrome. The studies on craniosynos- with suspected EKV should include pathogenic variants in toses were supported from Institute of Mother and Child in KRT10. Warsaw intramural grant no. OPK-510-18-63 A. Hotz: None. S. Redler: None. J. Kopp: None. A. A. Kutkowska-Kazmierczak: None. M. Gos: None. J. Zimmer: None. J. Fischer: None. Castaneda: None. M. Boczar: None. A. Barczyk: None. A. Pietrzyk: None. O. Kordowska: None. T. Gambin: 
P04 .30.C None. P. Własienko: None. B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: When textbooks fall short - earlier detection of None. K. Kowalczyk: None. M. Bartnik-Głaska: None. Hypochondroplasia - a large UK cohort experience M. Smyk: None. M. Paczkowska: None. I. Plaskota: and systematic review. None. K. Niepokój: None. J. Kelly: None. B. Now- akowska: None. E. Obersztyn: None. J. Bal: None. A. Sabir1, E. Morley2, J. Sheikh2, A. Singh2, A. Cocca1, M. Cheung1, M. Irving1 
P04 .27.C Patients with suspected Erythrodermia variabilis of a 1Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospital, London, United large family carry variants in GJB3 and KRT10 Kingdom, 2University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom A. Hotz1, S. Redler2, J. Kopp1, A. Zimmer1, J. Fischer1 Introduction: Hypochondroplasia (HCH) is a rare auto- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center somal dominant skeletal dysplasia caused by FGFR3 Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany, 2Insti- mutations leading to disproportionate short stature. Classi- tute of Human Genetics, Heinrich-Heine-University, Med- cally HCH presents in toddlers or school-age children, as ical Faculty, Düsseldorf, Germany limb-to-trunk disproportion is often mild and easily over- lookedduringinfancy.WereportexperiencesfromourUK Introduction: Erythrokeratoderma variabilis (EKV) is a HCH cohort of ~30 patients and review recent literature to rare skin disease characterized by two features: red skin explore the antenatal detection of HCH. areas with sharp borderlines, which tend to shift positions; Methods: We reviewed the rate of antenatal HCH and hyperkeratosis, which can either be generalized or detection in our 29 patient cohort and describe relevant localized as thickened plaques. EKV is mostly inherited in case-date. We then conducted a systemic, retrospective an autosomal dominant manner and is mainly caused by literaturereview using PUBMEDandMEDLINE,identify- pathogenic variants in GJB3, GJB4 or GJA1. ing antenatally suspected / detected HCH cases. Paper Results: We describe a large family with twelve patients inclusion criteria: Antenatally suspected HCH. Molecular of ﬁve generations affected by a skin disorder. The index conﬁrmation of denovo HCH. Exclusion criteria: unclear patientshowstypicalfeaturesofEKV.Mutationanalysisin antenatal scanning history. seven affected members from three generations using Next Results: Antenatally suspected (and concurrent or GenerationandSangersequencingmethodsrevealedthatall deferred molecularly conﬁrmation) HCH has been reported of them carry both the heterozygous unclear variant 10 times in the literature (between 2004-2019) and in 6 of c.783G>C, p.(Gln261His) in GJB3 and the novel hetero- our 29 patient cohort. Key sonographic markers included zygous pathogenic variant c.1346A>C, p.(Tyr449Ser) in reduced; femur length, biparietal diameter and humeral KRT10. Pathogenic variants in KRT10 lead to Epidermo- length. lytic ichthyosis, which is characterized by diffuse erythro- Conclusions: HCH is increasingly detected both antena- dermaandblisteringatbirthandprogressivehyperkeratosis tally and in infancy, contrary to previous descriptions. This later in life and is usually inherited in an autosomal is likely due to greater HCH awareness, improved imaging dominant manner. Furthermore, two unaffected members and easier molecular testing. Thus one should consider wereanalyzed,oneofthemcarriesnoneofthevariants,the HCH outside the classical presenting period. Studying the other only the GJB3 variant. natural history of earlier cases is important with the advent of several targeted FGFR3 therapies currently in trials for240 J.delPicchia Achondroplasia (Biomarin’s Vosorotide, Ascendis’ Trans- evidenceforthecontributionofrare,large-effectvariantsto chon, QED’s Infagratinib and Pﬁzer’s TA-46) as such the etiology of this common trait. therapies may soon be trialled in HCH and are likely most C.T. Thiel: None. N. Hauer: None. C. Vogl: None. S. efﬁcacious during earliest skeletal maturation. Uebe: None. H. Sticht: None. A.B. Ekici: None. C. A. Sabir: None. E. Morley: None. J. Sheikh: None. A. Kraus: None. H. Dörr: None. A. Reis: None. Singh: None. A. Cocca: None. M. Cheung: None. M. Irving: None. 
P04 .32.B IRAK1geneSNPsrs1059703andrs3027898polymorph- 
P04 .31.A isms is associated with psoriasis Mono-allelic deleterious variants in autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia genes are strongly associated with L. Kucinskas1, A. Bruzaite1, J. Cepaite1, V. Kucinskiene2, idiopathic short stature R. Ugenskiene1, S. Valiukeviciene2 C.T.Thiel1,N.Hauer1,C.Vogl1,S.Uebe1,H.Sticht2,A.B. 1Institute of Biological System and Genetic Research Ekici1, C. Kraus1, H. Dörr3, A. Reis1 LUHS, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Department of Skin and Venereal Diseases, Lithuanian University of Health 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Univer- Sciences (LUHS), Hospital of LUHS Kauno Klinikos, sität Erlangen-Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, Germany, 2Insti- Kaunas, Lithuania tute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, Germany, 3Depart- Psoriasis vulgaris and psoriatic arthritis are multifactorial ment of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Friedrich- diseases with an important genetic component. The clinical Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, signiﬁcance of IRAK1 genes SNPs rs1059703 ir rs3027898 Germany areunknownforpsoriasispathogenesis.Theaimofpresent studywastodeterminateIRAK1geneSNPsrs1059703and Short stature is a common concern in childhood with an rs3027898 clinical importance for psoriatic arthritis and incidence of 3%. After exome analysis about 60% remain psoriasisdevelopment.Methods.106patientswithpsoriasis without diagnosis (idiopathic short stature, ISS). Recent from Skin and Veneral disease department of Lithuanian identiﬁcation of heterozygous mutations in ACAN in 1.4% University of Helath Sciences hospital and 52 healthy of ISS individuals conﬁrmed that single, large-effect var- control group subjects were genotyped. The IRAK1 gene iants strongly affect height (appr. 15cm ﬁnal adult height). SNPsrs1059703andrs3027898genotypingwasperformed We therefore hypothesized that heterozygous variants in using Mva1269I (BSMI) and Eco57I (AcuI) restriction other autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia genes also enzymes.Dataandstatisticalanalysiswasperformedusing, contribute to ISS. We selected exome data from 368 ISS Microsoft Ofﬁce Excel“ and, IBM SPSS Statistics 20.0“ families where previous analysis showed no mutations in a programs.Results. The number of patients of IRAK1 gene known growth-associated gene and selected 114 genes rs3027898 with C/A, C/C and C genotypes outnumbered known to be involved in autosomal recessive inherited controlgroup (32persons(30%) vs5persons(10%). The skeletal dysplasia, extracted from the “Nosology and Clas- numberofpatientsofIRAK1rs1059703withC/T,C/Cand siﬁcation of Genetic Skeletal Disorders” (Bonafe et al. C genotype was higher compare with control group (30 2015). From a total of 391 heterozygous variants we persons(30%)vs6persons(11%).Thestatisticalanalysis selected 33 variants in 26 genes which were classiﬁed as of patients genotypes and psoriatic arthritis corelation ACMG class 4/5 and compatible with segregation in the showed no signiﬁcant data of association (p < 0,05). Odds familiesandwerethusconsideredstrongcandidatesforISS. ofratiocalculation(OR)showedIRAK1rs3027898C/A,C/ This accounted for 31 patients (8.4%). No class 4/5 variant C, C and IRAK1 rs1059703 C/T, C/C and C genotypes in any of the 26 genes was detected in 343 controls (p<1e- association with psoriasis (OR 4,06) and (OR 3,39) 85). Frequently affected genes were ACAN (6 individuals) respectively.Conlusions.Statisticallysigniﬁcantassociation and NPR2 (3 individuals) representing 2.5% of the study of IRAK1 rs3027898 and IRAK1 rs3027898 SNPs with group. In addition to missense variants in 17 genes, a psoriatic arthritis was not determinated. IRAK1 rs3027898 nonsense variant was observed in ADAMT
S10 , CHST3, C/A,C/C,CgenotypesandIRAK1rs1059703C/T,C/Cand CY
P27 B1, TCIRG1, TRI
P11 , WDR35 and CU
L7 . Our C genotypes are associated with psoriasis development. ﬁndings suggest a strong association between rare mono- L. Kucinskas: None. A. Bruzaite: None. J. Cepaite: allelic deleterious variants in genes for recessive skeletal None. V. Kucinskiene: None. R. Ugenskiene: None. dysplasia and idiopathic short stature and provide further S. Valiukeviciene: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 241 
P04 .33.C C. LAM Skin cancer screening is indicated in IWC patients due to the identiﬁcation of heterozygous KRT10 variants in The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China patients with MAUIE syndrome Introduction: Hypomelanosis of Ito is a neurocutaneous B. Burger1, A. Ghosh1,2, C. K. Y. Ng3, S. Piscuoglio1, I. syndrome, characterized by distinctive skin manifestations, Spoerri1, P. H. Itin1, K. Greer4, D. Elbaum5 with or without multisysteminvolvements. While theexact cause of hypomelanosis of Ito is unknown, chromosomal 1University of Basel and University Hospital Basel, Basel, mosaicism as a result of sporadic gene mutation has been Switzerland,2UniversityofZurichandETHZurich,Zurich, suggested in literature. Switzerland, 3University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 4Uni- MaterialsandMethods:InourClinicsforRarediseases versity of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States, Referral (CRareDr), we encountered a 3-year-old girl 5Mercy Hospitals of Bakersﬁeld, Bakersﬁeld, CA, United presenting with characteristic skin pigmentation and devel- States opmental delay, suggesting hypomelanosis of Ito This case was enrolled in our undiagnosed diseases program (UDP) Ichthyosis with confetti (IWC) is an autosomal dominant forendingdiagnosticodyssey.Weinitiatedgeneticanalysis skin disorder characterized by a congenital erythema and for neurodevelopmental impairment using whole-genome thedevelopmentofnumerouspalespots.About20%ofthe (WGS) and whole exome sequencing (WGS). patients are reported to develop skin cancer at young Results: Aheterozygousde novo variant NM_022113.6: adulthood. All IWC patients are carriers of a heterozygous c.2357dupA; p.Asn786Lysfs*18 in the KIF13A gene was keratin (KRT)10 or KRT1 variant leading to a shifted identiﬁed in the patient. The variant is a single nucleotide reading frame and the translation of an aberrant carboxyl duplicationcausingashiftinthetranslationalreadingframe (C)-terminus. This results in the nuclear localization of the and premature termination of the protein. The variant is KRT10/KRT1 protein instead of cytoplasmic. About 20 absent in control population in gnomAD exomes and years ago, two patients were described as MAUIE patients. genomes. They showed the typical IWC-phenotype including the Conclusions: KIF13A is a relatively new gene with a development of pale spots. Both patients developed limited number of studies on its function and has not been aggressive and fatal cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma reported to cause any hereditary conditions. To date, (cSCC).Ageneticanalysisisnotyetdone.Ourstudyaimed KIF13A is known to interact with adaptor complex AP-1, to identify an IWC-correlated frameshift variant in both formingacomplexthatisresponsibleforthetransportation patientsandtoclarifywhethertheysufferedfromIWC.We of a number of proteins and receptors to plasma membrane performedwholeexomesequencingongenomicDNAfrom and endosomal organelles. The role of KIF13A in FFPE cSCC tissue of both deceased patients and screened melanosome biogenesis is well-demonstrated in in-vitro for variants similar to IWC-associated variants. A hetero- studiesandmayexplaintheunderlyingpathogenesisofskin zygous KRT10 variant, encoding for the aberrantly shifted hypopigmentation in hypomelanosis of Ito. C-terminus, was identiﬁed in each patient and the nuclear C. Lam: None. localization of KRT10 was conﬁrmed by immuno- ﬂuorescence staining. Our study reclassiﬁed both MAUIE 
P04 .37.A patients as patients with a speciﬁc form of IWC. The fatal Functional evidence supporting the hypothesis that courseofthediseaseisnottypicalfortheotherIWCforms, NeanderthalsandDenisovanshadageneticallyspeciﬁed butitemphasizestheimportanceofskincancerscreeningin high bone mass negatively selected in anatomically all IWC-patients. We recommend the regular intensive modern humans examination of their skin for cancers and a good education of the patients with reference to their disease. N. Roca-Ayats1, I. Maceda2, C. Bruque3, M. Cozar1, N. B.Burger:None.A.Ghosh:None.C.K.Y.Ng:None.S. Garcia-Giralt4, L. Mellibovsky4, W. van Hul5, O. Lao2, D. Piscuoglio: None. I. Spoerri: None. P.H. Itin: None. K. Grinberg1, S. Balcells1 Greer: None. D. Elbaum: None. 1University of Barcelona, CIBERER, IBUB, IRSJD, Barce- 
P04 .34.A lona, Spain, 2Centre Nacional d’Anàlisi Genòmica CNAG- Kinesinfamilymember13A,KIF13A,isanovelgenefor CRG, Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro Nacional de Genética hypomelanosis of Ito Médica, ANLIS, Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experi- mental, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4Musculoske- letal Research Group, IMIM (Hospital del Mar Medical242 J.delPicchia Research Institute), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en de Medicina Xenómica, Universidade de Santiago de Red de Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Hospital (CIBERFES), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 5Department of Vall d’Hebron, Servicio de Cardiología, Barcelona, Spain, Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Bel- 4CIBER enfermedades Raras, Santiago de Compostela, gium Spain, 5FundaciónPúblicaGalega deMedicinaXenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain Introduction: Bonedensityunderwentgracilizationthrough hominin evolution; while Neanderthals and Denisovans had Introduction: Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant robust and dense bones, anatomically modern humans disorder of connective tissue manifested in the ocular, (AMH) show a more gracile skeleton. In this context, muta- skeletal and cardiovascular systems. It is most frequently tionsintheﬁrstβ-propellerofLR
P5 resultinhighbonemass causedbymutationsinFBN1withhighclinicalpenetrance, (HBM)inAMH,suggestingthisgeneasasuitablecandidate but showing a high inter and intra-familial variability, that for studying the hominin evolution of bone mass. cannotbeexplainedbythecurrentknowledgeofgenotype- Material and Methods: Variants were looked for in the phenotype correlation. In order to improve knowledge of publically available Neanderthal and Denisovan genomes the whole genetic background of this disease, this study andfunctionallytestedbyaluciferaseassayinSaos-2cells. aims to identify genetic modiﬁers of the phenotypic AmolecularhomologymodelofLR
P5 wasgeneratedusing expression of Marfan syndrome, looking for the intra- MODELLER (v.9.22). Introgression was inferred in the familial variability with known causal mutation in FBN1. Simons Genome Diversity Project using the CRF method. Material and Methods: A total of 22 Marfan syndrome Evidences of selective pressures at LR
P5  in AMH were patients with different severity from 8 families with known sought using PopHuman browser. FBN1 mutation, were exome sequenced. For exome wide Results: We identiﬁed ﬁve Neanderthal or Denisovan gene-set analyses F-SKAT (familial sequence kernell missense mutations in LR
P5 . Four displayed signiﬁcantly association test) was performed. At the intra-family level, greater Wnt pathway stimulation, and two also showed non-common rare protein changing variants among ﬁrst- reduced inhibition by DKK1. Modelling suggested that degree relatives with severe and mild phenotypes were these mutations either affected the 3D structure of the ﬁrst selected for discriminant analysis of principal components β-propeller, or impinged on the interaction of LR
P5  with (DAPC). DKK1. We observed that the LR
P5  genomic region in Results: F-SKAT test showed no gene with signiﬁcant AMHisdepletedofintrogressionfromNeanderthalsand/or differences after Bonferroni test between severe and mild Denisovans and that the functional Neanderthal and phenotype group of patients. Nevertheless, DAPC showed Denisovanmutationsareataverylowfrequencyincurrent twogenesofretinalhomeostasis,NXN
L1 geneandR
P1 L1
 human populations. gene, asoneof theprincipal contributors tothe discrimina- Conclusions: The variants identiﬁed in Neanderthal and tion analysis between mild and severe phenotype. Denisovan genomes, together with the evolutionary ana- Conclusions: The genetic architecture of Marfan syn- lyses in the LR P5
 region suggest that this gene may have drome is very complex, however, as it was previously been involved in HBM determination in archaic hominins. described in the literature, this study point to the genes Funding: Spanish MINECO (SAF2016-75948-R; related to retinal homeostasis as possible genetic modiﬁers PG C2018
-098574-B-I00); CIBERER (U720); AGAUR of the disease. Founding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III and (2017 SGR 937). Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (PI14/01062, PI16/ N. Roca-Ayats: None. I. Maceda: None. C. Bruque: 00903) None. M. Cozar: None. N. Garcia-Giralt: None. L. E. Ramos-Luis: None. G. Teixidó: None. J. Limieres: Mellibovsky:None.W.vanHul:None.O.Lao:None.D. None. R. Cruz: None. C. Granato: None. B. Sobrino: Grinberg: None. S. Balcells: None. None. J. Amigo: None. A. Blanco-Verea: None. A. Carracedo:None.A.Evangelista:None.M.Brion:None.  P04
.39.C Looking for genetic modiﬁers in Marfan syndrome  P04
.40.A Reciprocal translocation as a possible cause of familial E. Ramos-Luis1,2, G. Teixidó3, J. Limieres3, R. Cruz4,2, C. connective tissue disorder Granato3,B.Sobrino5,2,J.Amigo5,2,A.Blanco-Verea1,2,A. Carracedo5,2,4, A. Evangelista3, M. Brion1,2 B. Herr, K. Komlosi, A. Tzschach, J. Fischer, B. Gläser 1Xenética Cardiovascular, Instituto de Investigación Sani- Department of Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany taria de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2GrupoAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 243 Introduction: Monogenic disorders due to apparently We compared three different guidelines, by reanalyzing balancedreciprocaltranslocationsarerarelyreported.There patients’ data of the FBN1 gene. arefewreportsofinterstitialdeletionsinvolvingFBN1-gene Materials and Methods: Variants in the FBN1 gene, andonlyonecaseofapatientwithMarfansyndromeanda foundinourlab,wereusedtocomparetheoutcomeofthree complex chromosome rearrangement. However, no disrup- different variant classiﬁcations: the ACMG guidelines, the tionofFBN1duetoatranslocationhasbeenreportedsofar. methods of our accredited laboratory (ISO15189-RvA- Clinical report: We report on a mother and daughter M174) and recommendations from the Revised Ghent with clinical symptoms of connective tissue disorder. The nosology of Marfan syndrome (Loeys et al. 2010). 39-year-old mother presented with congenital strabismus, Results: We classiﬁed, by using our guidelines, 869 muscle weakness, muscle hypotrophy of forearms and variants as pathogenic. 77 of these are classiﬁed as benign calves, reduced exercise tolerance and muscle and joint according to Loeys et al. or VUS according to ACMG. A pain.Skeletalmanifestationsincludedarachnodactyly,joint largenumberofvariantsthatweclassiﬁedasbenignwould laxity and foot deformity. Her father and a paternal uncle beclassiﬁedaslikelybenignorVUSaccordingtotheother had skeletal abnormalities and died unexpectedly in young guidelines. adulthood. Her 18-year-old daughter fulﬁlled the Ghent Conclusions: Comparison of various variant interpreta- criteria for Marfan syndrome. tionsshowsthatpathogenicvariantswereclassiﬁedasVUS Methods and Results: Connective tissue panel diagnos- or even benign by using the other guidelines. This was tics did not reveal pathogenic variants in the mother. R- mainlycausedbyusinganincorrectconsensussequencefor banded karyotyping of lymphocyte cultures revealed the the amino acid motif of the 47 EGF domains in ﬁbrillin-1 same reciprocal translocation in mother and daughter: 46, (Loeysetal.)ornotusingspeciﬁcpropertiesoftheprotein. XX,t(2;15)(q22;q21.1). Chromosome microarray analysis Different use of frequency data causes a large difference in revealed no imbalances. Subsequent FisH analysis with interpretationofbenignvariants.Thesedataemphasizethat region-speciﬁcBACprobesfor2qand15qnarroweddown knowledge of the disease and the protein involved are the translocation break point to a region of approximately indispensable in correct interpretation of variants. 110 kb from g.43663778 proximal the 3`end of FBN1 to G.Pals:None.S.A.Stolk:None.A.Maugeri:None.D. g.48772449 in intron 32-33 of FBN1. Micha: None. M.A.M.M. Mannens: None. Conclusions: In order to prove a possible disruption of FBN1 weplantoperform long range PCR, next generation  P04
.42.C mapping and RNA sequencing. We emphasize the impor- Identifying the molecular cause in Marfan and Marfan tance of a combination of cytogenetic and molecular likephenotypeinacohortofpatientsfromRomania-5- diagnostic techniques to reveal the cause of monogenic year single center experience diseases typically caused by point mutations. B.Herr:None.K.Komlosi:None.A.Tzschach:None. M. Puiu1, A. Chirita-Emandi1, N. Andreescu1, G. Doros2, J. Fischer: None. B. Gläser: None. A. Popoiu2, A. Dumitrescu3, A. Lacatusu4, C. Zimbru5  P04
.41.B 1GeneticsDiscipline,CenterofGenomicMedicine,“Victor Variant classiﬁcation in Marfan syndrome: illustrating Babes,” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, an underestimated issue in DNA-diagnostics Romania, 2Pediatric Department University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, G. Pals1,2,3, S. A. Stolk1, A. Maugeri1, D. Micha2, M. A. M. 3Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children “Louis Tur- M. Mannens1 canu”,Timisoara,Romania,4“VictorBabes,”Universityof Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 5Depart- 1Amsterdam UMC, Genome Diagnostics laboratory, ment of Automation and Applied Informatics, Politehnica Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Centre for Connective tissue University, Timisoara, Romania disorders, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Prodia laboratories, Jakarta, Indonesia Background: Connective tissue disorder represent a group of life-threatening disorders. The prevalence of these dis- Introduction: Correct classiﬁcation is crucial for reliable eases is relatively low, but Marfan, Ehlers-Danlos, and diagnostic DNA-testing of patients. The classiﬁcation of Loeys-Dietz syndromes are ubiquitous, affect both genders variants ranges from benign (class 1) to pathogenic (class and involve several organs, particularly the cardiovascular 5). General recommendations for classiﬁcation have been system,eyes,andskeleton.Mortalitygenerallyresultsfrom developed, like the American College of Medical Genetics cardiovascular complications, mainly aortic dissection. (ACMG). Variant classiﬁcation differs per method used. Identifying the molecular cause can lead to a different244 J.delPicchia therapeutic management and the possibility for prevention ﬁbroblasts (HDFs) have been derived. Cells displayed of reoccurrence in the family. in vitro abnormalities of nuclear envelope morphology, Aim:Weaimedtoretrospectivelyevaluatethediagnostic presence of micronuclei, a large number of autophago- yield in these group o patients and present the variants somesand a signiﬁcant accumulation of prelamin A, identiﬁed. strongly linked to altered cellular proliferation and geno- Methods: Using targeted Next Generation Sequencing micinstability. DNA damage-induced treatment in MDPL- (NGS) with a panel for 174 genes (TruSightCardio HDFs revealed a poor capacity of DNA repair, an arrestin Illumina) related to cardiologic diseases we screened 52 G0/G1phasetransition,andalowernumberofcellsintheS patients (37 males/15 females) evaluated for a Marfan/ phase. Moreover, Western Blot analysesshowed a nuclear Marfan like phenotype using Ghent nosology, between reduction of POLD1 in MDPL-HDFs compared to WT in 2015-2020 at the Center for Genomic Medicine University basal condition but a statisticallysigniﬁcant and persistent of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Romania. increaseaftercisplatin/1-GyX-raydamagewhencompared Results: Diagnosis was identiﬁed in 55.7% (29/52) to WT. Analysis of telomere length exhibited an increased patients, most(25) pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants rate of telomere shortening, accompanied by anaccumula- werefoundinFBN1gene,3splicesite,5frameshiftand17 tionofunrepairedtelomericDNAdamage.Furthermore,the missense variants, including two variants associated with evaluation of H2AX and TelomereInduced Foci after 1-Gy neonatalMarfanSyndrome(NM_000138.4:c.3143T>Cand X-raytreatmentenabledustoﬁgureoutthatPOLD1repairs c.3217G>A). Of these, 10 are previously unreported less efﬁciently DNAdamage and its activity is mainly variants.Nineoutof52patientsoriginatedfrom3families. associated with the homologous recombination phase. Diagnosis in 3 other patients involved CO L3
A1, TGFBR1 Finally, we also generated human induced pluripotent stem and SL C2
A10 genes. cells from patient’s ﬁbroblasts showing thepeculiar pre- Conclusions: This study broadens the spectrum of senceofmicronuclei.Knowingthemechanisticbasisforthe pathogenic variants in FBN1 gene, providing an update of association of DNA damage and failed DNA repair with the molecular basis of Marfan Syndrome in Romania. aging wouldopen up new therapeutic possibilities for this M. Puiu: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. N. rare disease. Andreescu: None. G. Doros: None. A. Popoiu: None. A. C. De Masi: None. P. Spitalieri: None. M. Murdocca: Dumitrescu: None. A. Lacatusu: None. C. None. V. Ferradini: None. M. D’Adamo: None. P. Zimbru: None. Sbraccia: None. M. Sanchez: None. I. Udroiu: None. J. Marinaccio:None.G.Novelli:None.A.Sgura:None.M.  P04
.44.B D’Apice: None. F. Sangiuolo: None. Characterization of the pathogenetic role of POLD1 gene in Mandibular hypoplasia, Deafness, Progeroid  P04
.45.C features and Lipodystrophy (MDPL) Syndrome Molecular analysis of Polish patients with Mendelian Disorders of Corniﬁcation C. De Masi1, P. Spitalieri1, M. Murdocca1, V. Ferradini1, M. D’Adamo2, P. Sbraccia2, M. Sanchez3, I. Udroiu4, J. K. Wertheim-Tysarowska1, K. Osipowicz2, A. Kutkowska- Marinaccio4, G. Novelli1, A. Sgura4, M. D’Apice5, F. Kaźmierczak1,J.Sawicka1,M.Jackiewicz1,O.Kordowska1, Sangiuolo1 M. Gos1, A. M. Rygiel1, K. Niepokój1, K. Woźniak2, C. Kowalewski2, J. Bal1 1Dep. of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Dep. of Systems Medicine, Tor 1Medical Genetic Department, Institute of Mother and Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 3Core Facilities Center - Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Dermatology and Section of Cytometry, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Immunodermatology,WarsawMedicalUniversity,Warsaw, Italy,4Dep.ofScience."RomaTre"University,Rome,Italy, Poland 5Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Tor Vergata Hospital, Rome, Italy Introduction: Mendelian Disorders of Corniﬁcation (MeDOC) comprise syndromic or non-syndromic hetero- MDPL deﬁnes a multisystem disorder identiﬁed in 22 geneous disorders manifesting by skin hyperkeratosis and/ patients worldwide and associated to mutations inPOLD1 or scaling. Mutations in approximately 40 different genes gene, encoding the DNA polymerase δ, involved in DNA can cause MeDOCs, that can be inherited in autosomal replicationandrepair.Weidentiﬁedanin-framedeletion(p. recessive/dominant or X-linked patterns. Identiﬁcation of Ser605del), segregating for the ﬁrst time as an autosomal molecular defect is essential for prognosis, proper medical dominantmutation, in a MDPL patient from whom dermal interventions and genetic counseling. Nonetheless, geneticAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 245 diversity, low incidence of majority of MeDOCs and Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California overlapping phenotypes make diagnosis challenging. The at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, aim of the study was to characterize molecularly Polish 6DepartmentofOrofacialSciences,UniversityofCalifornia MeDOC patients. at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, Materials and methods: A group of 161 patients with 7Department of Anatomy, University of California at San clinical symptoms of MeDOC was enrolled to the study. Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 8U.S. Genetic analysis was performed using self-designed custo- Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, Berkeley, mized NGS panel. Sanger sequencing or MLPA were used CA, United States, 9Comparative Biochemistry Program, for mutations veriﬁcation. University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United Results: We identiﬁed full genotype in 125 (78%) States, 10School of Natural Sciences, University of Cali- patients. In 17 (11%) patients we didn’t detect any fornia Merced, Merced, CA, United States mutation, while in 19 (12%) we found mutation in one allele only, despite expected autosomal recessive inheri- Nonsyndromiccleftlipwith/withoutcleftpalate(nsCL/P)is tance. Overall, we detected mutations in 27 distinct genes. amongthemostcommoncongenitalmalformationsandhas The 33 patients had mutations in more than one gene amultifactorialetiology.Commonrisklociexplainpartsof involved in skin barrier functioning: 13 of them had the trait heritability, but a substantial fraction needs to be pathogenic mutations in two genes, while in remaining 20 elucidated. Parts of the missing heritability could be cases variant of unknown signiﬁcance was detected in at explained by rare, penetrant mutations that might occur de least one of the genes. novo in genes potentially involved in craniofacial devel- Conclusions: Our diagnostic strategy proved to be an opment. A previous study by our group identiﬁed three efﬁcient and sensitive diagnostic tool for MeDOC patients. nsCL/P susceptibility genes with rare recurrent de novo Our data provide further information regarding molecular mutations(PAXI P1
,MDN1,ANK1).Thepresentstudyaims epidemiology of skin barrier defects and also focus on the at assessing a contribution of the rare mutations found in presence of secondary mutations, which have important these nsCL/P susceptibility genes to cleft development by impact on genetic counseling and, presumably, may affect using CRISPR/Cas9 generated mouse models. We created therapy. Supported by NCN:2014/13/D/NZ5/03304 ﬁve knock-in mouse strains that carried human missense K.Wertheim-Tysarowska:None.K.Osipowicz:None. mutations in Paxip1 (1 mutation), Ank1 (1 mutation), and A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: None. J. Sawicka: None. Mdn1 (3 different mutations). Embryos at embryonic day M. Jackiewicz: None. O. Kordowska: None. M. Gos:  E18
.5 were dissected and assessed for craniofacial anoma- None. A.M. Rygiel: None. K. Niepokój: None. K. liesusingskeletalpreparationsandmicroscopicassessment. Woźniak: None. C. Kowalewski: None. J. Bal: None. No craniofacial anomalies were observed for  E18
.5 embryos in the F generation in any of the ﬁve knock-in 0  P04
.49.A strains. In the F generation, 2/31  E18
.5 pups carrying the 1 CRISPR/Cas9-based analysis of a missense variant in knocked-in Paxip1 missense mutation in a heterozygous Paxip1suggestssubtleeffectsonpalatalprocessdistance statepresentedwithabnormalbodyposture,abroadersnout and a subtle increase in distance between the palatal pro- N. Ishorst1,2, E. Z. Kvon2, Y. Zhu2, S. Tran2, I. Plajzer- cesses, suggesting a role of the missense variant in Paxip1 Frick2,C.S.Pickle2,S.Hölzel1,A.Harrington2,J.Godoy2, in craniofacial development. Further follow-up studies in J. A. Akiyama2, L. Selleri3,4,5,6,7, I. C. Welsh3, M. M. mice homozygous for the variants and more precise phe- Nöthen1, K. U. Ludwig1, E. Mangold1, D. E. Dickel2, L. A. notyping methods are ongoing. Pennacchio2,8,9, A. Visel2,8,10 N. Ishorst: None. E.Z. Kvon: None. Y. Zhu: None. S. Tran:None.I.Plajzer-Frick:None.C.S.Pickle:None.S. 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof Hölzel:None.A.Harrington:None.J.Godoy:None.J.A. Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Akiyama: None. L. Selleri: None. I.C. Welsh: None. M. 2Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology Division, M. Nöthen: None. K.U. Ludwig: None. E. Mangold: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, None. D.E. Dickel: None. L.A. Pennacchio: None. A. United States, 3Program in Craniofacial Biology, Univer- Visel: None. sity of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of  P04
.50.B California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United High-throughput screen for rare variants in candidate States, 5Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration genes for orofacial clefting246 J.delPicchia B. Zametica1, F. Thieme1, J. Fazaal1, N. Ishorst1, E.  P04
.52.A Ongkosuwito2, C. Carels3, I. A. L. M. van Rooij4, E. Phenotypic spectrum of NPR2 mutations: study of 12 Mangold5, K. U. Ludwig1 patients with acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type and 8 patients with short stature. 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, C. Michot1, S. Prévost1, C. Haudry1, A. Tourré1, A. Dieux- Bonn, Germany, 2Department ofOrthodontics and Cranio- Coeslier2, M. Mathieu-Dramard3, M. Rossi4, A. Toutain5, facial Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life G. Baujat1, S. Rondeau1, V. Cormier-Daire1 Sciences, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Depart- ment of Human Genetics and Department of Oral Health 1APHP - Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, Sciences,KULeuvenandUniversityHospitalsKULeuven, 2CHU de Lille - Centre de Biologie Pathologie Génétique, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department for Health Evidence, Lille, France, 3CHU Amiens-Picardie - Site Sud, Amiens, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud university France, 4CHU de Lyon HCL - GH Est-Hôpital Femme medical center (Radboudumc), Nijmegen, Netherlands, Mère Enfant, Bron, France, 5CHRU de Tours - Hôpital 5Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Bonn, Bretonneau, Tours, France Bonn, Germany Introduction: Acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type Nonsyndromiccleftlipwith/withoutcleftpalate(nsCL/P)is (AMDM, MIM 602875) associates disproportionate short a common birth defect with multifactorial etiology. stature, short limbs and extremities with cone-shaped epi- Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed physes. AMDM is caused by biallelic mutations of NPR2 >40risklocithatcontributetonsCL/Prisk,andithasbeen (natriuretic peptide receptor B). Heterozygous NPR2 suggestedthat~30%ofphenotypicvarianceisexplainedby mutations are involved in idiopathic or dyschondrosteosis- commongeneticvariation.Intheabsenceofsurgery,nsCL/ like short stature. P is a detrimental phenotype, which implies a considerable Materialsandmethods:Ourstudyreviewedtheclinical effect on reproductive ﬁtness. Thus, rare variants are likely andmolecularﬁndingsofAMDMandshortstaturepatients to also contribute to nsCL/P etiology. First studies have with NPR2 mutations. 12 AMDM DNAs and more than suggestednsCL/Pcandidategenesthatharborcausativerare 200 short stature DNAs were tested, after SHOX MLPA variants, or a burden thereof. These studies included the testing, in the molecular biology laboratory of Necker analysis of established “syndromic” genes (n = 6 genes), Hospital. genes with established role in craniofacial development (n Results: NPR2 mutations were identiﬁed in all AMDM = 5), and the identiﬁcation of mutations in genes of the cases and in 8 short stature patients. 23 different mutations epithelial cadherin-p120-catenin complex segregating were identiﬁed: nonsense, frameshift, splice and missense within multiply affected families (n = 5). However, inde- ones in AMDM and mostly missense variants in short pendent replication islacking. Here,we aimedatproviding stature. Heterozygous parents of AMDM patients were further genetic evidence for an involvement of these genes relativelysmall.AllAMDMpatientswereofshortbirthand in nsCL/P etiology, through the identiﬁcation of additional ﬁnal heights (125-130 cm). Apart small extremities, 6 had evidence for rare variants from a large Central-European largehalluxand7hadcurvedradiuswithlimitedpronation. cohort. Using single molecule molecular inversion probes Outof12cases, 8hadhyperlaxity, 7scoliosis and8 dental (smMIPs), we obtained high-conﬁdent sequencing results misalignment and arched palate. All heterozygous patients for14ofthe16genesin711nsCL/Pcases,761population- wereofnormalbirthsizeandgrewbetween-2,5to-1,5SD. based controls, and 234 case-parent trios. At individual They had normal envergure/height ratio, even if X-rays level, we identiﬁed four novel loss-of-function (LoF) var- showed thick radius. 2/8 had IV and V brachymetacarpia. iants (3 cases / 1 control). The variants observed in cases Conclusions: our study supports AMDM genetic homo- were LoF-mutations in CDH1, CTNND1 and MTRR. Fur- geneity. We underline the importance of speciﬁc assess- ther statistical analyses, including analyses of missense ments, including laxity, scoliosis and orthodontics. We variants, burden and pedigree analyses, are currently conﬁrm that NPR2 heterozygous mutations should be ongoing and will help to further understand the etiology of considered in short stature with minor skeletal changes. nsCL/P. NPR2functioninC-natriureticpeptidesignalingmightlead B.Zametica:None.F.Thieme:None.J.Fazaal:None. to therapeutics options. N. Ishorst: None. E. Ongkosuwito: None. C. Carels: C. Michot: None. S. Prévost: None. C. Haudry: None. None. I.A.L.M. van Rooij: None. E. Mangold: None. K. A.Tourré:None.A.Dieux-Coeslier: None. M.Mathieu- U. Ludwig: None. Dramard: None. M. Rossi: None. A. Toutain: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 247 G. Baujat: None. S. Rondeau: None. V. Cormier- (GWAS) in a medium-sized nsCL/P cohort encompassing a Daire: None. total of 285 nsCL/P patients and 1,212 controls from The Netherlands and Belgium. Twenty of 40 previously reported  P04
.55.A nsCL/P susceptibility loci were replicated, and at the well- Non-syndromic cleft lip with/without cleft palate: established nsCL/P susceptibility locus at chromosome Genome-wide association study in patients from The 8q24.21, the analyses identiﬁed 62 genome-wide signiﬁcant Netherlands and Belgium identiﬁes a suggestive risk SNVs. These ﬁndings underline the validity of this sample. locus at 16p12.1 and supports SH3PXD2A as a clefting SNV-based analysis of the data identiﬁed a yet unreported susceptibility gene. suggestivelocusatchromosome16p12.1(p-valueofthelead SNV:4.17×10-07).Thisassociationwasreplicatedintwoof I. van Rooij1, K. U. Ludwig2, J. Welzenbach2, N. Ishorst2, three patient/control replication series (Central European and M. Thonissen3, T. E. Galesloot1, E. Ongkosuwito3, S. J. Yemeni). The lead SNV rs56383345 maps to a 930 kb non- Bergé4,K.Aldhorae5,A. Rojas-Martinez6,L. Kiemeney7,J. codingregion at16p12.1, and is not locatedin anycurrently Vermeersch8, H. Brunner9, N. Roeleveld1, K. Devriendt10, known regulatory element. Gene-based analysis of the T. Dormaar11, G. Hens12, M. Kanpp13, C. Carels14,8, E. GWASdataprioritizedSH3PXD2Aatchromosome10q24.33 Mangold2 asacandidategenefornsCL/P.Todate,supportforthisgene asacleftgenehasbeenrestrictedtodatafromzebraﬁshanda 1Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute for knockout mouse model. The present GWAS is the ﬁrst to Health Sciences, Department for Health Evidence, Nijme- implicate SH3PXD2A in non-syndromic cleft formation in gen, Netherlands, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University humans. In summary, although performed in a relatively of Bonn, School of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, small sample, the present GWAS generated novel insights Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Radboud Institute for Health into nsCL/P etiology, and demonstrates how medium-sized, Sciences, Department of Dentistry, Section of Orthodontics clinically well characterized GWAS samples can improve and Craniofacial Biology, Radboud university medical knowledge of the genetic basis of nsCL/P. center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Radboud university med- I. van Rooij: None. K.U. Ludwig: None. J. Welzen- icalcenter,DepartmentofOralandMaxillofacialSurgery, bach:None.N.Ishorst:None.M.Thonissen: None.T.E. Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Orthodontic Department, College Galesloot: None. E. Ongkosuwito: None. S.J. Bergé: of Dentistry, Thamar University, Thamar, Zambia, 6Tecno- None. K. Aldhorae: None. A. Rojas-Martinez: None. L. logico de Monterrey, School of Medicine, and Universidad Kiemeney: None. J. Vermeersch: None. H. Brunner: Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, Centro de Investigación y None. N. Roeleveld: None. K. Devriendt: None. T. Desarrollo en Ciencias de la Salud, Monterrey, Mexico, Dormaar: None. G. Hens: None. M. Kanpp: None. C. 7Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute for Carels: None. E. Mangold: None. Health Sciences, Department for Health Evidence and Department of Urology, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Depart-  P04
.56.B ment of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, GWAScandidategenesforcleftlipwithorwithoutcleft 9Radbouduniversitymedicalcenter,DepartmentofHuman palate: Analysis of expression data during embryonic Genetics, and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and craniofacial development. Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Center for Human Genetics,UniversityHospitalsLeuven,KULeuven,Leuven, A. Siewert1, B. Reiz2, J. Welzenbach1, H. Dickten2, K. U. Belgium, 11Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Ludwig1 Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 12Department of Neurosciences, Experimental Otorhinolaryngology, KU 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 13Institute of Medical Biometry, Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, 2FASTGenomics, Comma Soft AG, Bonn, Germany Germany, 14Orthodontics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium Molecular defects during craniofacial embryonic develop- mentmayresultinnonsyndromiccleftlipwith/withoutcleft Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/P) palate (nsCL/P), one of the most common birth defects. ranks among the most common human congenital mal- Despite the possibility of surgical correction, follow-up formations.TheetiologyofnsCL/Pismultifactorial,whereby treatment is long-term and requires an interdisciplinary genetic risk factors, environmental exposures, and potential approach. Also, epidemiological data indicate that indivi- gene-environment interactionsall contribute to susceptibility. duals with nsCL/P show an increased risk for morbidities The present project is a genome-wide association study and suffer from a considerable psycho-social burden.248 J.delPicchia The molecular pathways underlying these observations are Germany, 7Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico de currently unknown. We here used nsCL/P-GWAS data and Coimbra, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, array-based expression data from embryonic mice (gesta- Coimbra, Portugal, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, St tional days  E10
.5- E12
.5, Hooper et. al 2017), to identify Michael’s Hospital, University Hospitals Bristol, Bristol, pathways in which nsCL/P candidate genes are enriched. UnitedKingdom,9SkeletalDysplasiaGroup,Departmentof The 45 nsCL/P risk loci comprise ~400 genes within their Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University topologically associated domains. Using gene-based ana- ofCampinas,Campinas,Brazil,10HospitaldasClínicasda lysis, we identiﬁed 86 genes with enrichment of common FaculdadedeMedicinadaUniversidadeFederaldeMinas variants, suggesting their involvement in nsCL/P etiology. Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 11Univer- Foreachofthesegenes,weanalyzedtheexpressionpattern sity Clinic of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of in ectodermal or mesodermal tissues of mandibular, max- Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 12University Clinic of illary and fronto-nasal prominences, and performed hier- Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra,, archical clustering. One of the three clusters we identiﬁed Coimbra, Portugal, 13University Clinic of Pediatrics, comprised 33 genes, including established nsCL/P-genes Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, likeIRF6andTFA P2
a.Apathwayanalysisofgeneswithin Portugal, 14Unidade de Genética, Instituto da Criança do this cluster revealed a signiﬁcant overrepresentation of Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da cancer-related pathways and processes related to molecular Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 15Instituto signaling. Interestingly, affecteds with nsCL/P have been de Biociências da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, reported to be at increased risk of cancer. We will next Portugal, 16Unidade de Endocrinologia, Instituto da extend our approach at single-cell level, using systematic Criança do Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de data as recently provided (Cao et. al 2019) and the analy- Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, tical ecosystem FASTGenomics (Scholz et. al 2018). This Portugal, 17Division of Genetics, Children’s Hospital, will generate novel insights into gene regulatory networks University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 18Stellenbosch across development, and their contribution to nsCL/P. UniversityDivision of Genetics, Children’s Hospital, Uni- A.Siewert:None.B.Reiz:A.Employment(fullorpart- versity of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 19Institute of time);Signiﬁcant;CommaSoftAG.J.Welzenbach:None. Human Genetics, University Hospital Halle, Martin Luther H.Dickten:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; UniversityHalle-Wittenberg,Halle,Germany,20Connective Comma Soft AG. K.U. Ludwig: None. Tissue Unit, Division of Metabolism, University Children’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 21Division of Pedia-  P04
.59.B tric Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism, Depart- Severe Osteogenesis imperfecta with oligodontia: think ment of Pediatrics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, of MESD Bern, Switzerland, 22Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany; Department of Pedia- S. Moosa1,2,3, G. L. Yamamoto4,5,3, L. Garbes6, K. Keupp6, trics, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, A. Beleza-Meireles7,8, C. A. Moreno9, E. R. Valadares10, S. 23Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of B.deSousa7,11,S.Maia7,12,J.Saraiva7,13,R.S.Honjo14,C. Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 24Institute of Human Genet- A. Kim15, H. Cabral de Menezes16, E. Lausch17, P. V. ics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Lorini18,19, A. Lamounier Jr10, T. C. B. Carniero10, C. Germany, 25Institute of Human Genetics, University Giunta20, M. Rohrbach20, M. Janner21, O. Semler22, F. Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Ghana, 26Cologne Center Beleggia23, Y. Li24, G. Yigit24, N. Reintjes25, J. Altmüller26, for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, P. Nürnberg26, D. P. Cavalcanti9, B. Zabel17,27, M. L. 27MedicalFacultyoftheUniversityofMagdeburg,Magde- Warman28, D. R. Bertola14,5, B. Wollnik24,29, C. Netzer23,30 burg, Germany, 28Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Boston Children’s 1Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, South Africa, 2Uni- HospitalandHarvardMedicalSchool,Boston,MA,United versity Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, States, 29Cluster of Excellence, Multiscale Bioimaging: 3Boston Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, from Molecular Machines to Networks of Excitable Cells Boston,MA,UnitedStates,4UnidadedeGenética,Instituto (MBExC), University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, da Criança do Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de 30Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Germany 05403-000, Brazil;, Brazil, 5Instituto de Biociências da UniversidadedeSãoPaulo,SãoPaulo,Brazil,6Instituteof Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) comprises a genetically het- Human Genetics, University Hospital of Cologne and erogeneous group of skeletal fragility diseases. It is often Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, clinicallyimpossibletopredicttheunderlyingcausativegene,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 249 thus necessitating broad multi-gene panel testing or exome Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Justus Liebig Universität Gießen, sequencing. We report on ﬁve independent families with a Gießen,Germany,5UniversitaetsmedizinGöttingen,Göttin- progressively-deforming type of OI with the distinguishing gen, Germany feature of oligodontia. We identiﬁed four homozygous trun- cationorframeshiftmutationsinanovelgeneforOI,namely Wereportona34year-oldpatientwithsandwichvertebrae, MESD. MESD encodes an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) platyspondyly, osteosclerosis of long bones, pathologic chaperone protein for the canonical Wingless-related inte- fractures, and anemia. In the third decade, he developed gration site (WNT) signaling receptors LR P5
 and LR P6
. osteonecrosisofthejaws,whichwasprogressiveinspiteof Because complete absence of MESD causes embryonic repeated surgical treatment. An iliac crest bone biopsy lethality in mice, we hypothesized that the OI-associated revealed an elevated trabecular density (BV/TV [%] 32.2 mutations are hypomorphic alleles since these mutations vs. 21.5 + 14.8) and the presence of hypermineralized occur downstream of the chaperone activity domain but cartilage remnants leading to an overall increase in miner- upstream of ER-retention domain. This would be consistent alization (CaMean [wt%] 25.65 vs. 21.8). We also found with the clinical phenotypes of skeletal fragility and oligo- largemultinucleatedosteoclastswithabnormalmorphology dontiainpersonsdeﬁcientforLR P5
andLR P6
,respectively. and inadequate bone resorption. Although these ﬁndings FurtherfunctionalanalysisshowedthatOI-associatedMESD were reminiscent of autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type mutations produce hypomorphic alleles whose failure to 2,nomutationsinCLCN7weredetected.Subsequentwhole remain within the ER signiﬁcantly reduces but does not exome sequencing identiﬁed the novel homozygous splice- completelyeliminateLR P5
andLR P6
trafﬁcking.Sincethese site mutation c.261G>A in the gene LRRK1. cDNA individuals have no eye abnormalities (which occur in indi- sequencing showed nearly complete skipping of exon 3 viduals completely lackingLR P5
) and have neither limb nor leading to a frameshift (p.Ala34Profs*33), very likely brain patterning defects (both of which occur in mice com- leading to a loss of function. LRRK1 encodes a protein pletely lacking LR P6
), we infer that bone mass accrual and kinase and its dysfunction can cause osteosclerotic meta- dental patterning are more sensitive to reduced canonical physeal dysplasia (OSMD; OMIM # 615198). Osteoclasts WNT signaling than are other developmental processes. differentiated in vitro from the patient’s peripheral blood Multigene panels do notyet includeMESD. Therefore,if an monocytes formed quickly and became unusually large. In undiagnosedpatientwithsevereOIandoligodontiapresents, resorption assays these cells formed large areas with it may be prudent to think ﬁrst of MESD. superﬁcial pseudo-resorption but excavated only few S. Moosa: None. G.L. Yamamoto: None. L. Garbes: resorptionpits(resorptionpitsurfacesurface[%]1.3+0.6 None. K. Keupp: None. A. Beleza-Meireles: None. C.A. vs. 15 + 3.6; p < 0.01). Phosphorylation of L-plastin was Moreno: None. E.R. Valadares: None. S.B. de Sousa: strongly reduced in patient-derived osteoclasts, thus corro- None. S. Maia: None. J. Saraiva: None. R.S. Honjo: borating a LRRK1 loss of function (0.26 + 0.1 vs. 1 + None.C.A.Kim: None.H.CabraldeMenezes: None.E. 0.08; p < 0.01). Our analysis indicates a strong overlap of Lausch: None. P.V. Lorini: None. A. Lamounier Jr: LRRK1-related OSMD with other late-onset forms of None. T.C.B. Carniero: None. C. Giunta: None. M. osteopetrosis, but an exceptionally leaky osteoclast Rohrbach: None. M. Janner: None. O. Semler: None. F. resorption. Beleggia:None.Y.Li:None.G.Yigit:None.N.Reintjes: A.Howaldt:None.A.Hennig:None.T.Rolvien:None. None. J. Altmüller: None. P. Nürnberg: None. D.P. U.Roessler:None.A.Knaus:None.S.Boettger:None.S. Cavalcanti:None.B.Zabel:None.M.L.Warman:None. Geißler: None. R. Oheim: None. M. Amling: None. H. D.R. Bertola: None. B. Wollnik: None. C. Netzer: None. Howaldt: None. U. Kornak: None.  P04
.61.A  P04
.62.B Adult osteopetrosis with osteonecrosis of the jaws and The lrp5 knockout zebraﬁsh as a model to study abnormal osteoclast resorption due to a LRRK1 splice osteoporosis site mutation P.J.Coucke,J.Bek,H.DeSaffel,A.DeClercq,A.Boel,A. A. Howaldt1, A. Hennig1, T. Rolvien2, U. Roessler1, A. Willaert Knaus3, S. Boettger4, S. Geißler1, R. Oheim2, M. Amling2, H. Howaldt4, U. Kornak5 Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium 1Charité-Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, Osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (OPPG) is an auto- 2University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Ham- somal recessive disorder characterized by reduced bone burg,Germany,3SchoolofMedicine&UniversityHospital mass and strength, caused by loss-of-function mutations in250 J.delPicchia LR P5
(low-densitylipoproteinreceptor-relatedprotein5),a reported that p.R321C mutation causes a blockade of co-receptor in the WNT signaling pathway. Here we autophagyandanactivationofNF-kBpathway.Theaimof describe the ﬁrst reliable genetically induced form of this study was to characterize the effect of the p.R321C osteoporosis in the zebraﬁsh in a lrp5 knockout (KO). mutation in human osteoclasts. Molecular analysis conﬁrmed reduced lrp5 transcripts and Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) absence ofLpr5protein. Reduced survivalwas observedin were isolated from blood samples for generating human lrp5 KO larvae after the onset of mineralization. The frac- osteoclasts.CellsweredifferentiatedbyaddingM-CSFand tion of larvae that did survive, displayed delayed ossiﬁca- RANKL for 3 weeks. Human osteoclasts were transiently tionaswasshownviamineralstaining.Subsequently,these transfected with total plasmid DNA (pCEFL-Flag- ﬁsh were grown to adulthood and analyzed via μCT. This SQSTM1-321C and pCEFL-Flag-SQSTM1-321R con- revealed decreased bone volume and decreased bone structs). Finally, we performed a co-immunoﬂuorescence mineralization in the vertebral column, which are hallmark assay to detect Flag and p62. featuresofosteoporosis.Next,weperformedCRISPR/Cas9 Results and discussion: Our results showed that, while mediated mutagenesis targeted at lrp5 followed by F0 321R-p62proteinremainedscatteredthoughthecytoplasm, phenotype analysis (crispant screening). Miseq sequencing 321C-p62 was concentrated in the periphery of osteoclasts. of the mosaic larvae revealed out-of-frame mutations in on Thisrelocationofp62proteincausedbyp.R321Cmutation average 90% of the reads. Consequently, we showed a could be a consequence of autophagy blockade, which has similarskeletalphenotypeintheF0‘crispants’tothatofthe been reported that could have a crucial role in the etiology stable lrp5-/- larvae, showing that crispant screening in of PDB. The p.R321C mutation causes a blockade of zebraﬁsh is a promising approach to functionally screen a autophagy and an activation of NF-kB pathway, therefore large set of osteoporosis candidate genes. In summary, we the alteration of the cell metabolism could be the cause of present lrp5−/− zebraﬁsh as the ﬁrst genetic osteoporosis the relocation of p62 protein in human osteoclasts. zebraﬁshmodelthatcanbeusedasascreeningplatformfor Conclusion: The p.R321C mutation in p62 protein leads potential therapeutics. Additionally, we show that F0 cris- to a relocation of the protein in human osteoclasts. This pant screening can be used for functional validation of reinforces the hypothesis that an alteration of autophagy candidate genes for osteoporosis as high rates of out-of- could be involved in PDB etiology. frame mutations in the lrp5 gene are sufﬁcient to induce This work was supported by FIS-FEDER:PI16/01920. phenotypes. N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. R. Usategui-Martín: None. C. P.J. Coucke: None. J. Bek: None. H. De Saffel: None. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero: None. A.I. Turrión Nieves: None. A. De Clercq: None. A. Boel: None. A. Willaert: None. J. Del Pino-Montes: None. R. González- Sarmiento: None.  P04
.64.A The p.R321C mutation in p62 protein, associated to  P04
.66.C Paget’s Disease of Bone, leads to a relocation of the Penttinen syndrome and infantile myoﬁbromatosis in a protein in human osteoclasts patient carrying the tyrosine kinase-activating variant Asn666Ser in PDGFRB N. Gestoso-Uzal1,2, R. Usategui-Martín1,2, C. Gutiérrez- Cerrajero2,1, A. I. Turrión Nieves1,3, J. Del Pino-Montes1,3, D. Horn1, A. T. Abad-Perez1, V. Stephan2 R. González-Sarmiento2,1,4 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, 1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 2Sana Chil- Salamanca, Spain, 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department dren´s Hospital Lichtenberg, Berlin, Germany of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Rheumatology Service, University Hospital of Salamanca, Introduction: Penttinen syndrome belongs to the group of Salamanca, Spain, 4Institute of Molecular and Cellular progeroid disorders and is characterized by progressive Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca- subcutaneous lipoatrophy, sclerotic skin lesions and acro- CSIC, Salamanca, Spain osteolysis. This very rare condition is caused by a few distinct missense mutations of PDGFRB, other distinct Background: The most important known genetic factor mutations of this gene have been shown to be associated predisposing to Paget´s disease of bone (PDB) is mutation withdifferent conditionssuchasinfantilemyoﬁbromatosis. in SQSTM1 gene, which encodes p62 protein. We detected Material and Methods: Here, we describe a 5-year-old the c.961C>T SQSTM1 gene mutation in three PDB male patient with infantile myoﬁbromatosis diagnosed in patients, that causes the p.R321C mutation. It has been his ﬁrst month of life who in addition developed aAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 251 prematurely aged appearance with lipoatrophy, scar-like gingivalﬁbroblasts (3 biological and 3 technical replicates) skin nodules on the hands and joint contractures. and quantiﬁed the mRNA levels in 24h transfected and Results:Sangersequencingrevealedtheheterozygousde mock-transfected cells (Clariom D Array, ThermoFisher novo mutation c.1997A>G; p.Asn666Ser in the PDGFRB Scientiﬁc). The gene U2AF homology motif kinase 1 gene. Recently, this mutation has been described in two (UHMK1) was signiﬁcantly downregulated in the miRNA patients affected with a severe form of Penttinen syndrome mimic transfected cells (Fold Change= -1.8, P=0.00025). presenting a more pronounced connective tissue Twobindingsitesofhsa-miR-374b-5pwerepredictedatthe destruction. 3’UTR of UHMK1. To validate the functional mechanism, Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report of an individual we cloned therespective 3’UTR ofUHMK1 into a reporter affected with both conditions, infantile myoﬁbromatosis plasmid (pG L4
.24, Promega). After co-transfection of the and Penttinen syndrome. This mutation lead to increased plasmid and hsa-miR-374b-5p mimic into HeLa cells for phosphorylation of downstream signalling proteins such as 24 hours, the reporter gene expression was signiﬁcantly PTPN11. Imatinib is a strong inhibitor of phosphorylation reduced (Fold Change= -1.5, p=0.02, 3 independent of these targets representing a treatment option. replicates). UHMK1 has a role in the coordination of D. Horn: None. A.T. Abad-Perez: None. V. osteoblast differentiation. Stephan: None. R. Wiehe: None. D. Bajric: None. A. El Sharawy: None. A. Keller: None. H. Dommisch: None. A.  P04
.67.A Schaefer: None. Blood secreted miRNA hsa-miR-374b-5p inhibits osteoblast-differentiating gene UHMK1 and is upregu-  P04
.70.A lated in periodontitis patients PO P1
-Skeletal Dysplasias : Description of two new families. R. Wiehe1, D. Bajric2, A. El Sharawy3, A. Keller4, H. Dommisch1, A. Schaefer1 J. HARVENGT, S. ALKAN, B. FLORKIN, S. BULK, V. BOURS 1Charité-Universitymedicine Berlin, Institute for Dental and Craniofacial Sciences, Department of Periodontology CHU Liège, Liège, Belgium and Synoptic Dentistry, Berlin, Germany, 2University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Depart- Background: PO P1
 mutations should be considered in ment of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology, Kiel, anauxeticdysplasia(AD)patientswithoutRMRPmutations Germany, 3Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, butalsoinskeletaldysplasia(SD)ofdifferentseverities.To Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 4Clin- date, only 5 patients were reported. ical Bioinformatics, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Methods: Cartilage Hair Hypoplasia (CHH) was sus- Saarbrücken, Germany pected in two siblings based on clinical and radiological evaluation.Infamily1,a4yearsboywasinvestigated.His microRNAs interact with the 3’UTRs of target mRNAs to older sister is also affected by SD but currently refuses to suppress gene expression. MicroRNAs act tissue speciﬁ- pursue genetic testing. In family 2, two sisters presented a cally but some are secreted into blood. Recent studies severe short stature : the older has 120 cm as ﬁnal adult reported upregulation of speciﬁc miRNAs in the inﬂamed height. The second aged of 13 also suffered from an oralmucosaofperiodontitispatients.Theregulatorytargets immune deﬁciency. of these miRNAs may reveal genes that are conducive to Results: A skeletal dysplasia gene panel revealed in the oral health. If secreted into blood, these miRNAs could PO P1
gene:Family N°1:acompositeheterozygous variant serveasbiomarkerstodiagnoseperiodontitisbeforeclinical c.1846A>C, class3 (paternally inherited) and c.1747G>T, manifestation.ToidentifysuchmiRNAs,wequantiﬁed863 class 4 (maternally inherited). Family N°2 : a homozygous miRNAs in the blood of 18 periodontitis patients and 70 variant c.632G>A, class 4. periodontitis-freecontrols(GeniomBiochiparray).miRNA Discussion: PO P1
 patients are characterized by severe hsa-miR-421 and hsa-miR-374b-5p were most signiﬁcantly short stature of prenatal-onset and very short adult height upregulated in blood of periodontitis cases (P < 5x10 (classically less than 1 meter, but our adult patients were adjusted −6). Two previous studies that proﬁled microRNAs in the 120cmandnear160cm),hypodontia,midfacehypoplasia, inﬂamed and healthy oral mucosa independently reported mildintellectualdisabilityandradiologicalspeciﬁcﬁndings >2fold upregulation of hsa-miR-374b-5p, but not hsa-miR- including systematic bullet-shaped middle phalanges. 421. Using mirVana miRNA mimics (ThermoFisher Sci- Notably, none of the 5 published cases were reported with entiﬁc), we overexpressed hsa-miR-374b-5p in primary immune deﬁciency.252 J.delPicchia Conclusions: We describe two new families with PO P1
 CARD14inthepathogenesisofPPP.Theyalsosuggestthat mutations encountered in patients clinically suspected for the proteins encoded by disease alleles are prone to con- CHH and achondroplasia, enhancing that the phenotypical stitutiveoligomerization,whichwillcauseabnormalNF-kB spectrum is larger than AD type 2. Larger cohorts of activation. patientsareneeded toimprovetheclinical characterization, A.Niaouris:None.S.Haddad:None.A.PushpaRajah: especially the risk of having associated symptoms such as None. N. Benzian-Olsson: None. P. Baum: None. S. immune deﬁciency. Visvanathan: None. T. he APRICOT and PLUM study J. Harvengt: None. S. Alkan: None. B. Florkin: None. team:None.J.Barker:None.C.Smith:None.F.Capon: S. Bulk: None. V. Bours: None. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already  P04
.71.B received); Signiﬁcant; 3 Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma Coding variants of the CARD14 NF-kB adaptor are GmbH & Co. associated with palmar plantar pustulosis  P04
.74.B A. Niaouris1, S. Haddad1, A. PushpaRajah2, N. Benzian- Further delineation of Roifman syndrome: report of Olsson1, P. Baum3, S. Visvanathan4, T. he APRICOT and four new Spanish patients PLUM study team2, J. Barker2, C. Smith2, F. Capon1 I. Valenzuela1, I. Cusco1, I. Paramonov1, F. López- 1King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 2St Grondona1, S. Garcia-Miñaur2, M. Palomares-Bralo2, A. John’s Institute of Dermatology, Guy’s and St Thomas’ Martin1, J. Riviere1, M. Garcia-Prat1, P. Soler1, R. NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Boeh- Colobran1, E. Garcia-Arumí1, E. Tizzano1 ringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach, Germany, 4Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. 1Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital La KG, Ridgeﬁeld, CT, United States Paz, Madrid, Spain Caspase recruitment domain containing protein 14 Roifman Syndrome (RS, OMIM 300258) is a rare disorder (CARD14) is a soluble NF-kB adaptor protein, which is characterized by pre- and postnatal growth retardation, mostly expressed in keratinocytes. In the presence of cognitive delay, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, antibody inﬂammatorystimuli,freeCARD14moleculesoligomerise, deﬁciency and facial dysmorphism. Biallelic mutations in recruit a BC L10
/MALT1 signalosome and activate NF-kB RNU4ATAChavebeenreportedasthemolecularcause.Our signalling. Gain-of-function CARD14 variants have pre- seriesexpandthephenotypicspectrumofRoifmanpatients. viously been associated with inﬂammatory skin diseases We report four patients from three unrelated families with suchaspsoriasisvulgarisandgeneralisedpustularpsoriasis. RS. Due to the complexity of variant annotation in However, the involvement of CARD14 in palmar plantar RNU4ATAC, molecular studies are not usually straightfor- pustulosis (PPP), a localised form of pustular psoriasis, ward. Indeed, in families 1 and 2 exome sequencing was remains unclear. Here, we analysed CARD14 changes in inconclusive. In patient 1 the diagnosis was ﬁnally uncov- 160 PPP cases (125 females, 35 males; mean age of onset: ered by genome sequencing, in sisters 2 and 3 by Sanger 41 years) ascertained across the UK. We identiﬁed 11 rare sequencing upon clinical suspicion and in patient 4 by a variants predicted to have a deleterious effect on protein customizedgenepanel.Mainclinicalcharacteristicsinclude function. A burden test (comparing PPP cases vs controls skeletal dysplasia (4/4), short stature (4/4), intellectual dis- sequenced by the ExAC consortium) demonstrated a sig- ability(4/4),antibodydeﬁciency(3/4)andretinaldystrophy niﬁcant association between these changes and PPP (OR: (2/4). Main dysmorphic features included markedly long 2.5; 95% CI: 1.39-4.65; p = 0.0023). We also detected a philtrumandthinupperlip.Hepatomegalywasidentiﬁedin low-frequencyallelewithdeleteriouspotential( E422
K)that 2/4 and patient 1 presented hepatic cavernoma (unreported occurred more frequently in affected individuals compared so far in Roifamn patients). Molecular results showed var- to controls (OR: 1.7; 95% CI: 1.07-2.69; p= 0.025). To iants n.8C>T and n.50 G>A (patient 1); variant n.13C>T assess the effect of disease-associated variants, CARD14 and n.17 G>C (sisters 2 and 3) and two novel variants, FLAG-tagged plasmids were mutagenized and transfected n.37G>A and n.53C>T (patient 4). Segregation analysis intoHEK293cells.ThedepletionoffreeCARD14fromthe indicated that each variant was inherited from a healthy cytoplasm (which is an indirect measurement of protein parent in the three families. The inclusion of new patients oligomerization) was then analysed by western blotting. with Roifman increases the knowledge of mutational Thisconﬁrmedthatmostvariantspromotetheformationof spectrumandit’sessentialtodelineatethephenotypeofthis insoluble CARD14 oligomers. These ﬁndings implicate syndrome.TherecognitionofthesyndromeisindispensableAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 253 fortheorientationofmoleculardiagnosis,promptfollowup C. Vogl: None. K. Kessler: None. A. Giessl: None. P. and counseling. Kirchner: None. C. Büttner: None. A.B. Ekici: None. A. I. Valenzuela: None. I. Cusco: None. I. Paramonov: Reis: None. C.T. Thiel: None. None. F. López-Grondona: None. S. Garcia-Miñaur: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. A. Martin: None. J.  P04
.79.A Riviere:None.M.Garcia-Prat:None.P.Soler:None.R. Novel variant in PLAG1 in a familiar case of Silver- Colobran: None. E. Garcia-Arumí: None. E. Russell syndrome Tizzano: None. A.Pereda1,Y.Vado2,I.Llano-Rivas3,N.Gorria-Redondo4,  P04
.77.B I. Díez5, G. Perez de Nanclares2 Identiﬁcation of the deregulated NEK1 protein network in skeletal ciliopathies 1Rare Diseases Research Group, Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Research Institute, C.Vogl1,K.Kessler1,A.Giessl2,P.Kirchner1,C.Büttner1, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, 2Rare Diseases Research Group, A. B. Ekici1, A. Reis1, C. T. Thiel1 Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Research Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Araba, Spain, 1Institute of Human Genetics, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, 3Service of Genetics, BioCruces Health Research Institute, Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of Ophthalmology, FAU Hospital Universitario Cruces., Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain, Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany 4Service of Paediatric Neurology, Araba University Hospi- tal,Vitoria-Gasteiz,Araba,Spain,5DepartmentofPediatric The primary cilium is an organelle, which is present on Endocrinology. BioAraba Health Research Institute,Araba almostallvertebratecells.Ciliaconsistoftheaxonemeand University Hospital-Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Araba, the basal body and present various ciliary membrane Spain receptors,whichreceiveextracellularsignals.Thosesignals are transmitted into the cell, where they modulate different Introduction: Silver-Russell syndrome is a rare imprinting intracellular signaling pathways. Mutations in ciliary pro- disorder characterized by prenatal (SGA) and postnatal teins are involved in formation, maintenance and function growth retardation (PNGR), relative macrocephaly at birth, of the primary cilium and associated with developmental a prominent forehead, body asymmetry and feeding difﬁ- defects,likebrainmalformations,polydactyly,kidneycysts culties and/or low BMI. The most common underlying and skeletal abnormalities. This phenotypic spectrum is mechanisms are hypomethylation at H19/IGF2:IG-DMR present among patients with short-rib polydactyly syn- and UPD(7)mat. Rarely, rearrangements involving 11p15, dromes (SRPS). This group constitutes the most frequent orinactivatingpointvariantshavebeenidentiﬁed(maternal lethal autosomal recessive osteochondrodysplasias. CDKN1C or paternal IGF2 variants). Recently PLAG1 and Diallelic mutations in NEK1, encoding for a basal body HMGA2 genes, which participate in the IGF2 pathway, protein,aretheunderlyingcauseofSRPSII.Togainfurther have been associated with this syndrome. insight into the pathogenic mechanism, we used two Patients and Methods: We present a 9 years-old girl approaches: RNA sequencing of CRISPR/Cas9 mediated who was initially referred to pediatric endocrinology genomic edited HEK293T cells and scRNASeq in limb because of short stature. A clinical geneticist suggested buds of  E13
 embryos of theNek1 knock down mouse, and theclinicaldiagnosisofSRS(NHCscore=4:SGA,PNGR, respectively compared the knock out and the wildtype in prominentforeheadandproblemsforfeedingmanifestedas order to ﬁnd differentially expressed genes. Analysis of poor food intake). She also showed dental crowding with signiﬁcantly enriched pathways revealed an activation of delayed teeth eruption, triangular face, small and bulbous genes in early growth response and cell cycle control and nose, prominent maxillary, high ojival palate, ﬁne voice, silencing of different collagens and ribosomal and histone ﬁne hair and learning difﬁculties. Her mother and maternal proteins. One of the main ﬁndings was a severely reduced grandmother presented the same phenotype. After discard- expressionofAcan,codingforAggrecanthemostabundant ingalterationsin11p15andchromosome7(MS-MLPA),a cartilaginous protein, explaining the severe growth custom NGS panel for genes associated with growth phenotype. was run. These results underline that the NEK1 associated defect Results: The study of the NGS panel revealed an oftheprimaryciliumcausesthedeﬁciencyincellcycleand heterozygous novel variant within exon 5 of PLAG1 gene expression, mainly aggrecan, in the growth plate. [NM_001114634.2:c.551delA; p.(Lys184Serfs*45)], bioin- formaticallypredictedaslikelypathogenic (ACMG: PV S1
;254 J.delPicchia PM2; P P1
). Familial studies by Sanger sequencing development of many body organs and systems, including conﬁrmed cosegregation. the skeleton. Skeletal ciliopathies are a heterogenous group Conclusions: We report the second familial case of SRS of disorders with overlapping features, caused by patho- caused by a novel PLAG1 frameshift alteration, and we genic variants in at least 30 genes, coding for different expand the clinical spectrum to the previously described. structural cilia proteins. Funding:InstitutodeSaludCarlosIII(PI16/00073);Basque MaterialsandMethods:Weexamined28probandswith Department of Health (GV2017/111040). radiographic ﬁndings of skeletal ciliopathies. For single A. Pereda: None. Y. Vado: None. I. Llano-Rivas: nucleotide variant (SNV) analysis, we used whole exome None.N.Gorria-Redondo:None.I.Díez:None.G.Perez and genome sequencing with in silico ﬁltering for variants de Nanclares: None. in known skeletal ciliopathy genes. Results: We identiﬁed biallelic variants in 23 patients in  P04
.80.B DYN C2
H1, KIAA0753, WDR19,  C2
CD3, TT C21
B, EVC Increased yield of genetic diagnoses in skeletal ciliopa- and EV C2
.Subsequentexamination offour potential splice thies using massively parallel sequencing, structural variants showed that cDNA analyses are important in variant and RNA analyses facilitating molecular diagnoses in a signiﬁcant proportion (20%) of the patients and that aberrant splicing in A. Hammarsjo1, M. Pettersson1, D. Chitayat2,3, A. Handa4, DYN C2
H1, EVC and KIAA0753 can be conﬁrmed with F. Taylan5, D. Batkovskyte5, B. Anderlid1, A. E. Lin6, K. RNA extracted from blood. Copy number variant (CNV) Shimizu7,A.Beleza-Meireles8,9,B.Chung10,11,U.Voss12,A. analyses was performed for the same cohort and we found Nordgren1, G. Nishimura13, A. Lindstrand1, G. oneindividualwithanintragenicdeletionofDYN C2
H1and Grigelioniene1 another with 1q24q25-microdeletion syndrome. Conclusions: In conclusion, combined SNV, CNV and 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Center RNA analyses result in a high yield of genetic diagnoses for Molecular Medicine, KarolinskaInstitutet, and Clinical (86%) in a cohort of patients with a clinical, autopsy and Genetics, Karolinska University Laboratory, Karolinska radiological ﬁndings consistent with skeletal ciliopathy. University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Division of Grants: AnH - Sällskapet Barnavård and Karolinska Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Institutet. GG - Stiftelsen Samariten, Promobilia and Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Stiftelsen Frimurare. GG, AL and AN - Stockholm County 3The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Council.ANandAL-TheSwedishResearchCouncil.AN Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount Sinai - The Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation. Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, A. Hammarsjo: None. M. Pettersson: None. D. 4Department of Radiology, University of Iowa Hospitals Chitayat: None. A. Handa: None. F. Taylan: None. D. and Clinics, Iowa City, IA, United States, 5Department of Batkovskyte: None. B. Anderlid: None. A.E. Lin: None. Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Center for Molecular K. Shimizu: None. A. Beleza-Meireles: None. B. Chung: Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Med- None.U.Voss:None.A.Nordgren:None.G.Nishimura: ical Genetics, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston, None. A. Lindstrand: None. G. Grigelioniene: None. MA, United States, 7Division of Medical Genetics, Saitama Children’s Medical Center, Saitama, Japan, 8Department  P04
.82.A of Clinical Genetics and Genomics, Guy’s Hospital, Guy’s Lack of bone mineralization in a TANGO1 deﬁcient and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United patient Kingdom, 9Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology,King’sCollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom, B. Guillemyn1, S. Nampoothiri2, O. Foresti3, I. Raote3, V. 10Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The Malhotra3, F. Malfait1, S. Symoens1 University of Hong Kong and Shenzhen Hospital, Futian District, Shenzhen, China, 11Department of Pediatrics and 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University AdolescentMedicine,QueenMaryHospital,TheUniversity Hospital, Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 12Department of Belgium, 2Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita PediatricRadiology,KarolinskaUniversityHospital,Stock- Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Center, Cochin, holm, Sweden, 13Department of Pediatric Imaging, Tokyo India, 3Center for Genomic Regulation, The Barcelona Metropolitan Children’s Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain Introduction: Cilia are important for cell migration and Introduction:TANGO1(TransportandGolgiorganization- signalingusingmultiplepathwaysandproteinsessentialfor 1) encodes a transmembrane protein, located atAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 255 Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) exit sites. TANGO1 binds C. Mechler18, C. Michot7, F. Pelluard19, A. Putoux20,21, collagen in the lumen, COPII-coats in the cytoplasm and S. Whalen22, J. Ghoumid1,2, S. Manouvrier1,2, F. Petit1,2 recruits membranes from the ERGIC (ER-Golgi inter- mediate compartment) to create an export route for bulky 1CHU Lille, Clinique de Génétique, Centre de Référence cargos like collagen. Recently aberrant expression of trun- AnomaliesduDéveloppement,Lille,France,2Universitéde cated TANGO1 was linked to a severe collagenopathy Lille, EA7364, Lille, France, 3CHU Lille, Service de associated with primary obesity, diabetes mellitus and Biochimie et Oncologie Moléculaire, Lille, France, 4CHU intellectual disability. We show that complete loss of Lille, Institut de Génétique Médicale, Lille, France, 5Ser- TANGO1 results in human embryonic lethality with near- vice de Génétique Médicale, CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, total bone loss. France, 6Unité d’Embryofoetopathologie, Service Histolo- Material and Methods: Fetal DNA and parental blood/ gie Embryologie et Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants ﬁbroblastsampleswereobtained.Wholeexomesequencing Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 7Service de Génétique (WES) was performed. RTqPCR, Western blot, immuno- Clinique, Hôpital Necker – Enfants Malades, AP-HP, cytochemical staining and collagen secretion assays were INSERM UMR 1163, Institut IMAGINE, Paris, France, conducted. 8Service de Diagnostic Anténatal, Hôpital René Dubois, Results:Ultrasoundexaminationofa13-weeks-oldfetus Pontoise, France, 9Service d’Hématologie, CHR Metz- of healthy Indian consanguineous parents revealed tetra- Thionville, Metz, France, 10Service d’Anatomo-Pathologie, micromelia, increased nuchal translucency, absent nasal CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 11Institut d’Anatomo- bone, pingpong appearance of the skull, shortened limb Pathologie, CHU Lille, Lille, France, 12Service de Génét- segments, and extreme skeletal hypomineralization. The ique Médicale, CHU Bordeaux, et laboratoire MRGM, pregnancy was terminated and the infantogram showed an INSERM U1211, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, almostbonelessfetus.FetalWESdetectedahomozygous4- 13Département de Génétique, et centre de référence basepair deletion in TANGO1, heterozygously present in anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs, both parents. Parental ﬁbroblast studies demonstrated CHU de Rouen, Centre Normand de Génomique et de decreased TANGO1 expression and protein, and severe MédecinePersonnalisée,Rouen,France,14Départementde defects in collagen secretion. Génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France, Conclusions: Our ﬁndings underscore the importance of 15Service de Génétique, CHU Angers, Angers, France, TANGO1 in cellular protein secretion. While absence of 16Département de Génétique, CHU Grenoble-Alpes, Gre- TANGO1 results in human embryonic lethality, aberrant noble, France, 17Service d’Anatomo-Cytopathologie, Hôpi- expression of truncated TANGO1 results in a severe tal Cochin, AP-HP, Paris, France, 18Unité de collagenopathy.Thisfurthersupportsthephysiologicalrole Foetopathologie, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, ofTANGO1incollagenexport,whichisnecessaryforbone France, 19INSERM U1053-UMR BaRITOn et Unité de mineralization, skin and tissue biogenesis. Moreover, the Foetopathologie, Service de pathologie, Hôpital Pellegrin, data clearly reveal the severity of human pathologies in CHUBordeaux,Bordeaux,France,20ServicedeGénétique, association with levels of functional TANGO1 expression. Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 21GENDEV Team, B. Guillemyn: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. O. CRNL, INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR 5292, UCB L1
, Lyon, Foresti: None. I. Raote: None. V. Malhotra: None. F. France, 22UF de Génétique Clinique, Centre de Référence Malfait: None. S. Symoens: None. Maladies Rares des Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, AP-  P04
.83.B HP, Paris, France TAR syndrome: clinical and molecular characterization of a cohort of 26 patients and description of novel non- Thrombocytopenia-Absent Radius (TAR) syndrome is coding variants ofRBM8A characterized by radial defect and neonatal thrombocyto- penia. It is caused by bi-allelic variants of RBM8A gene S. Boussion1,2, F. Escande2,3, A. Jourdain2,3, T. Smol2,4, P. (1q21.1) with the association of a null allele and a hypo- Brunelle2,3, C. Duhamel2, Y. Alembik5, T. Attié-Bitach6, G. morphic non-coding variant. RBM8A encodes Y14, a core Baujat7, A. Bazin8, M. Bonnière6, P. Carassou9, D. protein of the Exon Junction Complex involved in mRNA Carles10, L. Devisme2,11, C. Goizet12, A. Goldenberg13, maturation. To date, only two hypomorphic variants have S. Grotto14, A. Guichet15, P. Jouk16, L. Loeuillet17, been identiﬁed. We report on a cohort of 26 patients affectedwithTARsyndrome.Halfpatientscarrieda1q21.1 deletion and one of the two known hypomorphic variants. Four novel non-coding variants of RBM8A were identiﬁed in the remaining patients. We developed experimental256 J.delPicchia models enabling their functional characterization in vitro. underdiagnosis ofaortic aneurysminrelatives and improve Two variants, located respectively in the 5’-UTR and 3’- early detection of aortic aneurysms, a CT-scan of the total UTR regions, are responsible for a diminished expression aorta and the iliac arteries should be considered as the whereas two intronic variants alter splicing. Our results method of choice for family screening. bring new insights into the molecular knowledge of TAR Conﬂicts of interest: none. Funding: Lijf en Leven syndromeandenabledustoproposegeneticcounselingfor Foundation patients’ families. R.L. Lechner: None. A.S. IJpma: None. D. Heijsman: S. Boussion: None. F. Escande: None. A. Jourdain: None. J.W. Roos-Hesselink: None. H.J.M. Verhagen: None. T. Smol: None. P. Brunelle: None. C. Duhamel: None. S. ten Raa: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: None. D.F. None. Y. Alembik: None. T. Attié-Bitach: None. G. Majoor-Krakauer: None. Baujat: None. A. Bazin: None. M. Bonnière: None. P. Carassou: None. D. Carles: None. L. Devisme: None. C.  P05
.02.B Goizet:None.A.Goldenberg:None.S.Grotto:None.A. Yield of whole exome sequencing of aneurysm genes in Guichet: None. P. Jouk: None. L. Loeuillet: None. C. 858 patients with an abdominal aorta aneurysm Mechler: None. C. Michot: None. F. Pelluard: None. A. Putoux: None. S. Whalen: None. J. Ghoumid: None. S. R. L. Lechner, A. S. IJpma, D. Heijsman, J. W. Roos- Manouvrier: None. F. Petit: None. Hesselink,H.J.M.Verhagen,S.tenRaa,R.M.W.Hofstra, D. F. Majoor-Krakauer  P05
 Cardiovascular Disorders Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands  P05
.01.A Improving family screening of abdominal aorta aneur- A growing number of genes are associated with risk for ysm patients aorticaneurysms.Similarmechanismsofremodelingofthe extracellular matrix inﬂuencing the integrity of the aortic R. L. Lechner, A. S. IJpma, D. Heijsman, J. W. Roos- wall may play a role in abdominal and thoracic aneurysms. Hesselink,H.J.M.Verhagen,S.tenRaa,R.M.W.Hofstra, This helps to explain co-occurrence of AAA and TAA D. F. Majoor-Krakauer (25%), relatives with AAA in familial TAA and relatives with TAA in familial AAA. Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands ToestablishtheroleofaneurysmgenesinAAA,theyield ofdiagnosticwholeexomesequencing(WES)ofapanelof Relatives of abdominal aneurysm patients (AAA) have an aneurysm genes in AAA patients is presented. increased risk of developing aneurysms. To improve early As part of an ongoing genetic AAA study consecutively detection and reduce risk of rupture in relatives, guidelines diagnosed patients at the department of Vascular Surgery recommend screening of ﬁrst degree relatives. Current wereinvitedforgeneticcounseling.InthiswayWESDNA guidelines do not specify the method or extend of aorta testing was performed in 858 AAA patients (738 unique screeninginrelatives.Inpractice, mostly malerelatives are families, 345 with familial AAA). referred for abdominal echographic screening of the A pathogenic (PV) variant occurred in 20 (3%) AAA abdominal aorta, possibly missing thoracic aneurysms index cases and 7 family members and 301 AAA patients (TAA) in relatives. To determine in which part of the aorta (41%) had a variant of unknown clinical signiﬁcance affected relatives of AAA patients have an aneurysm or (VUS). PV occurred in FBN1 (n = 4), CO L3
A1 (n = 6), dilatation, we reviewed the results of family history taking DSCH1 (n = 1), TGFBR2 (n = 3), NOTCH1 (n = 1), and family screening of families of 471 AAA patients with PLOD1 (n = 1), MYLK (n = 1), MFA P5
 (n = 1) SMAD6 familial aneurysms of which medical records and/or CT (n = 1) and SL C2
A10 (n = 1, heterozygous). VUS were images relatives were available. In total 475 affected rela- observed in FBN2, CO L5
A1, MYH11, PLOD1, TGFB2, tives (311 male, 164 female) in 237 families had an aorta CO L1
A1 and CO L1
A2. There was no difference between dilatationoraneurysm:258(54,3%)hadabdominaland147 familialandsporadicAAAintheWESyield.Theoutcome (31%) thoracic aneurysm. Male relatives were more likely wascomparabletothatfoundinthoracicaneurysmpatients. tohaveAAA(40%vs28%,p<0.05),femalestohaveTAA The conclusion is that DNA diagnostics may improve (32% vs 17%, p < 0.05). Co-occurrence of AAA and TAA stratiﬁcation of familial risk for aortic aneurysms and wasobservedin7%ofrelatives.In17%aniliacandin2% distinguish relatives who beneﬁt most from close a popliteal dilation occurred. In conclusion: relatives of surveillance. AAA patients have an increased risk for dilatation of the Funding Lijf en Leven Foundation abdominal and the thoracic aorta. To prevent Conﬂicts of interest: noneAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 257 R.L. Lechner: None. A.S. IJpma: None. D. Heijsman: had (recurrent) subaortic membrane, suggesting that None. J.W. Roos-Hesselink: None. H.J.M. Verhagen: ADAMT S19
 is the ﬁrst gene identiﬁed related to discrete None. S. ten Raa: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: None. D.F. subaorticstenosis.Incontrasttoprevious publication,none Majoor-Krakauer: None. of these patients were reported as having a bicuspid aortic valve. However, one case presented a bi-commissural  P05
.03.C pulmonary valve. All patients displayed some degree of ADAMT S19
associatedheartvalvedefects:novelgenetic atrioventricularvalveinsufﬁciency.Othercardiacanomalies variantsconsolidatingarecognizablecardiacphenotype included atrial/ventricular septal defects, persistent ductus arteriosus, and mild dilated ascending aorta. S. Massadeh1,2, A. AlHashem3, I. van de Laar4, F. Our ﬁndings conﬁrm that biallelic LoF variants in Alhabshan5, N. Ordonez6, S. Alawbathani6, S. Khan6, ADAMT S19
 are causative of a speciﬁc and recognizable M. Kabbani5, F. Chaikhouni5, A. Sheereen1, I. cardiac phenotype. We recommend considering Almohammed1,2, B. Alghamdi1, S. Ahmad7, I. Frohn- ADAMT S19
 genetic testing in all patients with multiple Mulder8, C. Beetz6, A. Rolfs6,9, P. Bauer6, M. Wessels4, semilunar valve abnormalities, particularly in the presence M. Alaamery1,2, A. Bertoli-Avella6 of subaortic membrane. ADAMT S19
 screening in patients withsemilunarvalveabnormalitiesisneededtoestimatethe 1Developmental Medicine Department, King Abdullah frequency of the HVD related phenotype, which might be International Medical Research Center, King Saud Bin not so rare. Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, King Abdulaziz S. Massadeh: None. A. AlHashem: None. I. van de Medical City, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Laar: None. F. Alhabshan: None. N. Ordonez: A. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2The Joint Center of Excellence for Employment (fullor part-time); Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE Biomedicine Between King Abdulaziz City for Science and AG. S. Alawbathani: A. Employment (full or part-time); Technology (KACST) and Brigham & Women’s Hospital Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE AG. S. Khan: A. Employment (BWH), Joint Centers of Excellence Program, King (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE AG. M. Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST), Kabbani: None. F. Chaikhouni: None. A. Sheereen: Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Division of Pediatric Genetics, None. I. Almohammed: None. B. Alghamdi: None. S. Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical Ahmad: None. I. Frohn-Mulder: None. C. Beetz: None. City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Department of Clinical A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, CENTOGENEAG.P.Bauer:A.Employment(fullorpart- Netherlands, 5Cardiac Sciences Department, Ministry of time); Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE AG. M. Wessels: None. the National Guard - Health Affairs, King Abdullah M. Alaamery: None. A. Bertoli-Avella: A. Employment International Medical Research Center, King Saud bin (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 6CENTOGENE AG, Rostock, Germany, 7Cardiac  P05
.04.A Center,PrinceSultanMilitaryMedicalCity,Riyadh,Saudi Aortic aneurysm and dissection, an underestimated Arabia, 8Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Erasmus ﬁnding in JAG1 mutation carriers University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 9Uni- versity of Rostock, Rostock, Germany I. Van Gucht1, J. R. Bento1, A. Van Berendoncks2, E. Van Craenenbroeck2, J. Saenen3, S. Laga3, J. Meester1, Recently, ADAMT S19
 was identiﬁed as a novel causative A. Verstraeten1, N. Boeckx1, L. Van Laer1, B. Loeys1 gene for heart valve disease (HVD), affecting mainly the aortic and pulmonary valves as described in four patients 1Center of Medical Genetics Antwerp, University of from two families and supported by a mouse Antwerp, University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, knockout model. 2Department of Cardiac Surgery, University Hospital Exome sequencing and data repository (CentoMD®) Antwerp, University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, analyses were performed to identify patients with 3Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Antwerp, ADAMT S19
 variants (two families). A third family was University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium recognized based on cardiac phenotypic similarities and SNP array homozygosity. Three novel loss of function Loss-of-function Jagged-1 mutations classically lead to (LoF) variants were identiﬁed in six patients from three Alagille syndrome (AGS), a dominantly inherited disorder families. Clinically, all patients presented anomalies of the affecting liver, heart, eye, face and skeleton. Pulmonary aortic/pulmonary valves, which included thickening of artery stenosis, present in two thirds of AGS patients, is valve leaﬂets, stenosis and insufﬁciency. Three patients considered as a hallmark of the condition. Other vascular258 J.delPicchia anomalies are identiﬁed in up to 10% of AGS patients. We aortic dissections. The purpose of this retrospective multi- describeauniquefamilywithaJAG1missensevariantthat center study was to review the clinical and genetic data of segregates with a wide range of cardiovascular anomalies. 47 new individuals with a pathogenic or likely pathogenic Whole exome sequencing in a fetus with left hypoplastic ACTA2 variant and elucidate the clinical outcome of heart and left renal agenesis revealed a missense variant ACTA2-related vasculopathies. (c.2242T>C; p.Cys748Arg) in JAG1, which was absent MaterialandMethods:Indexpatientsandrelativeswith from gnomAD, predicted likely pathogenic by prediction apathogenicorlikelypathogenicvariantintheACTA2gene programs and maternally inherited. The mother underwent were included in this study. Data were collected through surgery for aortic coarctation at age 10. The JAG1 variant retrospective review of available medical records using a was present in the mother’s monozygotic twin-sister and standardized questionnaire. brother but absent in another sister. Subsequent familial Results: Forty-seven individuals from 26 families clinical evaluation revealed normal eye exam (no embry- participated in our study. Mean age at last evaluation was otoxon), normal ultrasound of kidneys and absence of 50.8 ± 17.0 years. A total of 21 different ACTA2 variants hemivertebrae in all mutation carriers. Echocardiographic weredetectedinourcohort,including19missensevariants, evaluationrevealedanormalaortainthemother,borderline 1 splice site variant and 1 frameshift variant. Four variants aorticdilatation(40mm)inhermonozygotictwin-sisterand are novel. Aortic events occurred in 30/47 (63.8%) of a huge aortic sinus aneurysm (58 mm) in the brother. The patients. Mean age at ﬁrst aortic event was 55.6 ± 13.7 brotheralsohasscoliosis.Remarkably, inliteratureanother years. Male gender and the presence of hypertension JAG1 variant affecting a Cys-residu has been linked to emerged as signiﬁcant predictors of aortic events. Men severecongenitalheartdisease(TetralogyofFallot).Aortic were also at higher risk of aortic aneurysms compared to aneurysm was previously reported in four patients, three of women. Other clinical ﬁndings included congenital heart whichwereonlydiagnosedonautopsyafterfataldissection. disease in 6/47 and iris ﬂocculi in 6/47. Our family data warrant regular echocardiographic follow- Conclusions: We provide further insight into the up in JAG1 mutation carriers as severe aortic aneurysms genotype and phenotype of ACTA2-related vasculopathies. remain asymptomatic and predispose to fatal aortic Male gender and hypertension are predisposing factors for dissection. aortic events in individuals with a pathogenic ACTA2 I. Van Gucht: None. J.R. Bento: None. A. Van variant. Berendoncks: None. E. Van Craenenbroeck: None. Supported by Dutch Heart Foundation (2014T007) and J. Saenen: None. S. Laga: None. J. Meester: None. Erasmus University Rotterdam Fellowship to IvdL. A. Verstraeten: None. N. Boeckx: None. L. Van Laer: L. van den Bersselaar: None. E. Rompen: None. None. B. Loeys: None. S. Kurul: None. M. Kempers: None. A. Houweling: None.E.Overwater:None.Y.Hilhorst:None.D.Barge-  P05
.06.C Schaapveld: None. I. Krapels: None. E. Dulfer: None. Expanding the genetic and phenotypic spectrum of M. Wessels: None. B. Loeys: None. J. Bekkers: None. ACTA2-related vasculopathies in a Dutch cohort H. Bruggenwirth: None. A. Maugeri: None. J. Roos- Hesselink: None. J. Verhagen: None. I. van de L. van den Bersselaar1, E. Rompen1, S. Kurul1, M. Laar: None. Kempers2, A. Houweling3, E. Overwater3, Y. Hilhorst4, D. Barge-Schaapveld4,I.Krapels5,E.Dulfer6,M.Wessels1,B.  P05
.11.B Loeys2, J. Bekkers1, H. Bruggenwirth1, A. Maugeri3, Prevalence of TTR mutations associated with transthyr- J. Roos-Hesselink1, J. Verhagen1, I. van de Laar1 etine amyloidosis (ATTR) estimated from national exome sequencing data. 1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Rad- boud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, D. Monies1,2, D. Mohty3,4,5, B. Fadel3,4, B. Meyer1,2, 3Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Neth- I. Alayary6, M. Abouelhoda1,2 erlands, 4Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 5Maastricht University Medical Center, 1Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital Maastricht, Netherlands, 6University Medical Center Gro- andResearchCentre,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,2SaudiHuman ningen, Groningen, Netherlands Genome Program, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Heart center, King Introduction: Heterozygous variants in the ACTA2 gene, Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Riyadh, encoding the smooth muscle cell speciﬁc isoform of alpha- Saudi Arabia, 4Al-Faisal University, College of Medicine, actin, confer a high risk for thoracic aortic aneurysms and Afﬁliate Harvard Medical School International, Riyadh,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 259 SaudiArabia,5CHU,Limoges,France,6PﬁzerInc,Jeddah, population. Familial BAV has an autosomal dominant pat- Saudi Arabia tern of inheritance with reduced penetrance, however, the majority of BAV cases are sporadic. Pathogenic and likely Introduction: Amyloidosis is a rare, frequently under- pathogenic NOTCH1 variants have been reported in famil- diagnosed systemic disease due to protein deposition that ial, as well as up to 4% of sporadic cases. develops when a native protein misfolds into insoluble Aim:ToinvestigatethefrequencyofcausativeNOTCH1 amyloid ﬁbrils. These ﬁbril deposits alter function of most mutations in a large cohort of patients of sporadic and affected organs, including the myocardium. Transthyretin familial BAV disease recruited to the Bicuspid aoRtic amyloidosis (ATTR) is one of the two main causes of vAlVe gEnetic research (BRAVE) study. cardiac amyloidosis and occurs as a result of mutations in Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was per- TTR. Under or misdiagnosis of affected individuals and formedin12families(30affectedand25unaffectedfamily incomplete penetrance make estimates of prevalence chal- members). Targeted NOTCH1 sequencing was carried out lenging. While worldwide prevalence is estimated to be in383sporadicBAVcases.NOTCH1variantswereﬁltered around50,000individuals,withTTRV142Ibeing themost by gnomAD allele frequency (< 0.001) and potential common cardiac ATTR associated mutation, no data on deleteriouseffect(CombinedAnnotationDependentDeple- TTR mutations or their frequency in Middle Eastern coun- tion (CADD) score>20). We also compared cumulative tries are available to date. frequencyofrareNOTCH1variantsbetweensporadicBAV Materials and Methods: Blinded from clinical informa- patients and 1102 apparently healthy controls. tion, we undertook data mining of 13,906 exomes of Results: One BAV family had a truncating NOTCH1 unrelated Saudi individuals, sequenced between 2015 and variant (c.873C>G/p.Tyr291*). There were no candidate 2019 aspart of theSaudi Human Genome Project(SHGP). NOTCH1 variants in any of the other 11 families. We Pathogenic or highly pathogenic TTR variants were identiﬁed seven rare and potentially deleterious NOTCH1 identiﬁed following ﬁltration to remove common, synon- variants in the sporadic patient group. Among which, there ymous, non-coding and other benign variants. were no protein truncating mutations. There was no Results and conclusion: We identiﬁed seven missense enrichment of NOTCH1 variants between cases and variants (known or predicted pathogenic) in TTR, three of controls (1.83% vs 3.09%, p-value 0.18). which have been previously reported in amyloidosis Conclusions: Our data suggest that whilst occasionally patients worldwide. The most frequent variants were responsible for familial cases of BAV, NOTCH1 mutations c.424G>A:p.V142I (1:435) and c.370C>T:p.R124C are an infrequent cause of sporadic forms of the disease. (1:2,318). Prevalence of TTR variants in the general Saudi S.E. Hamby: None. R. Debiec: None. M. Nath: None. population was much higher than the actual estimated rate P.D.Jones:None.S.Coolman:None.M.Asiani:None.S. of ATTR cases nationally (1:10,000), which may be Kharodia: None. G.J. Skinner: None. N.J. Samani: explained by incomplete penetrance or sub-clinical mani- None. A. Bolger: None. T.R. Webb: None. festation of the disease. D. Monies: None. D. Mohty: None. B. Fadel: None. B.  P05
.14.B Meyer: None. I. Alayary: None. M. Abouelhoda: None. Bicuspid aortic valve: a pilot candidate gene-based approach in a representative Czech cohort  P05
.13.A Investigation of NOTCH1mutation frequency in bicus- P. Votýpka1, P. Peldová1, A. Krebsová2, V. Zoubková1, pid aortic valve disease M. Balaščaková1, M. Macek, Jr.1 S.E.Hamby1,2,R.Debiec1,2,3,M.Nath1,2,P.D.Jones1,2,S. 1DepartmentofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,2ndFaculty Coolman1,2, M. Asiani1,2, S. Kharodia1,2, G. J. Skinner3, N. of Medicine, Charles University and Motol, Prague, Czech J. Samani1,2, A. Bolger1,2,3, T. R. Webb1,2 Republic, 2Department of Cardiology, Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic 1University of Leicester Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2NIHR Leicester Aim:Analysisofthegeneticbasisinarepresentativecohort Biomedical Research Centre, Leicester, United Kingdom, ofCzechpatientswithfamiliarbicuspidaorticvalve(BAV) 3East Midlands Congenital Heart Centre, Glenﬁeld Hospi- with / without aortic aneurysm (MIM# 109730). tal, Leicester, United Kingdom Materials and Methods: Altogether 100 unrelated cases were clinically examined, underwent genetic counselling Background: Bicuspid Aortic valve (BAV) is a common andpositivecasesweresubjectedto“cascadescreening”of congenital heart defect present in around 1% of the ﬁrst-degreerelatives.Massivelyparallelsequencing(MiSeq260 J.delPicchia platform; Illumina.com) was utilised for a custom-made different families. Mutation carriers show variable expres- panel comprising either 136, 229 or 100 cardiac/aortic sion of the phenotype: from asymptomatic to syncopes and conditions-related candidate genes (Sophia Genetics.com). SCD. We used induced pluripotent stem cell derived car- Presence of pathogenic variants was validated by Sanger diomyocytes (iPSC-CM) to investigate the underlying sequencing and via their segregation in respective families. pathophysiology. Results: Pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant (ACMG Material & Methods: Dermal ﬁbroblasts of three Class ≥ 4) were found in 3/100 patients (3 %) within patients with different severity, and one unrelated healthy TGFB2, SMAD6 and FBN1. Variants of unknown sig- control were reprogrammed using the CytoTune™-iPS 2.0 niﬁcance (Class 3) were detected in 9/100 patients (9 %) Sendai Reprogramming Kit. iPSC-CMs were differentiated comprising genes FLNA, FBN1, MYH11, TAB2, TGFB2 following a published protocol. T3 hormone addition was and GATA5. A family with concurrent familial dilated tested to improve maturity of the cells. We performed cardiomyopathy, BAV and ectopia lentis was analysed as severaldifferentiationroundsandinvestigatedexpressionof well.LikelycausativeDNAvariantsinMYBP C3
andFBN1 cardiacmarkersusingqPCRandimmunocytochemistryand were identiﬁed, but FBN1 variants did not co-segregate electrophysiological properties using patch-clamping and with BAV. calcium imaging. Conclusions: The yield of genetic testing in familial Results: All iPSC-CMs expressed tested markers. We forms of BAV is rather low in our cohort. Moreover, the observed reduction in sodium current density in patient identiﬁcation of pathogenic variant in BAV-related gene is iPSC-CMs, together with shortening of the action potential not a guarantee of their causality, hence detected variants and calcium transient duration compared to the control. should be carefully interpreted. The genetic basis for the However, our data display variability between the differ- familialformsofBAVwillbefurtherstudied,e.g.bywhole entiationbatches,aswellasbetweenclonesgeneratedfrom exome analysis together with improved clinical stratiﬁca- one donor. Addition of T3 improved organization of the tion of our patient cohort. sarcomeres and decreased result variability. Supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, Conclusions: We established iPSC-CM models for a grant Nr. NV18-02-00237 uniqueBelgianSCN5Afoundermutation.Despiteobserved P. Votýpka: None. P. Peldová: None. A. Krebsová: variability, we could detect expected differences in electro- None. V. Zoubková: None. M. Balaščaková: None. M. physiological properties of patient cells compared to Macek, Jr.: None. controls. We prove that T3 addition improves the maturity of the cells, with a positive impact on the variability.  P05
.16.A E.Simons:None.A.Nijak:None.B.Vandendriessche: Electrophysiological characterization of a Brugada None.D.VandeSande:None.E.Sieliwończyk:None.A. syndrome SCN5A Belgian founder mutation in induced J.Labro:None.D.Snyders:None.D.Schepers:None.B. pluripotent stem cell cardiomyocytes Loeys: None. M. Alaerts: None. E. Simons1, A. Nijak1, B. Vandendriessche1, D. Van de  P05
.18.C Sande2, E. Sieliwończyk1, A. J. Labro2, D. Snyders2, D. Network-based identiﬁcation of novel Shox2-dependent Schepers1, B. Loeys1,3, M. Alaerts1 genes in cardiac rhythm control 1Centre of Medical Genetics, faculty of Medicine and S. Hoffmann1,2, S. Schmitteckert1, K. Raedecke1,2, D. Health Sciences, University of Antwerp & Antwerp Rheinert1, S. Diebold3, R. Roeth1, B. Weiss1, M. Granzow4, University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Laboratory of B. Niesler1,2, A. Griesbeck1, V. Eckstein5, W. H. Molecular Biophysics, Physiology & Pharmacology, Zimmermann6,7, S. Just3, G. A. Rappold1,2 DepartmentofBiomedicalSciences,UniversityofAntwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Human Genetics, 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Nether- Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, lands Germany, 2DZHK, German Center for Cardiovascular Research, Partner Site Heidelberg/Mannheim, Heidelberg, Introduction: SCN5A encodes the α-subunit of voltage- Germany, 3Department of Internal Medicine II, University gated cardiac sodium channel Na 1.5. Mutations in SCN5A of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 4Department of Human Genetics, v are identiﬁed in about 20% of patients with Brugada syn- Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, drome (BrS), an inherited cardiac arrhythmia. We have Heidelberg,Germany,5FACSCoreFacility,Departmentof identiﬁed an SCN5A founder mutation (c.4813+3_4813 Medicine V, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, +6dupGGGT),leadingtoaloss-of-functionofNa 1.5in25 Germany, 6Institute of Pharmacology, University Medical vAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 261 CenterGoettingen,Goettingen,Germany,7DZHK,German drasticallychangedcardiogenetics,thefactthatmanycases Centre for Cardiovascular Research, Partner Site with positive family history remain unsolved after routine Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany panel diagnostics suggests that some genetic causes remain to be discovered. In this study we examined the diagnostic The transcription factor SHOX2 is involved in the devel- yield of targeted gene panels compared to whole exome opmentandfunctionofthesinoatrialnode(SAN),whichis data analysis. crucial for initiating and controlling heart rhythm. SHOX2 Methods:Thecohortconsistedof61consecutivepatients has been associated with cardiac arrhythmias such as atrial with a diagnosis of cardiomyopathy or primary arrhythmia ﬁbrillation (AF) and sinus node dysfunction. Yet, our syndrome, with DCM being the most common diagnosis. knowledge on co-regulatory networks associated with car- The genetic analysis involved whole exome sequencing diac rhythm control in health and disease still remains with subsequent stepwise bioinformatic analysis starting limited. To dissect the role of Shox2-dependent networks, from virtual gene panels till whole exome data. Genetic weutilizedamurineembryonicstemcell(ESC)modelthat variants were classiﬁed according to ACMG-criteria. allowed us to investigate molecular pathways involving Results:Overall,in39outof61(64%)patientsavariant Shox2 in SAN-like cardiomyocytes. Differential RNA-seq- of interest was detected. The detection rate was highest in based expression proﬁling of Shox2+/+ and Shox2-/- ESCs patients with a diagnosis of HCM (7/9; 77%) or DCM (25/ revealed94regulatedtranscriptsinShox2-/-SAN-likecells. 36;69%).InDCMthediagnosticyieldwasbettercompared Fifteen putative target genes were selected for further to current literature. The majority of variants of interest validation based on comparative expression analysis of our were found in the disease-speciﬁc panel (46%; 28/61), dataset with publicly available RNA-seq data of SAN and while the further analysis of an extended panel and whole right atria enriched genes at different mouse embryonic exomedataledtoanadditionaldiagnosticyieldof13%and stages. Network-based analyses integrating data from the 5%, respectively. Whole exome data analysis also detected MouseOrganogenesisCellAtlasandtheIngenuitypathway variants in thus far not well characterized candidate genes analysis tool as well as validation in mouse and zebraﬁsh whoseexpressionandfunctionproﬁlesuggestedaprobable conﬁrmed a species conserved regulation for Shox2 target pathogenetic role. genes in cardiac rhythm control. Our results indicate that Conclusions: Targeted gene panel analysis led to the co-regulatorynetworksinvolvingSHOX2participateinthe identiﬁcation of the genetic cause in the majority of solved development of conduction traits through regulatory cases. The additional diagnostic yield of whole exome data mechanisms, thereby affecting the expression of multiple analysis was low, enabled though the detection of genes. This work was supported by grants from the DFG potentially causal variants in candidate genes. (RA 380/14-4) and DZHK (81X2500110 and K. Kolokotronis: None. N. Pluta: None. E. Klopocki: 81X2500171). None. S. Störk: None. S. Rost: None. B. Gerull: None. S. Hoffmann: None. S. Schmitteckert: None. K. Raedecke: None. D. Rheinert: None. S. Diebold: None.  P05
.20.B R. Roeth: None. B. Weiss: None. M. Granzow: None. B. Diagnosticyieldofcorepanelsforcardiomyopathy-and Niesler: None. A. Griesbeck: None. V. Eckstein: None. arrhythmia genes versus a larger panel of heart-disease W.H. Zimmermann: None. S. Just: None. G.A. related genes Rappold: None. D.M.E.I.Hellebrekers1,B.J.C.vandenBosch1,G.R.F.  P05
.19.A Claes1,I.Roozen1,Y.E.G.Barrois1,N.Vergoossen1,A.T. Diagnostic yield of targeted versus broad next genera- M. Hendrickx1, W. van Dijk1, C. L. M. Marcelis2, M. tion sequencing data analysis in inherited cardiomyo- Kempers2, Y. M. Hoedemaekers2, A. T. J. M. Helderman- pathy and arrhythmia syndromes vandenEnden1,E.K.Vanhoutte1,I.P.C.Krapels1,A.van den Wijngaard1 K. Kolokotronis1, N. Pluta1, E. Klopocki1, S. Störk2, S. Rost1, B. Gerull2 1MaastrichtUniversityMedicalCenter,Maastricht,Nether- lands, 2Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Netherlands Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Comprehensive Heart Failure Center and Department of Medicine I, University Hospital Introduction: We evaluated the prevalence of (likely) Würzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany pathogenicvariantsinourcardiomyopathy-andarrhythmia core panels in patients with cardiac disease. Furthermore, Introduction: Although next generation sequencing has262 J.delPicchia the additional diagnostic value of a larger panel of heart Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Depart- disease-associated genes was assessed. mentofCardiology,AmsterdamUniversityMedicalCenter, Methods: This study included a large population of Amsterdam, Netherlands ~2000 patients suspected of a heritable cardiac condition whounderwentcardiogenetictestingatthelaboratoryofthe Introduction: Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is Clinical Genetics Department in Maastricht. Sequencing a a dominant inherited cardiac disease characterized by pro- diagnostic panel of 46 cardiomyopathy genes and/or 27 gressive ﬁbrofatty replacement of the myocardium that arrhythmia genes was performed using single-molecule predisposes to ventricular tachycardia and sudden death. molecular inversion probes (smMIPs). For 347 of these Carvajal syndrome is a rare recessive form of ACM asso- patients, whole exome sequencing was performed for the ciated with woolly hair and palmo-plantar keratoderma and analysis of a panel of 350 heart disease-associated genes. pathogenic variants in the desmoplakin (DSP) gene. Some Results: A (likely) pathogenic variant was found in 20% families have been described with a dominantly inherited (336/1719) and 8% (34/408) of patients tested for the DSP variant with features of Carvajal. cardiomyopathyorarrhythmiagenepanel,respectively.The Materials and Methods: In a four generation family majority of these variants were found in the MYBP C3
, seggregation analysis was done for a dominantly inherited MYH7, LMNA, TNNT2, MY L2
 and PK P2
 genes for DSP p.R1113* variant. The phenotypes are described and cardiomyopathy and SCN5A, KCNQ1, RYR2 and KCNH2 the results are compared to literature. genes for arrhythmia. Sequencing the larger panel of 350 Results: In the large sibship (4M + 8F) at least three genes in 347 patients identiﬁed an additional pathogenic siblings are obligate carrying the DSP pathogenic variant variantexplainingtheclinicalphenotypeinonly3patients. and have offspring with cardiac abnormalities. Five family Conclusions: Our data support parallel sequencing of membersdiedsuddenly,2/5obligatecarriers,3/5thestatus core genes as the preferred strategy for genetic testing of is unknown. The curly hair is co-seggregating with the patients suspected of having a genetic cardiomyopathy or variant. Not all carriers have keratoderma. A number of arrhythmia. The incremental diagnostic yield of a larger individuals with the variant have no cardiac complaints so panel of heart disease-associated genes is minimal. There- far, cardiological investigations are planned. An overview fore, focus should not be on analysing more genes, but on willbepresentedattheconferenceandcomparedtothesix developing functional assays to predict pathogenicity of families described by Maruthappu et al in 2019, one of variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS’s) in the core these families also has the p.R1113* variant. panel genes. Conclusion:Thep.R1113*variantintheDSPgeneleads D.M.E.I. Hellebrekers: None. B.J.C. van den Bosch: to a well recognizable phenotype of mild Carvajal None. G.R.F. Claes: None. I. Roozen: None. Y.E.G. syndrome. Drawing the attention to this phenotype by Barrois:None.N.Vergoossen:None.A.T.M.Hendrickx: presenting this large four generation family may help in None. W. van Dijk: None. C.L.M. Marcelis: None. M. identifying other families with this disease and in prevent- Kempers: None. Y.M. Hoedemaekers: None. A.T.J.M. ing sudden death. Helderman-van den Enden: None. E.K. Vanhoutte: A.T.J.M. Helderman-vd Enden: None. J.G. Post: None. I.P.C. Krapels: None. A. van den None.K.J.A.F.vanKaam:None.R.H.LekanneDeprez: Wijngaard: None. None. D. Dooijes: None. A.A.M. Wilde: None. I.P.C. Krapels: None.  P05
.21.C Dominant mild Carvajal syndrome: arrhythmogenic  P05
.22.A cardiomyopathy caused by the heterozygous p.R1113* Chromosome 22q11 copy number variations in paedia- nonsense variant in the DSP gene. tric and adult patients with congenital heart defects A. T. J. M. Helderman-vd Enden1, J. G. Post2, K. J. A. F. G. K. ZODANU, D. Nagy, M. Széll, M. Oszlánczi, van Kaam1, R. H. Lekanne Deprez3, D. Dooijes4, A. A. M. K. Havasi, A. Kalapos, M. Katona Wilde5, I. P. C. Krapels1 UNIVERSITY OF SZEGED, SZEGED, Hungary 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of Introduction: Congenital heart defect (CHD) is the most Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, common birth defect, affects ~1% of newborns. Chromo- Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, some 22q11 microdeletion syndrome is often associated AmsterdamUniversityMedicalCenter,Amsterdam,Nether- with CHDs and is the most common human microdeletion, lands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, University occurs in ~1/4000 live births in the general population andAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 263 in2.8-14.9%ofCHDpatients.22q11copynumbervariants underthecongenitalheartdiseasearmoftheproject,almost (CNVs) are caused by non-allelic homologous recombina- all of whom have no known causative variant. In addition, tioneventsintheﬂankinglowcopyrepeatregions(LCRs), analysis of phenotyping and clinical data identiﬁed an labeled A-H. additional ~2,500 participants with congenital heart disease Materials and Methods: Our aim was to evaluate the who were recruited to the project for other conditions. prevalenceof22q11CNVsinHungarianCHDpatients.175 We will present rare, likely pathogenic single nucleotide, bloodsampleswereobtainedfromchildrenandadultswith short insertions/deletions and structural variants, both different isolated and combined CHDs. Samples were transmitted and de novo, from this cohort of 3,100 analyzed using multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli- participants with congenital heart disease. Short variants ﬁcation(MLPA)todetectCNVsinthegivenchromosomal are ﬁltered for variants with moderate or high impact on region. Positive MLPA results were conﬁrmed with locus- protein function; CADD (combined annotation dependent speciﬁcFISH.Genotype-phenotypecomparisonandfamily depletion) score ≥ 20; and absent in gnomAD v3. screening was also performed. This research was made possible through access to the Results:CNVs weredetected inoverall10cases(5.7%). data and ﬁndings generated by the 100,000 Genomes Six cases with typical microdeletion (between LCRsA and Project (http://www.genomicsengland.co.uk). D) also known as DiGeorge syndrome, 2 cases with Grant reference: BHF FS/16/58/32734. microduplication and 2 cases with combined microdeletion S.L.Baross:None.S.G.Williams:None.K.E.Hentges: and microduplication were detected. The phenotypical None. A.D. Sharrocks: None. B.D. Keavney: None. appearance of patients was highly variable. CNVs were familiar in 3 cases.  P05
.24.C Conclusions: Until present this was the largest systemic Mutation spectrum of congenital heart disease in genetic screening of Hungarian CHD patients. Since the 73consanguineous Turkish families clinical diagnosis of 22q11 microdeletion/microduplication syndromemaybechallengingduetoitsvariablemanifesta- W. Dong1, H. Kaymakcalan2, N. Diab1, S. Chih Jin1, tion, systematic genetic testing may be of utmost beneﬁt in C. Tanıdır3, A. Yalcin2, S. Mane1, K. Bilguvar1, M. the early diagnosis and proper management of these Brueckner1, R. Lifton1 patients. Funding grant: GINOP-2.3.2-15-2017-00039 1Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States, 2Demir- G.K. Zodanu: None. D. Nagy: None. M. Széll: None. oglu Bilim University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Mehmet Akif M.Oszlánczi:None.K.Havasi:None.A.Kalapos:None. Ersoy Hospital, istanbul, Turkey M. Katona: None. Mutation spectrum of congenital heart disease in 73 con-  P05
.23.B sanguineous Turkish families Genetic variation in participants of the 100,000 Gen- Introduction: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the omes Project with congenital heart disease most frequent defect among live births and the leading causeofmortalityfromabirthdefect.Nearly90%ofCHD S. L. Baross1, S. G. Williams1, K. E. Hentges2, A. D. caseshaveasuspectedgeneticetiology,butin56%ofcases Sharrocks3, B. D. Keavney1 thegeneticetiologyisunknown.Fewgenediscoveryefforts have been made with consanguineous CHD cohorts. We 1Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Man- recruited74CHDpatientsfrom73consanguineousfamilies chester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Division of Evolu- in Turkey and used whole exome sequencing to identify tion and Genomic Sciences, University of Manchester, affectedgenes inthese patients. In13.7% ofthecohort,we Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Division of Molecular and could identify a genetic etiology and we discovered four Cellular Function, University of Manchester, Manchester, new genes that are putatively causative for CHD. This United Kingdom representsanimportantadvanceinourunderstandingofthe genetic consequences of consanguinity in CHD. Congenital heart disease is the most common birth defect, Materials and methods: 74 samples from 73 families affecting approximately 1% of live births globally. Con- were recruited from two pediatric cardiology clinics in genitalheartdiseaseshowsahighdegreeofheritabilitybut Istanbul,Turkey. Cardiacphenotypeswereclassiﬁedinto5 the genetic causes are still poorly understood. major categories and whole exome sequencing was The 100,000 Genomes Project provides whole genome performed at the Yale Center for Genomic Analysis using sequences for patients with rare disease or cancer and their Illumina. families.Over600participantswererecruitedtotheproject264 J.delPicchia Result: 7 out of 73 (9.6%) patients carried damaging G. AKAN1, E. Nyawawa2, B. Nyangasa2, M. K. Turkcan3, homozygousvariantsinknownCHDgenesand3outof73 E. Mbugi1, O. Ozgen4, M. Janabi2, F. Atalar1 (4.1%) of them harbored other types of CHD-related genomic alterations, which explained 13.7% of the cohort. 1MUHAS Genetics Laboratory, Biochemistry Department, Conclusions: Our ﬁndings is consistent with the hypoth- School of Medicine, Muhimbili University of Health and esis that high consanguinity is more likely to be associated Allied Science, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, United Republic withrecessivecardiacabnormalities.Additionally,itﬁtsthe of, 2Muhimbili National Hospital Jakaya Kikwete Heart perception that the heritability for severe defects is higher Institute, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, United Republic of, than milder malformations. 3Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia Univer- Grant: Yale-National Institutes of Health Center for sity,, New York, NY, United States, 4Molecular Medicine Mendelian Genomics Department, Aziz Sancar Experimental Medicine Research W. Dong: None. H. Kaymakcalan: None. N. Diab: Institute, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey None. S. Chih Jin: None. C. Tanıdır: None. A. Yalcin: None.S.Mane:None.K.Bilguvar:None.M.Brueckner: Background: 9p21.3 locus was identiﬁed as a hot spot None. R. Lifton: None. locus associated with coronary artery disease(CAD) and it contains CDKN2A and CDKN2B genes which encode the  P05
.26.B cell cycle regulators and a non-coding RNA ANRIL gene. AlteredmicroRNAandtargetgeneexpressionrelatedto Roleof9p21.3locusvariationsinmolecularmechanismsof Tetralogy of Fallot CAD pathogenesis and the expression of neighbour-genes remainunknown.Thestudyaimstoassessofexpressionsof M. Grunert, S. Appelt, S. Rickert-Sperling CDKN2A, CDKN2B, ANRIL and ANRIL splices variants association with CAD susceptibility, and to investigate the Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany impact of 9p21.3 locus variations on the expression of studied genes in peripheral blood, Epicardial Adipose Tis- MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in guiding sue(EAT), Mediastinal Adipose tissue(MAT) and Sub- development and maintaining function of the human heart. cutaneous Adipose Tissue(SAT) in Tanzanian CAD Dysregulation of miRNAs has been linked to various con- patients. genital heart diseases including Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), Methods&Results: Expression of CDKN2A, CDKN2B, which represents the most common cyanotic heart mal- ANRIL, and its splice variants (circANRIL, NR003529, formation in humans. Several studies have identiﬁed dys- EU741058andDQ485454)weremeasuredbyQRT-PCRin regulated miRNAsinrightventricular (RV)tissues ofTOF peripheral blood, EAT, MAT and SAT of 25 patients patients. In the study presented here, we proﬁled genome- undergoingcoronaryarterybypassgraftingduetoCADand widethewholetranscriptomeandanalyzedtherelationship 25 non-CAD patients undergoing heart valve surgery. of miRNAs and mRNAs of RV tissues of a homogeneous ANRIL gene expression levels were signiﬁcantly up- groupof22non-syndromicTOFpatients.Observedproﬁles regulated while expression levels of circANRIL were were compared to proﬁles obtained from right and left signiﬁcantly down-regulated in peripheral blood of CAD ventricular tissue of normal hearts. To reduce the large list patients. Moreover, increased expression levels of circAN- of predicted target genes of dysregulated miRNAs, we RIL were associated with less severity of CAD. ROC applied a stringent target prediction pipeline integrating analysis data has also conﬁrmed that circANRIL could act probabilitiesformiRNA-mRNAinteraction.Theﬁnallistof as a potential biomarker for detecting CAD. disease-related miRNA-mRNA pairs comprises novel as Conclusions: Our results are the ﬁrst data presenting the well as known miRNAs including miR-1 and miR-133, expressions of ANRIL and its splice variants in cardiac whichareessential tocardiacdevelopmentandfunction by adipose tissues of CAD patients. We demonstrate circAN- regulating KCNJ2, FBN2, SL C38
A3 and TNNI1. Overall, RIL has a synergistic effect with ANRIL and plays a our study provides additional insights into post- protective role in CAD. circANRIL could possibly be used transcriptional gene regulation of malformed TOF hearts. as a biomarker for CAD in Tanzania. M. Grunert: None. S. Appelt: None. S. Rickert- G. Akan: None. E. Nyawawa: None. B. Nyangasa: Sperling: None. None.M.K.Turkcan:None.E.Mbugi:None.O.Ozgen: None. M. Janabi: None. F. Atalar: None.  P05
.28.A Circulating lncRNA ANRIL a potential biomarker in  P05
.29.B Tanzanian patients with coronary artery disease Members of subgingival plaque bacterial complexes are presentinbloodofpatientswithcoronaryarterydiseaseAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 265 A.Suarez-Molina1,C.Fong2,L.Cifuentes- C2
,S.Guauque- C. Lanera3, D. Gregori3, D. Fabbro1, G. Damante1, Olarte2 A. Proclemer1 1Instituto Departamental de Salud de Nariño, Pasto, 1ASUFC, Udine, Italy, 2University of Udine, Udine, Italy, Colombia, 2Universidad Cooperativa de Colombia, Pasto, 3DCTVPH, Padova, Italy Colombia Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) is Introduction: It has been hypothesized that oral bacteria increasingly recognized as an important cause of myo- canmigrate,throughtheblood,fromthemouthtotheartery cardial infarction, particularly in women often with few plaques exacerbating atherosclerosis. This study compared cardiovascular risk factors. SCAD is deﬁned as a sponta- the bacteria present in peripheral blood of individuals with neous tear inthecoronaryarterialwallthatisnottraumatic and without coronary artery disease. or iatrogenic. Studies are still underway to investigate the Materials and Methods: RNA sequences from blood role of genetics in promoting SCAD; genetic diseases fre- downloaded from GEO (GS E58150
) correspond to 8 cases quently associated with SCAD are connective tissue dis- with coronary artery calcium (CAC) >514 and 8 controls eases. Considering the role of SCAD for sudden cardiac (CAC=0). After quality controls, the sequences were death and the increased risk for future cardiac events, an aligned to the hg38 reference genome using Hisat2. The early diagnosis is crucial. We enrolled 60 patients with unmapped sequences were fed into Kraken to determinate nonatherosclerotic angiographic diagnosis of SCAD. All bacterial taxa. Ecological indices were calculated using patients’ genomic DNA was analyzed by NGS with gene Vegan. The counts of bacteria between groups was panel involved in collagenopathies and arteriopathies compared using a Mann-Whitney U test. (ACTA2, CBS, CO L3
A1, CO L5
A1, CO L5
A2, ELN, FBN1, Results: The mean number of species was different FBN2, LTB P2
, MYLK, NOTCH1, MYH11, SMAD3, between cases (433.4) and controls (226.1) (p-value = SMAD4, SL C2
A10, TGFB2, TGFB3, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, 0.0001).Atotalof129specieswerefoundonlyincasesand PLOD1). Seven patients result to carry potential SCAD- 74 were exclusive of controls. According to the Jaccard related mutations. In particular, we observed a pathological similarity index 16% of the species identiﬁed is not shared CO L3
A1 mutation; 3 different VUS mutations in: LTB P2
 between cases andcontrols (p=0.001). TheAlcaligenaceae (twopatients),MYLKandNOTCH1.Moreover,wefounda family was more frequent in cases than in controls (FDR: newnonsensemutationinSMAD3andamissensealteration 0.048).TheredcomplexbacteriaTreponemadenticolawas in CO L5
A2; both not enlisted in public database, but that detected only in 2 cases. The mean count of bacteria could be categorized as pathogenetic and VUS, respec- belonging to subgingival plaque bacterial complexes was tively, according to the ACMG classiﬁcation. These data higher in cases (573.5) than in controls (249) (p-value = support the use of sequencing of genes inclusive of col- 0.0206). lagenopathies and arteriopathies as an approach to evaluate Conclusions: This study identiﬁed periodontopathogens genetically mediated SCAD. However,, considering that inbloodofpatientswithcoronaryarterydisease.Thelistof only a minority of patients have clear SCAD-causative microorganisms presented only in cases will be key to mutations,theseresultsremarktheneedoffurtherstudiesto identify new periodontopathogens that can relate period- deﬁne genetic mechanisms of SCAD. ontitis and this cardiovascular disease. SGO received M. Antonutti: None. F. Baldan: None. L. Spedicato: funding by CONADI-Universidad Cooperativa de Colom- None. D. Zanuttini: None. T. Bisceglia: None. bia, grant 1839. E. Favaretto: None. C. Tioni: None. D. Sut: None. M. A.Suarez-Molina:None.C.Fong:None.L.Cifuentes- Ghidina: None. C. Lanera: None. D. Gregori: None. D. C: None. S. Guauque-Olarte: None. Fabbro: None. G. Damante: None. A. Proclemer: None.  P05
.30.C  P05
.32.B Molecular genetic screening in patients with sponta- Comparison of variant detection rate in 100 candidate neous coronary artery dissection genes between two representative cohorts of Czech living patients versus victims of sudden cardiac death M. Antonutti1, F. Baldan2, L. Spedicato1, D. Zanuttini1, T. with clinical. or post mortem diagnosis of dilated-, Bisceglia1, E. Favaretto1, C. Tioni1, D. Sut1, M. Ghidina1, arrhythmogenic- and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A. Krebsova1, P. Votýpka2, P. Peldová2, K. Ruecklova3, V. Zoubkova2, S. Pohlova-Kucerova4, A. Pilin5, M. Kulvajtova6, M. Kubanek1, M. Bilek5, T. Tavacova7,266 J.delPicchia J.Petrkova8,M.Dobias9,P.Tomasek10,M.MacekSr.2,M. in SCD. Supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Macek Jr.2, J. Janousek7, J. Kautzner1 Republic, grant Nr. NV18-02-00237 and 00064203/6003 A. Krebsova: None. P. Votýpka: None. P. Peldová: 1Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, None. K. Ruecklova: None. V. Zoubkova: None. Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology and Medical S. Pohlova-Kucerova: None. A. Pilin: None. M. Kulvaj- Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and tova: None. M. Kubanek: None. M. Bilek: None. Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Pae- T. Tavacova: None. J. Petrkova: None. M. Dobias: diatric Department, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles None. P. Tomasek: None. M. Macek Sr.: None. M. University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of MacekJr.:None.J.Janousek:None.J.Kautzner:None. ForensicMedicine,FacultyofMedicineinHradecKrálové, Charles University, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic,  P05
.33.C 5Institute for forensic medicine and toxicology, 1st Faculty Genome wide association analysis in dilated cardiomyo- of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, pathy revealed two new susceptibility loci for systolic 6Institute for Forensic Medicine, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, heart failure Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 7Children´s Heart Centre, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University S. Garnier1,2, M. Harakalova3,4, S. Weiss5,6, M. Mokry3,7,8, and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, J. van Setten3, C. Proust9, L. Duboscq-Bidot1,2,10, A. 8DepartmentofCardiology,FacultyHospitalOlomoucand Boland11,12, J. Deleuze11,12,13, M. Dörr6,14, F. PalackýUniversity,Olomouc,CzechRepublic,9Institutefor Asselbergs3,15,16, F. Cambien9, E. Villard1,2,10, Forensic Medicine, Faculty Hospital Olomouc, Olomouc, D. Trégouët9, P. Charron1,2,10,17 CzechRepublic,10InstituteforForensicMedicine,Hospital Bulovka, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 1SorbonneUniversité,INSERM,UMR- S1166
,researchunit Prague, Czech Republic on cardiovascular disorders, metabolism and nutrition, Team Genomics & Pathophysiology of Cardiovascular Introduction: Hereditary cardiomyopathy is associated Diseases, Paris, France, 2ICAN Institute for Cardiometa- with risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD).Genetic aetiology bolism and Nutrition, Paris, France, 3Department of of SCD in a representative Czech cohort with post mortem Cardiology, Division Heart & Lungs, University Medical diagnosis of cardiomyopathy was studied and results com- Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, pared to those in living cases. 4Regenerative Medicine Utrecht (RMU), University Medi- Patients and Methods: Altogether 47 victims of SCD cian Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Interfaculty withpostmortemdiagnosisofhypertrophic-(HCM;18/47), Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, Depart- arrhythmogenic-(ACM;19/47)anddilatedcardiomyopathy ment of Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifs- (DCM; 10/47) were ascertained. Concurrently, genetic wald, Greifswald, Germany, 6DZHK (German Centre for testing was performed in 114 living patients (HCM 54/ Cardiovascular Research), partnersite Greifswald, Greifs- 114, ACM 22/114, DCM 38/114). NGS (MiSeq platform; wald, Germany, 7Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Illumina.com) was utilised for a custom-made panel Haematology, University Medical Center, Heidelberglaan comprising 100 candidate genes (Sophia Genetics, 100, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Laboratory for Experimental Switzerland). Cardiology,UniversityMedical Center Utrecht,Heidelber- Results: The causative detection rate (according to glaan 100, Utrecht, Netherlands, 9INSERM UMR_S 1219, ACMG.net classes 4 or 5) in SCD victims with DCM was Bordeaux Population Health Research Center, University 60 % (6/10) and in living patients with DCM 47.4 % (18/ of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 10APHP, Pitié-Salpêtrière 38). Variants in TTN, RBM20, DES and FLNC prevailed. Hospital, Cardiology Department, Paris, France, 11Centre Detection rate in ACM was 5 % (1/19 in SCN5A gene) in National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), SCDvictimsand31.8%(7/22)[JJ1]inlivingpatients.The InstitutdeBiologieFrançoisJacob,CEA,UniversitéParis- detection rate in SCD victims with HCM was 16 % (3/18) Saclay, Evry, France, 12Laboratory of Excellence and in living patients 35 % (19/54). The most prevalent GENMED (Medical Genomics), Paris, France, 13Centre gene was MYBP C3
, while PRKAG2 was detected in SCD d’Etude du Polymorphisme Humain, Fondation Jean victim and in cardiac arrest survivor. Dausset, Paris, France, 14Department of Internal Medicine Conclusion: Post-mortem genetic analysis in DCM B, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, yields a high detection rate and allows effective primary 15InstituteofCardiovascularScience,FacultyofPopulation preventionofSCDinatriskrelatives.Incontrast,molecular Health Sciences, University College London, London, autopsy of HCM and ACM renders a much lower yield United Kingdom,16Health DataResearch UKandInstitute which could reﬂect more complex genetic aetiology ofHealth Informatics,UniversityCollegeLondon,London,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 267 United Kingdom, 17AP-HP, Département de génétique, Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Centre de Référence Maladies Cardiaques Héréditaires, Rotterdam, Department of Paediatric cardiology, Rotter- Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France dam, Netherlands, 3University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Paediatric WeconductedthelargestGenomeWideAssociationStudy cardiology,Groningen,Netherlands,4UniversityofLeiden, performed so far in Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM), a Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Paedia- leading cause of systolic heart failure and cardiovascular tric cardiology, Leiden, Netherlands, 5Amsterdam Univer- death. Using a discovery phase of 2,719 cases and 4,440 sity Medical Center, location AMC, Department of controls and a replication phase of 584 independent cases Paediatric cardiology, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Univer- and 966 controls, we identiﬁed and replicated two new sity of Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, University DCM-associatedlocioneonchromosome3p(meta-analysis MedicalCenterUtrecht,Department ofPaediatric cardiol- p = 5.3 10−13) and the second on chromosome 22q (meta- ogy, Utrecht, Netherlands, 7Amsterdam University Medical analysisp=5.010−10)whileconﬁrmingthetwopreviously Center, location Free University Medical Center, Depart- identiﬁed DCM loci on chromosome 10 and 1, BAG3 and ment of Paediatric cardiology, Amsterdam, Netherlands, HSPB7 for an estimated heritability of 31% ± 8%. The 8Radboud University Medical Center, Department of geneticriskscoreconstructedfromthenumberofleadrisk- Paediatric cardiology, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9Radboud alleles at these 4 loci revealed a 27% risk increased in University Medical Center, Department of Genetics, individualswith8risk-allelescomparedtothe5riskalleles Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Department of Clinical Genetics, referencegroup.Thetwoassociationsignalswerethenﬁne- Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, mapped by combining in silico and functional genomics Rotterdam,Netherlands,11UniversityofUtrecht,University investigations. While a few genes remain candidates at the Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Genetics, Utrecht, second locus and deserve further investigations, our work Netherlands, 12University of Leiden, Leiden University clearlyidentiﬁedonegeneasresponsiblefortheassociation Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden, attheﬁrstlocuswhoseroleinthepathophysiologyofDCM Netherlands, 13Amsterdam University Medical Center, issupportedbyrecent observationsinhuman and mice. As location AMC, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amster- the biological pathway in which this gene is involved is a dam, Netherlands potential target for pharmacological agents, our ﬁnding opens novel therapeutic perspectives for treating or pre- Introduction: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in children venting heart failure. These results provide new ﬁndings may have an underlying genetic cause in a substantial that add both on the understanding of the genetic archi- number of cases. We describe the current practice and tecture of heart failure and on potential new players results of genetic evaluation in children with DCM and involvedinthepathophysiologyofthisdevastatingdisease. evaluate genotype-phenotype correlations that may guide S. Garnier: None. M. Harakalova: None. S. Weiss: prognosis. None. M. Mokry: None. J. van Setten: None. C. Proust: Methods: We performed a multicentre prospective None. L. Duboscq-Bidot: None. A. Boland: None. J. observational study in children diagnosed with DCM from Deleuze: None. M. Dörr: None. F. Asselbergs: None. F. 2010-2017. Cambien:None.E.Villard:None.D.Trégouët:None.P. Results: One hundred forty-four patients were included. Charron: None. InitialdiagnosticcategoriesconsistedofidiopathicDCMin 67children(47%),familialin18(13%),neuromuscularin7  P05
.34.A (5%), inborn error of metabolism in 4 (3%), malformation Utility of genetics for risk stratiﬁcation in paediatric syndromein2(1%),myocarditisin23(16%)and‘other’in dilated cardiomyopathy 23 (16%). Median follow-up time was 2.1 years [IQR 1.0- 4.3]. Hundred-seven patients (74%) underwent genetic J.C.Herkert1,M.H.vanderMeulen2,S.L.denBoer2,G. testing. A likely pathogenic (LP) or pathogenic (P) variant J.duMarchieSarvaas3,N.Blom4,5,A.D.J.tenHarkel4,H. wasfoundin39children(36%);themajorityinMYH7(n= M. P. J. Breur6, L. A. J. Rammeloo7, R. Tanke8, C. 9). Three patients had more than one LP/P variant. In at Marcelis9, I. M. B. H. van de Laar10, J. M. A. Verhagen10, least 5/39 patients (13%) the variant occurred de novo. A. Baas11, A. Sammani11, I. Christiaans1, D. Q. C. M. During the study, 39 patients (27%) reached a study Barge-Schaapveld12, R. H. Lekanne dit Deprez13, J. P. van endpoint (SE: all-cause death or heart transplantation). Tintelen11, M. Dalinghaus2 Transplant-free survival was signiﬁcantly lower in patients withaLP/Pvariant(P=0.005).ChildrenwhocarriedaLP/ 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Pvariantwere2.8timesmorelikelytoreachaSEcompared Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, to children without, while clinical characteristics at268 J.delPicchia diagnosis did not differ (hazard ratio 2.8; 95%CI 1.3-5.8, A.G. Fleming: None. L. Brett: None. S. Wilkinson: P = 0.007). None. S. John: None. L. Briggs: None. M. Edwards: Conclusions: Genetic testing is useful to predict clinical None. D.J. Morris-Rosendahl: None. outcomeinchildrenwith DCM andshould beincorporated intotheinitialwork-up.PatientswithaLP/Pvarianthavea  P05
.37.A poorer prognosis than patients without LP/P variant. Optimization and reﬁnement of the diagnosis of genetic J.C.Herkert:None.M.H.vanderMeulen:None.S.L. dyslipidemias by targeted NGS den Boer: None. G.J. du Marchie Sarvaas: None. N. Blom: None. A.D.J. ten Harkel: None. H.M.P.J. Breur: L. Zuurbier, O. R. F. Mook, M. A. Haagmans, J. C. None. L.A.J. Rammeloo: None. R. Tanke: None. C. Defesche Marcelis: None. I.M.B.H. van de Laar: None. J.M.A. Verhagen: None. A. Baas: None. A. Sammani: None. I. Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, Christiaans: None. D.Q.C.M. Barge-Schaapveld: None. Netherlands R.H.LekanneditDeprez:None.J.P.vanTintelen:None. M. Dalinghaus: None. Introduction: Geneticandacquireddyslipidemias arevery frequent in the general population and strongly associated  P05
.35.B with premature atherosclerosis, myocardial infarctions, Non-segregation of truncating TTN variants in families arterial complications and sudden death at young age. with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) Genetic lipoprotein abnormalities can be explained by a limited number ofgenes. For optimal clinical management, A.G.Fleming,L.Brett,S.Wilkinson,S.John,L.Briggs,M. riskassessmentandpreventionofcardiovasculardiseasean Edwards, D. J. Morris-Rosendahl accurate diagnosis is an absolute requirement, but the interconnection between the metabolic pathways of differ- ClinicalGenomicsLaboratory,London,UnitedKingdom ent lipoprotein fractions jeopardizes this when only lipid levels are assessed. DCM is a highly heterogeneous condition with over 30 Materials and Methods: In order to pinpoint the culprit genes implicated in inherited forms, including TTN. TTN lipoprotein fraction of clinical dyslipidemia in 4277 truncating variants are found in ~2% of the general popu- patients, we evaluated NGS and CNV data, including 29 lation (Roberts et al. (2015) Sci Transl Med. 7(270); 270) dyslipidemia-associated genes that enabled to examine all but there is a higher association with DCM for truncating separate lipoprotein components simultaneously. With this variants in cardiac isoforms of titin; therefore, only trun- approach 10 types of dyslipidemia can be discriminated. cating variants in exons which are spliced into >90% of Moreover,thispanelincludesageneticriskfactorforstatin TTN cardiac transcripts are reported as potentially patho- intolerance. genic in DCM by our laboratory. We have identiﬁed TTN Results: A genetic cause for dyslipidemia was found in truncating variants that have been classiﬁed as either likely 32% of the patients. Of these, 4% carried a CNV. The pathogenicorpathogenicin82of613DCMpatientsinour speciﬁcinitialclinicaldiagnosesofhypercholesterolemiaor cohort.DuetotheprevalenceofTTNtruncationsinhealthy hypertriglyceridemiawereconﬁrmedinonly17and35%of individuals,predictivetestingfortruncatingTTNvariantsis patients, respectively. However, unsolicited ﬁndings causal offered with caution, and instead segregation testing in for a second or an unexpected type of dyslipidemia, were affected relatives is ﬁrst undertaken. Within our cohort we encountered in 17% of cases, and suggest a broader role have found several variants which do not segregate with than initially anticipated for variants causing dysbetalipo- DCM. Out of a total of 36 individuals, across 25 families, proteinemia or hypertriglyceridemia. we have 5 cases of non-segregation of truncating TTN Conclusions: The use of the NGS-Dyslipidemia gene variants;3frameshift,1splicesiteandoneexonicdeletion. panel accurately separated genetic from acquired dyslipi- All of these non-segregating variants are absent from demias and within the detected genetic dyslipidemias the populationsdatabasesandoccurinexonswhicharespliced diagnosis was reﬁned based on unsolicited ﬁndings in a into 100% of cardiac TTN isoforms; and were therefore substantial number of patients. This allows targeted and initially classiﬁed as likely pathogenic. These ﬁndings optimal treatment to reduce cardiovascular risk. highlight the importance of a cautious approach when L. Zuurbier: None. O.R.F. Mook: None. M.A. interpreting TTN truncating variants, as well as the risks of Haagmans: None. J.C. Defesche: None. predictive testing; especially if this results in clinical dis- charge for individuals who do not carry the familial trun- cating TTN variant.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 269  P05
.38.B Hypercholesterolaemia (FH), including the LDLR, PCSK9 Hypermethylation of NRG1 gene correlates with the and ApoE genes, is available to Scottish individuals with presence of heart defects in Down’s syndrome highcholesterolwhofulﬁlSimonBroomecriteria.Theaim of mutation identiﬁcation is to allow more effective man- A. Dobosz, A. Grabowska, M. Bik-Multanowski agement of the proband, as well as cascade testing and identiﬁcation of at risk individuals. The ultimate aim is Department of Medical Genetics, Jagiellonian University earlystatintreatmentofaffectedindividualswithprevention Medical College, Krakow, Poland of cardiovascular morbidity. Method: 60 index patients with causative LDLR muta- Congenitalheartdefectscandecreasethequalityoflifeand tions were identiﬁed between 2010 and 2018 in NHS life expectancy in affected individuals, and constitute a Tayside (Scotland). We used record linkage to assess the major burden for the health care systems. Endocardial effect of genetic testing on cholesterol levels on probands cushion defects are among the most prevalent heart mal- and the number of subsequent cascade tests performed on formations in the general population, and are extremely familymembers.Themainendpointweusedwasachieving frequent (approximately a 100-fold higher prevalence) in a 50% reduction of LDL cholesterol levels, as recom- children with Down syndrome. Several genes have been mendedbytheUKNationalInstituteofClinicalExcellence proposed to be involved in the pathogenesis of these mal- (NICE). formations,butnocommonpathogenicDNA variants have Results: 49/189 (25.9%) eligible ﬁrst degree relatives been identiﬁed so far. Here, we focussed on constitutive, received cascade testing. Where data was available, 6/22 epigenetic alterations of function of selected genes, poten- (27.3%) patients met the 50% reduction target in LDL-C tially important for endocardial cushion development. We levels. There was no demonstrable relationship between used two types of microarrays, dedicated for assessment of cholesterolreductionandattendanceatacardiovascularrisk gene promoter methylation and whole genome expression. clinic. First, we compared the gene promoter methylation Conclusions: The number of cascade tests following proﬁles between two groups of Down syndrome patients, diagnosis in a proband is low. Even if a causative LDLR with andwithoutheartdefectsofendocardialcushion-type. mutation was identiﬁed, there was limited impact on the Then, to determine the functional role of the detected clinical improvement of cholesterol levels, with only a methylation alterations, we assessed the expression of the minority of patients achieving recommended cholesterol genes of interest. We detected signiﬁcant hypermethylation lowering following diagnosis. A better mechanism for of the NRG1 gene promoter region in children with heart cascade testing and management of FH is required to gain defects. NRG1 is a key factor in maturation of endocardial the maximum clinical beneﬁt from DNA analysis in cushions. Supplementary gene expression assessment Familial Hypercholesterolaemia. revealed signiﬁcantly decreased activity of the ERBB3, C. Leung: None. E. Gellatly: None. J. Berg: None. SH C3
 and SH C4
 genes in children with heart defects. The abovethreegenesarecloselyrelatedtotheNRG1geneand  P05
.41.A arecrucialelementsoftheNRG/ErbBpathway.Theresults Mutation spectrum and polygenic score in German ofthispilotstudyshowthathypermethylationoftheNRG1 patients with familial hypercholesterolemia gene promoter can reﬂect the functional genome alteration contributing to development of congenital heart defects of L. Rieck1, F. Bardey1, T. Grenkowitz1, L. Bertram2, endocardial cushion-type. J. Helmuth3, C. Mischung3, J. Spranger1, T. Bobbert1, A. Dobosz: None. A. Grabowska: None. M. Bik- U. Kassner1, I. Demuth1 Multanowski: None. 1Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,  P05
.39.C 2Lübeck Interdisciplinary Platform for Genome Analytics, How Effective is Genetic Testing for Familial Hyperch- Institutes of Neurogenetics and Cardiogenetics, Lübeck, olesterolaemia Patients in Tayside? Germany, 3Department Molecular Diagnostics, Labor Berlin, Berlin, Germany C. Leung, E. Gellatly, J. Berg Introduction:Autosomal-dominant familial hypercholes- Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of terolemia (FH) is a genetic disorder characterized by Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom increased plasma concentrations of LDL-Cholesterol and a substantially elevated risk for cardiovascular disease. Background: DNA analysis for Familial MutationsinthreemajorgenesareknowntocauseFH:the270 J.delPicchia LDL receptor gene (LDLR), the apolipoprotein B gene variants,and35(10%)harboredrare FLNCvariants (either (APOB) and the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 9 not described or ≤ 10 cases in gnomAD). Eleven patients gene(PCSK9).Ouraimistoanalyzethemutationspectrum were carriers of both sarcomeric and FLNC variant, thus and to determine a polygenic risk score in a cohort of their were excluded to the further analysis and variant hypercholesterolemic patients. classiﬁcation since their pathogenicity is complex to Methods: We screened 336 patients who were clinically measure. In this way, we ﬁnally selected 24 carriers of 20 assessedby the Dutch Lipid ClinicNetwork (DLCN)score different FLNC variants. Family studies were performed in and suspected to have FH for disease causing variants and 16/24cases.Intotal,weidentiﬁed55relativeswhoharbora genotyped six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to FLNC variant, thirty nine of them have a HCM diagnosis calculate the polygenic risk score for the FH patients and a (71%penetrance).AccordingtotheACMGcriteria,andthe control group of 1,946 healthy participants. performed family studies, seven variants (35%) have been Results: We identiﬁed an FH causing variant in 117 of classiﬁed as pathogenic or likely pathogenic, twelve as the 336 patients (12 novel variants) from the FH cohort. variants of unknown signiﬁcance (60%), and a variant Most sequence variants were found in the LDLR gene classiﬁedasbenignorlikelybenign(5%).Inconclusion,at (84.9%)outofwhich44.4%wereofthemissensetype.The least 1.2% of HCM index cases harbor a FLNC likely discriminatory power of the DLCN score distinguished FH pathogenic variant. However, further co-segregation and mutationcarriersfromnon-carrierswithanAUC=0.76(p functional studies have to be performed in order to < .001) in a receiving operator characteristic (ROC) curve, accomplish an accurate variant classiﬁcation, specially in similar to the value for native LDL-C (AUC = 0.77 (p < VUS variants. .001)). Similar topreviousstudies, themean polygenicrisk E. Cuesta-Llavona: None. R. Lorca: None. B. Díaz- score was signiﬁcantly higher in FH mutation negative Molina: None. J. Lambert: None. B. Alonso: None. S. subjectsthaninFHmutationpositivepatients(p<.05)and Iglesias-Álvarez: None. J. Reguero: None. E. Coto: healthy controls (p < .001). None. J. Gómez: None. Conclusions:Thisstudysubstantiatestheknownclinical and genetic variability of FH for German hypercholester-  P05
.44.B olemic patients and examines a possible polygenic A founder truncating mutation in GDF1 causes aetiology. autosomal-recessive right isomerism in multiplex Arab L. Rieck: None. F. Bardey: None. T. Grenkowitz: kindreds. None. L. Bertram: None. J. Helmuth: None. C. Mischung: None. J. Spranger: None. T. Bobbert: None. D. Yagel1,2, Y. Bolkier3,2, O. Barel4, A. Vardi3,2, D. U. Kassner: None. I. Demuth: None. Mishali3,2,A.Veber1,N.Shalva1,U.Katz3,2,S.Abudi1,2,N. Kol4, A. Raas-Rothschild5,2, G. Rechavi4,2,6, B. Pode-  P05
.43.A Shakked1,7,2, Y. Anikster1,2,6 FLNC geneinHypertrophic Cardiomyopathy:aneffort to accurate variant classiﬁcation 1Metabolic Disease Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Chil- dren’sHospital,ShebaMedicalCenter,RamatGan,Israel, E. Cuesta-Llavona, R. Lorca, B. Díaz-Molina, J. Lambert, 2SacklerFacultyofMedicine,Tel-AvivUniversity,Tel-Aviv, B. Alonso, S. Iglesias-Álvarez, J. Reguero, E. Coto, J. Israel, 3Department of Pediatric Cardiac Intensive Care, Gómez Edmond Safra International Congenital Heart Center, EdmondandLilySafraChildren’sHospital,ShebaMedical Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, 4Sheba Cancer Research Spain Center, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, 5The Institute for Rare Diseases, The Danek Gertner Institute of HypertrophicCardiomyopathy(HCM)isthemostcommon Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, inherited heart disease. Recent studies have identiﬁed the Israel, 6The Wohl Institute for Translational Medicine, Filamin C (FLNC) gene as a HCM-associated gene. The ShebaMedicalCenter,RamatGan,Israel,7TalpiotMedical aim of this study is to assign the percentage of HCM cases Leadership Program, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, which could be relationated with FLNC variants. Israel We sequenced 924 index cases of HCM for a compre- hensive cardiovascular gene panel of 194 genes, in an Ion The genetic basis of congenital heart malformations asso- GeneStudio  S5
 Sequencer. We identiﬁed 365 patients ciated with disruption of left-right (L-R) asymmetry is (39%) with variants in the sarcomeric and FLNC genes. broad and heterogenous, with variants in over twenty ﬁve Among them, 330 (90%) were carriers of sarcomeric genesimplicatedthusfar.Ofthese,deleteriousmutationsinAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 271 the Growth/Differentiation Factor 1 (GDF1) gene have exhibited decreased enzymatic activity and altered elastin recently been shown to cause heterotaxy with varied com- crosslinks. Structural analysisby two photon and scanning plex heart malformations of left-right patterning, in 23 electron microscopyrevealed holes in the elastic lamellar individuals reported to date, either in monoallelic or bial- sheets that increased with age and blood pressure. As in lelic state. We report three unrelated individuals exhibiting humans, the rate of aortic dilation was higher in males, but heterotaxy with congenital heart defects, each originating was also ampliﬁed by pregnancy. Lox mutants showed from consanguineous kindreds of Arab-Muslim descent. altered transcription of matrisome genes and their aortas Using Whole exome sequencing, a shared novel homo- showed increased susceptibility to elastase. zygous truncating c.608G>A (p.W203*) mutation in the Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest that missense GDF1 gene, was revealed as the molecular basis of their variation surrounding the LOX copper binding domain disease. Subsequently, targeted sequencing of this variant increases risk for aortic aneurysm while missense variation showed full segregation with the disease in these families, in the region encoding the N-terminal pro-domain appears with over 15 reportedly affected individuals, enabling largely tolerated. Novel gene-ﬁrst studies are underway to genetic counselling, prenatal diagnosis and planning of test this hypothesis in a large hospital-based cohort. Our future pregnancies. Our ﬁndings further conﬁrm the asso- mouse studies conﬁrm that copper binding domain LOX ciation of GDF1 variants, heterotaxy and congenital heart variants cause disease through the production of a defects of left-right patterning, and expand the previously dysfunctional extracellular matrix that is unusually suscep- described phenotypic spectrum and mutational proﬁle. tible to proteolytic damage. In both humans and mice, the Finally, given the high rate of consanguinity and high fre- progressive weakening of the connective tissue leads to quency of the p.W203* mutation in the Arab-Muslim worsening aortic disease, modiﬁed by sex and blood population residing near the city of Hebron, we suggest pressure. targeted screening for this variant in relevant clinical Funding: NIH H L006244
, USA circumstances. K. Tsang: None. R.H. Knutsen: None. C.J. Billington D. Yagel: None. Y. Bolkier: None. O. Barel: None. A. Jr: None. E. Lindberg: None. H. Steenbock: None. A. Vardi: None. D. Mishali: None. A. Veber: None. N. Wardlaw-Pickett: None. C.K.E. Bleck: None. J. Brinck- Shalva: None. U. Katz: None. S. Abudi: None. N. Kol: mann: None. B.A. Kozel: None. None. A. Raas-Rothschild: None. G. Rechavi: None. B. Pode-Shakked: None. Y. Anikster: None.  P05
.47.B Rare variants in HCN4 identiﬁed in the general  P05
.46.A populationareassociatedwithcompleteatrioventricular Pathogenic variationin the copper binding domain of (AV) block, 1. degree AV block and bundle branch lysyl oxidase causes aortic dilation modiﬁed by sex and block, results from 50.000 exomes mechanical forces J. S. Jensen1,2, O. B. Vad1,2, C. Paludan-Müller2,1, P. R. K. Tsang1, R. H. Knutsen1, C. J. Billington Jr1, E. Lundegaard1, J. H. Svendsen2,3, S. Haunsø2,3, H. Lindberg1, H. Steenbock2, A. Wardlaw-Pickett1, C. K. E. Bundgaard2,3, M. S. Olesen1,2 Bleck1, J. Brinckmann2, B. A. Kozel1 1DepartmentofBiomedicalSciences,FacultyofHealthand 1NationalInstitutesofHealth,Bethesda,MD,UnitedStates, MedicalSciences,University ofCopenhagen, Copenhagen, 2University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany Denmark, 2Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, Depart- ment of Cardiology, Centre for Cardiac, Vascular, Mutations in lysyl oxidase (LOX) contribute to familial PulmonaryandInfectiousDiseases,Rigshospitalet,Copen- thoracic aortic aneurysm. GnomAD reveals variation hagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, throughout LOX, with more variants reported in the region 3Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and encoding the N-terminal pro-domain. While ClinVar MedicalSciences,University ofCopenhagen, Copenhagen, showed disease-associated stopgain and frameshift variants Denmark throughout LOX, the majority of pathogenic missense mutations were identiﬁed near the copper binding domain, Introduction:Cardiacconductiondisorderscoverdisorders within the relatively variant-poor C-terminal catalytic such as atrioventricular (AV) block and bundle branch domain. block (BBB). Genome-wide association studies have iden- We then studied theLoxb2b370.2Clo (c.G854T; p. C285
F) tiﬁed more than 100 genetic loci for atrial ﬁbrillation, mouse whose mutationfalls within the copper binding including HCN4 loci associated with duration of the PR domain. The Lox C285
F protein was stably secreted but interval, a proxy for AV dysfunction. Recent candidate272 J.delPicchia studies suggest an association between HCN4 variants and Newcastle-Ottawa quality assessment scale was used to AV-block. We seek to determine the contribution of rare assess the quality of included research papers. Using genetic variants in HCN4 to complete AV-block, 1. degree miRTarBase, we identiﬁed all known gene targets for AV-block and BBB in the general population. selected miRNAs that were differentially expressed in Materials/methods: The UK Biobank is a population- research papers included in thesystematic review.We then based study of 500000 individuals including a subset with comprisedthelistofalltargetgenesandperformedgeneset genome-wide genotyping and exome sequencing (n = enrichment analysis using Enrichr. Results from KEGG, 45,596). In this case-control study, we included persons of BioPlanet, and Panther databases were analyzed. genetically determined white-European ancestry and ana- Results: We identiﬁed 72 differentially expressed micro- lyzed their exome data. Analyses were performed using a RNA molecules among groups of heart failure patients and logisticmixed-effectsmodel.Agene-basedburdenanalysis control groups. There was no substantial overlap of and single variant test were performed to examine the differentially expressed miRNAs among different studies, relationship between HCN4 variants and complete AV- onlyﬁvemiRNAs(miR-1228,miR-122,miR-423-5p,miR- block, 1. degree AV-block and BBB in the general 142-3p, and exosomal miR-92b-5p) were differentially population. expressed in more than one included study. Gene set Results: The study included 43,371 persons. In an enrichment analysis, based on the gene targets of micro- analysis of the HCN4 genes a signiﬁcant association RNAs presented in included studies, showed that gene between rare variants (MAF < 0.01) in HCN4 gene was targetsofdifferentiallyexpressedmiRNAswereenrichedin found (complete AV-block, P=2.5 x 10−5, 1. degree AV- MAPKsignalingpathway,TGFβsignalingpathway,PI3K- block,P=1.3x10−3andBBB,P=0.01).Theassociationto Akt signaling pathway, IL-2 signaling pathway, apoptosis complete AV block was mostly driven by the variants pathway, p53 activity regulation, angiogenesis pathway, Ser835Phe (P=2.7e−3), Glu153Gly (P=3.5e−3) and and PDGF signaling pathway. Arg378Cys (P=6.3e−3). Conclusions:Resultsofoursystematic reviewshow that Conclusions: Rare HCN4 variants contribute to the risk currently, there is insufﬁcient support for the use of any of ofcompleteAV-block,1.degreeAV-blockandBBBinthe the presented miRNAs as a pathophysiological or prog- general population. These HCN4 variants seem to confer a nostic biomarker in the clinical setting. substantial penetrance.Clinical screeningfor some ofthese A.M. Peterlin: None. K. Pocivavsek: None. D. variants seems appropriate. Petrovic: None. B. Peterlin: None. J.S. Jensen: None. O.B. Vad: None. C. Paludan- Müller: None. P.R. Lundegaard: None. J.H. Svendsen:  P05
.51.C None. S. Haunsø: None. H. Bundgaard: None. Germline variants in transcription factor HEY2 func- M.S. Olesen: None. tional domains lead to congenital heart defects and thoracic aortic aneurysms  P05
.49.A MicroRNAs as biomarkers of heart failure E. S. van Walree1,2, G. Dombrowsky3, I. E. Jansen2, M. Umićević Mirkov2, R. Zwart4, A. Ilgun4, D. Guo5, S. B. A. M. Peterlin1, K. Pocivavsek2, D. Petrovic1, B. Peterlin3 Clur6, A. S. Amin7, J. E. Savage2, A. C. van der Wal8, Q.Waisﬁsz9,A.Maugeri9,A.Wilsdon10,F.A.Bu’lock11,M. 1Institute of Histology and Embriology, Faculty of Medi- E.Hurles12,S.Dittrich13,F.Berger14,E.AudainMartinez3, cine,UniversityofLjubljana,Ljubljana,Slovenia,2Depart- M. Hitz3, D. M. Milewicz5, D. Posthuma2, H. Meijers- mentofCardiovascularSurgery,UniversityMedicalCentre Heijboer1, A. V. Postma1,4, I. B. Mathijssen1 Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Clinical Institute of Genomic Medicine, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Complex Trait Genetics, Introduction: MicroRNAs arehighlyinvestigated for their Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. Never- Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, theless,evidenceforclinicalimplementationisstilllacking. de Boelelaan 1085, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department In our systematic review, we evaluated the potential of of Congenital Heart Disease and Pediatric Cardiology, microRNA as pathophysiological and diagnostic bio- Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein Kiel, Kiel, Ger- markers of heart failure. many, 4Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam UMC, Materials and methods: The literature search was University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, conducted in the PubMed database up to August 2019. Netherlands, 5Department of Internal Medicine, McGovernAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 273 MedicalSchool,UniversityofTexasHealthScienceCenter patients. Identifying a potentially deleterious variant in at Houston, 6431 Fannin, Houston, TX, United States, HEY2 warrants clinical follow-up. 6Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Emma Children’s E.S. van Walree: None. G. Dombrowsky: None. I.E. Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Jansen: None. M. Umićević Mirkov: None. R. Zwart: Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Department of None.A.Ilgun:None.D.Guo:None.S.B.Clur:None.A. Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Amsterdam UMC, S. Amin: None. J.E. Savage: None. A.C. van der Wal: University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, None.Q.Waisﬁsz:None.A.Maugeri:None.A.Wilsdon: Netherlands, 8Department of Pathology, Amsterdam UMC, None. F.A. Bu’lock: None. M.E. Hurles: None. S. University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, Dittrich: None. F. Berger: None. E. Audain Martinez: Netherlands,9Department ofClinicalGenetics,Amsterdam None. M. Hitz: None. D.M. Milewicz: None. D. UMC, Vrije Universiteit Medisch Centrum, de Boelelaan Posthuma: None. H. Meijers-Heijboer: None. A.V. 1118, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 10School of Life Sciences, Postma: None. I.B. Mathijssen: None. University of Nottingham, Queen’s Medical Centre, Not- tingham, United Kingdom, 11East Midlands Congenital  P05
.52.A Heart Centre and University of Leicester, Glenﬁeld The Unknown Genetic Architecture of Severe Hyperch- Hospital, Leicester, United Kingdom, 12Wellcome Trust olesterolemia in Finland Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinx- ton, United Kingdom, 13Department of Pediatric Cardiol- N. Junna1, S. Ruotsalainen1, S. Ripatti1,2, E. Widén1 ogy, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Loschgestrasse 15, 91054,Erlangen,Germany,14GermanHeartCenterBerlin, 1FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Public Health, Department of Congenital Heart Disease, Pediatric Cardi- Clinicum, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, ology, Berlin, Germany Helsinki, Finland Background:Affectingapproximately1%ofallnewborns, While severe hypercholesterolemia is a signiﬁcant risk cardiovascular defects (CVDs) are the most common con- factor for ischemic heart disease (IHD), Finnish patients genitalanomalyworldwide.Here,wepresentalargefamily remain inadequately identiﬁed and only a part of their from a genetically isolated population presenting with mutation load is known. To elucidate the genetic archi- CVDs, including congenital heart defects (CHD) and tecture of severe hypercholesterolemia in Finland, we have familial thoracic aortic aneurysms (FTAA), caused by a screened participants of the GeneRISK-study (n = 7 342) loss-of-function mutation in the Notch target gene HEY2, originating from South-eastern Finland for novel mutations which hasn’t been associated with hereditary CVDs in andutilizedtheFinnGen-cohort(n=110654)toassessthe humans previously. mutation prevalence, impact, and nationwide distribution. Methods: The index patient, who has severe CVD, Five percent (n = 366) of GeneRISK-participants had underwent trio WES. The identiﬁed variant was subse- severehypercholesterolemia(LDL≥5mmol/l)andexome- quently screened in 30 members of this patient’s family, sequencing revealed 3 carriers of previously known which has a high prevalence of CVDs. Additionally, 3011 mutations (LDLR R594Q, LDLR  P309
Kfs and APOB unrelated cases and 4940 controls from two datasets (one R3527Q, which has not previously been reported in withCHDandonewithFTAA)werescreenedforrare risk Finland). We also identiﬁed a novel, likely pathogenic variantsinHEY2.To investigate howthevariousidentiﬁed mutation, LDLR R574L. We assessed the geographical variants inﬂuence gene function, the regulatory activity of distribution of the mutation and the cardiometabolic status mutatedandwildtypeHEY2onatargetgenewasmeasured of mutation carriers in the nationwide FinnGen-cohort and with luciferase assays and qPCR. compared them with 5 previously described Results: A homozygous frameshift variant (p.G108*) in hypercholesterolemia-mutations (LDLR R594Q, LDLR HEY2 was identiﬁed in three individuals with life- G844D, LDLR  L401
H, LDLR D579N, LDLR  C352
W). threatening CVDs. Twenty family members were found to ThenovelLDLRR574L-mutationwasunevenlydistributed be heterozygous for this variant, of whom 80% had CVD. in the country with a high prevalence among individuals Two additional CVD datasets show enrichment for rare, born in the Southeast (the ceded Karjala region) and likely deleterious variants in HEY2 after meta-analysis. prevalence of cardiovascular disease among mutation Lastly, we demonstrate that these variants induce failure of carriers was elevated (22% had been diagnosed with IHD repression of HEY2 target genes. and 14% with stroke). The data further showed that less Conclusions:WeﬁndthatrareHEY2variantspredispose thanhalfofmutationcarriers(boththenovelandpreviously to a broad spectrum of CVDs and advise clinicians to known mutations) were on statin therapy. consider HEY2 as a causative gene in unsolved CVD274 J.delPicchia Our data show that the genetic spectrum of severe E.M. Wigmore: A. Employment (full or part-time); hypercholesterolemia in Finland is more diverse than Signiﬁcant; AstraZeneca. O. Chazara: A. Employment previously anticipated, and further highlight the urgent (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; AstraZeneca. .. FinnGen need for better recognition and treatment of this disease. Consortium: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, N. Junna: None. S. Ruotsalainen: None. S. Ripatti: collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as None. E. Widén: None. grants already received); Signiﬁcant; AstraZeneca, Abbvie, Biogen, Celgene, Genentech, GSK, Merck, Pﬁzer, Sanoﬁ.  P05
.53.B K. Carss: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Mendelian randomisation identiﬁes pleiotropy between AstraZeneca. A. Matakidou: A. Employment (full or part- uric acid and cardiovascular diseases time); Signiﬁcant; AstraZeneca. C. Haeﬂiger: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; AstraZeneca. E. M. Wigmore1, O. Chazara1, . FinnGen Consortium2, K. Carss1, A. Matakidou1, C. Haeﬂiger1  P05
.55.A Pathogenic variant in the MYBP C3
 gene with founding 1AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2University of effect in Galician population Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland A. Blanco-Verea1,2, R. Cruz3,2, M. Álvarez-Barredo4,1,5, B. Elevated levels of uric acid (UA), hyperuricaemia, leads to López-Abel6,1, R. Gil1,2, E. Ramos-Luis1,2, L. Martínez- the formation of urate crystals that cause gout. Hyperur- Campelo1,2, I. Quintela7,2, J. González-Juanatey4,5, Á. icaemia has also been linked to cardiovascular and meta- Carracedo8,2,3,7, M. Brion1,2,5 bolic diseases but, unlike gout, causality has not been ascertained. Here we utilised biomarker data from the UK 1Xenética Cardiovascular, Instituto de Investigación Sani- Biobank (UKB, n = ~500,000) and health outcome data taria de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Grupo fromaFinnishbiobank,FinnGen(n=~135,000)toexplore de Medicina Xenómica, Universidade de Santiago de the causal relationship between biomarkers and disease. Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3CIBER Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of 48 available Enfermedades Raras, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, biomarkers were conducted in UKB and FINEMAP was 4ComplejoHospitalarioUniversitariodeSantiago,Servicio applied to ascertain putative causal variants. We assessed de Cardiología, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 5CIBER the genetic correlation of these biomarkers with 1,485 dis- Cardiovascular, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 6Com- ease endpoints in FinnGen using LD score regression. plejo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago, Servicio de Those with a signiﬁcant correlation following FDR cor- Pediatría, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 7Centro Nacio- rection were assessed for causal associations using Men- nal de Genotipado (CEGEN-PRB3-ISCIII), Santiago de delian randomisation (MR). GWAS of UA corrected for Compostela, Spain, 8Fundación Pública Galega de Medi- allopurinol treatment (a UA-lowering medication) was cina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain completedon389,114individualsandFINEMAPidentiﬁed 320 putative causal signals. Signiﬁcant genetic correlations Introduction: The Myosin Binding Protein  C3
 gene were found with multiple diseases (n = 183) including (MYBP C3
) is one of the main genes in which mutations hypertensive diseases (rg=0.25, P =6.2x10−38), type 2 involved in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) FDR diabetes (rg=0.29, P =6.2x10−38), cardiovascular dis- appear. One of these pathogenic variants is the deletion FDR ease (rg=0.23, P =9.6x10−29) and gout (rg=0.70, rs397515926 that appears in the gnome AD database in FDR P =8.3x10−21).ResultsfromMRanalysesconﬁrmedthe only one individual of Latino origin (Allele Fre- FDR known causal association of UA with gout (IVW esti- quency=0.000004913). However, we have found 18 unre- mate=1.6, P =7.8x10−62) as well as with poly- lated patients with HCM from Galicia with this variant, FDR arthropathies (IVW estimate=0.37, P =1.9x10−12) but whichhasledustothinkaboutapossiblefoundingeffectof FDR notwithotherdiseases.Asigniﬁcantcausalassociationwas this variant in the Galician population. found with hypertension (IVW estimate=0.20, Materials and Methods: Trying to unmask a possible P =0.0015) but horizontal pleiotropy was also detected founding effect or a distant family relationship between FDR (MR-EggerinterceptP=0.0069).Ourﬁndingsuggeststhat patients, we made a genotyping with the Applied although MR does not support the direct association BiosystemsTMAxiomTMSpain Biobank Arrayin6ofthese between UA and cardiovascular disease, we observe patients and in a cohort of healthy Galician and Spanish pleiotropic effects which could support therapies targeting population.Principalcomponentsanalysisanddiscriminant shared pathways. analysis of principal components were performed in Plink and adegenet package of R software.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 275 Results: discriminant analysis of principal components concentration of MIF and CXC L12
 was estimated by takingintoaccountrarevariantsofthearrayandcomparing enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Receiver operating our patients with the general Spanish and Galician characteristic analysis was used to assess the diagnostic population clearly differentiate our patients with respect to value of each miRNA. the rest. Results: Our data showed 9 miRNAs (miRNA-1224-5p, Conclusions: Considering the results of the analysis of miRNA-1303, miRNA-3147, miRNA-4455, miRNA-498, the genotypes between our cases and the general popula- miRNA-548b-3p, miRNA-548d-3p, miRNA-615-3p, tion, the practically null bibliographic mention and very miRNA-651-5p) signiﬁcantly upregulated in T2DM IHD scarce presence in databases of this variant, we could group compared to T2DM noIHD (FC>1.4 and FDR < assume a possible common origin for the presence of this 0.05). Furthermore, all miRNAs showed high diagnostic variant in the Galician population, highlighting a possible value (AUC>0.85). Targeted genes were identiﬁed in foundingeffect.Founding:InstitutodeSaludCarlosIIIand canonical pathways involved in the pathology of the FondoEuropeodeDesarrolloRegional(PI16/00903,CB16/ cardiovascular system. No statistical differences were 11/00226, CB03/07/0088). observedintheconcentrationofMIFandCXC L12
between A. Blanco-Verea: None. R. Cruz: None. M. Álvarez- tested groups. Barredo: None. B. López-Abel: None. R. Gil: None. E. Conclusions: Our ﬁndings suggest that circulating Ramos-Luis: None. L. Martínez-Campelo: None. I. miRNAs might have a pivotal role in the development of Quintela: None. J. González-Juanatey: None. Á. Carra- IHD in T2DM patients and may be used as non-invasively cedo: None. M. Brion: None. biomarkers for early diagnosis. A. Bielska: None. W. Bauer: None. I. Sidorkiewicz:  P05
.56.B None. A. Szalkowska: None. J. Raczkowska: None. D. The potential diagnostic value of circulating serum- Ostrowski: None. P. Prokopczuk: None. S. Dobrzycki: derived miRNAs in ischemic heart disease (IHD) as a None. M. Niemira: None. A. Kretowski: None. complication of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).  P05
.57.C A. Bielska1, W. Bauer1,2, I. Sidorkiewicz1, A. Szalkowska1, Derivation and validation of a polygenic risk score J. Raczkowska1, D. Ostrowski1, P. Prokopczuk3, S. associated with ischemic heart failure in multiethnic Dobrzycki3, M. Niemira1, A. Kretowski1,4 cohorts 1ClinicalResearchCentre,MedicalUniversityofBialystok, I. Paranjpe1, J. De Freitas1, N. Tsao2, R. Judy2, K. Bialystok, Poland, 2Clinical Research Centre, Medical Chaudhary3, I. Forrest4, CBIPM Genomics Team, University of Bialystok, Białystok, Poland, 3Department of Regeneron Genomics Team, S. Coca5, J. Narula6, B. Invasive Cardiology, Medical University of Bialystok, Glicksberg1, R. Do3,4, S. Damrauer2, G. Nadkarni1,3,7 Bialystok, Poland, 4Department of Endocrinology, Diabe- tology and Internal Medicine, Medical University of 1The Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Health at Mount Bialystok, Białystok, Poland Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 2Department of Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Introduction:Currently,IHDisthemostcommoncauseof Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3The death inpatientswith diabetes anditdevelopsmuch earlier Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, beforeclinicaldiagnosis.Therefore,thereisanurgentneed Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, for the detection of sensitive and speciﬁc early biomarkers United States, 4Department of Genetics and Genomic to predict the risk of the IHD development. We postulate Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New thatnon-codingmiRNAsmayhavehigherdiagnosticvalue York, NY, United States, 5Division of Nephrology, Depart- forearlydetectionofIHDthaninﬂammatorymediatorslike mentofMedicine,IcahnSchoolofMedicineatMountSinai, chemokine CXC L12
 and macrophage migration-inhibitory New York, NY, United States, 6Division of Cardiology, factor (MIF). Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Materials and Methods: We obtained serum samples Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 7Renal from43T2DMpatients(24withIHDand19withoutIHD). Program, James J Peters VA Medical Center at Bronx, Thelevelsof798miRNAswereanalysedusingNanoString New York, NY, United States nCounter Technology. Additionally, we predicted the key miRNA regulatory network and miRNAs targets and Introduction: Mortality from heart failure (HF) secondary pathways that may be critical in IHD development using to coronary artery disease (CAD) is 50% and risk- the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. The stratiﬁcation approaches are limited. We aimed to stratify276 J.delPicchia risk of progression to HF in CAD patients by developing a Methods:1495 patients diagnosed with LQTS and 7475 polygenic risk score (PRS). propensity-score matched controls were identiﬁed in a Methods:UsingsummarystatisticsfromarecentGWAS database of primary care electronic records (CPRD). A forHFsecondarytoCAD(ischemicHF),wecomputedrisk range of clinical features that occurred at greater frequency scoresbyvaryingtherhoparameterinLDPredandvarying in cases than control (p <0.05) before diagnosis were the p-value threshold and r2. We selected the PRS that identiﬁed and incorporated into a multivariable logistic maximizedtheassociationwithischemicHF(PRS )from regression model. iHF themultiethnicMountSinaiBioMeBiobank(N=6276).We Results:18 clinical features were incorporated into the validated the association in Penn Medicine BioBank ﬁnal model, including: epilepsy (1.70 (1.12, 2.56)), (PMBB; N=6674). We performed association analysis palpitations (2.22 (1.80, 2.74)), collapse (1.636 (1.32, using logistic regression adjusted for age, sex, smoking 2.03), mitral valve disease (2.64 (1.41, 4.91)), atrial history,hypertension,BMI,type2diabetes,andtengenetic ﬁbrillation (1.91 (1.41, 2.60)) and IBS (1.78 (1.41, 2.26)) principal components. (OR (95% CI)). The discriminative accuracy of the model Results: In BioMe, one standard deviation (SD) increase assessedbyareaunderthecurve(AUC)was0.74,(95%CI in PRS was signiﬁcantly associated with HF (OR=1.1; 0.73 to 0.75), with comparable performance in two more iHF p=0.001; 2530 cases, 3746 controls HF risk increased tightly phenotyped subgroups: LQTS diagnosis <45 years monotonically with PRS in a subset of individuals with and those commenced on a betablocker &/or ﬁtted with an iHF CAD but no evidence of obstructive CAD on coronary ImplantableCardioverterDeﬁbrillator(ICD)post-diagnosis. catheterization (N=4775). In PMBB, PRS was asso- Conclusion:Thisstudydemonstratesthatitispossibleto iHF ciated with ischemic HF in European Americans (adjusted develop a predictive model for LQTS that performs with OR=1.07; p=0.02; 2692 cases, 2472 controls) but not similaraccuracytootherwidelyadoptedcardiovascularrisk African Africans (adjusted OR=0.94; p=0.3; 921 cases, models.Furthermore,itshowsthepotentialofprimarycare 589 controls). records to phenotypically identify patients that are at an Conclusions: We derived and validated a PRS for increased risk of having a rare disease. ischemic HF in two multiethnic cohorts and demonstrated W.R.H.Evans:D.SpeakersBureau/Honoraria(speakers association with and without obstructive CAD. PRS bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Intrabio iHF replicated in patients of European ancestry, but not in inc. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Mendelian.co. Africanancestry.Althoughstudiesonclinical utility andin S.F. Weng: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers more diverse populations are needed, our results suggest bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Amgen. application in early risk stratiﬁcation. R.K. Akyea: None. A.D. Simms: None. J. Kai: None. N. I.Paranjpe:None.J.DeFreitas:None.N.Tsao:None. Qureshi: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, R.Judy:None.K.Chaudhary:None.I.Forrest:None.S. symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Amgen. Coca: None. J. Narula: None. B. Glicksberg: None. R. Do: None. S. Damrauer: None. G. Nadkarni: None.  P05
.60.C Functional investigation of possible pathogenic EPHB4  P05
.58.A variantsassociatedwithlymphaticrelatedfetalhydrops Identifying Long QT syndrome (LQTS) patients in and hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia primary care, an approach for rare diseases. E. Sackey, S. Martin-Almedina, K. Ogmen, D. Grigoriadis, W.R.H.Evans1,S.F.Weng1,R.K.Akyea1,A.D.Simms2, S. Mansour, P. Ostergaard J. Kai1, N. Qureshi1 St. George’s University, London, United Kingdom 1University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 2Department of Cardiology, Leeds Teaching Hospital NHS The use of next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies Trust, Leeds, United Kingdom has increased the capacity of rare and novel variant detec- tion. However, this brings challenges to conﬁrm patho- Introduction: LQTS is a rare (~1 in 2000 births) inherited genicity of the identiﬁed variants and evaluate them cardiacarrhythmiathatpredisposespatientstosyncopeand functionally, both needed for precise clinical diagnostics. sudden cardiac death. Identiﬁcation and treatment can This study investigates nine novel possible pathogenic substantially reduce this risk. We aimed to identify the nonsynonymous variants in the EPHB4 (Ephrin Receptor clinical features that precede the diagnosis of LQTS in B4) gene. EPHB4 mutations have been associated with primary care and use these to develop a predictive model. lymphatic related fetal hydrops (LRFH) and hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) both with autosomalAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 277 dominant inheritance. Non-immune fetal hydrops is char- expression data (N=1,687) in the Rotterdam Study to acterisedbyﬂuidaccumulationinatleasttwoextravascular identify genetic instruments for miRNAs. MR was fetalcompartmentsandabout15%ofthecasesresultfroma performed in a hypothesis-free manner between 591 lymphatic abnormality. HHT presents commonly with miRNAs and 886 metabolites measured by the Metabolon arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) inthe liver and lung, platform. The association of the genetic instruments with in connection with cutaneous and mucosal telangiectasias. metabolites were examined in the Airwave Study Functionalanalysisincludingimmunoprecipitation,western (N=1,942). We further performed MR to investigate the blotting, and immunoﬂuorescence assays were performed causal role of identiﬁed metabolites on cardiovascular on nine novel variants on EPBH4 to investigate their disorders using publicly available GWAS summary results. pathogenicity. This study demonstrates the pathogenic Results: Our analysis indicated causal associations effect of eight variants out of nine. Most of the LRFH- between 16 miRNAs and 21 metabolites after multiple associated EPHB4 variants presented similar protein testing correction. Among the identiﬁed metabolites, expression levels compared to the wildtype protein but nominally signiﬁcant associations were found between reduced tyrosine kinase activity while HHT-associated androsterone sulfate, cysteine sulﬁnic acid, and N- EPHB4 variants showed a reduction or total absence of palmitoylglycine with stroke, and 3-hydroxy-5- proteinexpression.Basedontheseresults,wesuggestthere cholestenoic acid with coronary artery disease. Taken couldbetwodistinctEPHB4-associateddiseasephenotypes together, we were able to identify metabolites that might distinguishedbytwodistinctivemolecularmechanisms,but link miR-1273h-5p, miR-3937, and miR-4753-5p with further research is necessary to elucidate this. stroke, and miR-181a-2-3p with coronary artery disease. E. Sackey: None. S. Martin-Almedina: None. K. Conclusions: Our study has added insight into under- Ogmen:None.D.Grigoriadis:None.S.Mansour:None. standing the role of metabolites in the link between P. Ostergaard: None. miRNAsandcardiovasculardisorders.Thisapproachcould offer a way for ﬁnding candidate biomarkers and therapeu-  P05
.61.A tic targets in cardiovascular disorders. Identifying metabolomic ﬁngerprints of microRNAs in R. Mustafa: None. M. Mens: None. R. Pinto: None. I. cardiovascular disorders Karaman: None. G. Roshchupkin: None. J. Huang: None. P. Elliott: None. M. Evangelou: None. A. R. Mustafa1, M. Mens2, R. Pinto1, I. Karaman1, G. Dehghan: None. M. Ghanbari: None. Roshchupkin3,4, J. Huang1, P. Elliott1, M. Evangelou5, A. Dehghan1, M. Ghanbari2  P05
.62.B The detection of mosaic mutationsin hereditary aortic 1Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Imperial disease through next-generation sequencing CollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,2Departmentof Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Z. G. Yan, H. Yang, Y. H. Zhang, Z. Zhou Netherlands, 3Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Beijing Netherlands,4DepartmentofMedicalInformatics,Erasmus Key Laboratory for Molecular Diagnostics of Cardiovas- Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Department cular Diseases, Diagnostic Laboratory Service, Fuwai of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, United Kingdom Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China Introduction:microRNAs(miRNAs)aresmallnon-coding Background: The mosaic carriers have been clinically RNAs that regulate gene expression. Despite an increasing normal or had only minor manifestations when the pro- evidence that supports miRNAs as potential biomarkers in portion of mutated cells is low, which makes it difﬁcult to cardiovascular disorders, the underlying mechanisms be detected. However, if the mutations were transmitted remain to be elucidated. We aimed to identify metabolites from asymptomatic carriers to their children, it will cause that mediate the effect of miRNAs on cardiovascular unexpected occurrence of diseases. So genetic tests are disorders. often required. Methods: We performed two steps of two-sample Methods: We choosed 563 patients with suspected Mendelian Randomization (MR) to study the causal marfan syndrome (MFS) or thoracic aortic aneurysm/ associationbetweenmiRNAsandmetabolites,andbetween dissection, who had been detected by Panel. Among them, themetabolitesandcardiovasculardisorders.Weconducted we selected 56 patients who carried likely pathogenic genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on miRNA (pathogenic) mutations and were not de novo, their parents278 J.delPicchia who harbored the same mutation were clinically normal. the exon 33 of MYH11 (NM_00104114.1) with a potential For these Trio families, we used the Life PGM TM DX splicingimpact.Thisvariantwasalsopresentintheaffected platform to perform deep sequencing of single amplicon sister. It was absent from GnomAD and internal variant (approximately 5000×) on DNA samples extracted from database (>1000 patients) and never reported in the litera- whole blood. ture. Interestingly, a single-nucleotide polymorphism is Results:WedetectedtwomosaicmutationsintheseTrio described at this position: c.4599+3A>G (rs143288748). families. The ﬁrst patient AD700-1 who had typical MFS Interpretation of variations at the position +3 of the 5’ss is features carried the mutation FBN1,  C1305
F. After deep difﬁcult because data of the literature are conﬂicting with sequencing,23% mutated alleles were detected in healthy variationsreportedtoinduceaberrantsplicinginsomecases father who harbored the same mutation. The second but not in others. We performed transcript analysis with mutation FBN1, c.2167+1G>A was identiﬁed in patient RNA extracted from an aortic biopsy during the brother’s AD1833,whowassuspectedtobeMFS.Themutationwas second intervention. RT PCR revealed a skipping of the alsocarriedbyhealthyfather,whowasfoundtocarry17% exon33ofMYH11predictingatruncatedmyosintailanda of the mutant allele through deep sequencing. dominant negative effect. This report conﬁrms genotype- Conclusions:Mosaicmutationscouldbeamorecommon phenotype correlations for MYH11 and FAA/PDA. phenomenoninaorticdiseasesthanhasbeenrealizedsofar. B. Chesneau: None. A. Plancke: None. G. Rolland: Therefore, whenever children are identiﬁed with harmful None. B. Marcheix: None. Y. Dulac: None. T. Edouard: mutations, the parents who lack obvious phenotypic None. M. Aubert-Mucca: None. S. Julia: None. M. characteristics should be detected by genetic testing, which Langeois: None. V. Gaston: None. P. Khau Van willprovidemoreaccurateguidanceforgeneticcounseling. Kien: None. Z.G.Yan:None.H.Yang:None.Y.H.Zhang:None.Z. Zhou: None.  P05
.64.A A founder pathogenic variant in MYH7 causing hyper-  P05
.63.C trophic cardiomyopathy in Catalonia Familial aortic aneurysm syndrome caused by a +3 variant at a donor splice site of MYH11. P.Fernández-Álvarez1,M.Codina1,J.Limeres2,C.Serra- Juhé3, M. Masas Castro1, A. Cordero Lopez1, E. García- B.Chesneau1,2,A.Plancke1,G.Rolland1,B.Marcheix3,Y. Arumí1,4, E. Tizzano1,4 Dulac2, T. Edouard2, M. Aubert-Mucca2,4, S. Julia4, M. Langeois2,4, V. Gaston4, P. Khau Van Kien1 1DepartmentofClinicalandMolecularGeneticsandMedicine Genetics Group, VHIR, University Hospital Vall d’Hebron, 1Unité de génétique médicale et cytogénétique, Hôpital Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Cardiology, Hospital Carémeau, CHU de Nîmes, Nîmes, France, 2Centre de Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department Référence du syndrome de Marfan et des syndromes ofGenetics,HospitaldelaSantaCreuiSantPau,Barcelona, apparentés, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU de Toulouse, Spain,4CIBERER,CentrodeInvestigaciónBiomédicaenRed Toulouse, France, 3Département de chirurgie cardiaque, de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain Hôpital Universitaire deRangueil,Toulouse,France,4Ser- vice de génétique médicale, Hôpital Universitaire de Pathogenic variants in MYH7 are the second most common Purpan, Toulouse, France cause of inherited hypertrophic cardiomiopathy (HCM). 262 unrelated HCM probands were screened using the Illumina Pathogenic variants in the myosin smooth muscle heavy TruSightCardio kit. Twenty-nine patients were heterozygous chain 11 (MYH11) are associated with familial aortic forMYH7pathogenicvariants,6(21%)ofthemhadthesame aneurysm (FAA) and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) syn- variant c.2674C>A p.(Gln892Lys). This variant has been pre- drome.Wereportafamilywithtwosiblingswhopresented viouslydescribedasaVUSinaHCMpatientwhichharbored with type A aortic dissections. The sister made an aortic another pathogenic variant in MYH7 and in ClinVar, and is dissection at 45 years-old. The brother made an aortic dis- absentinGnomAD.Inalloursixpatientsp.(Gln892Lys)was section at 22 years-old treated with an aortic graft proce- theonlyprobablypathogenicvariantfound.Patients(4males/2 dure, at 46 years-old he had revision surgery because of females) were of Catalan origin and had been diagnosed of pseudoaneurysms complications. His daughter was diag- HCM around 30 years-old. Familial sudden death before the nosedwithapatentductusarteriosus.Theirfathersuddenly ﬁfthdecadeoflifewerereported.Weextendedthegeneticand died at 28 years-old. Molecular analysis of a panel of 15 cardiologicstudyto20relativesoftheprobands.Twelvewere aortic aneurysm genes in the brother revealed only the carriers, 9 of them symptomatic and p.(Gln892Lys) co- variant c.4599+3A>C at the 5’ donor splice site (5’ss) of segregated with the HCM in all the families. We studied theAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 279 possibility of a founder effect by haplotype analysis using the MY L3
 encodes the slow-twitch speciﬁc myosin essential SNP data from the TruSightCardio kit. We used 14 SNPs, lightchain(ELC),andpathogenicvariantsinthisgenearea ﬂankinganareaof49,35kbbeforeMYH6andafterMYH7.A rarecauseofhypertrophiccardiomyopathy.Themajorityof common haplotype with a calculated haplotype frequency in cases reported in the literature involve MY L3
 missense Iberia population of 0.0187 was shared in the 6 patients and variants transmitted in an autosomal dominant mode of was not found in our remaining 256 patients with HCM. Our inheritance. Here, through exome sequencing of four results indicate a possible founder effect of this MYH7 patho- unrelated consanguineous families we identify biallelic genic variant in HCM patients of Catalan origin. MY L3
 sequence variants. Affected individuals present with hypertrophicordilatedcardiomyopathyofvariableseverity from early- to late-onset of cardiomyopathy, and sudden Resultsofhabplotypeanalysisinthe6patients cardiacdeathin10individuals.Wereporthomozygousand SNP Position Proband1Proband2Proband3Proband4Proband5Proband6Distance (hg19) from compound heterozygous missense variants p.Ala57Asp, p. chr14 Previous case1 SNP(kb) Met173Lys and p.Glu177Gly, a novel homozygous trans- rs8006357 23853629T C T C T C T C C C T C lational stop codon variant p.Glu36Ter, and a homozygous rs178640 23855569A G A G G G A G G G A G 1,94 splice variant c.482-1G>A in MY L3
. G0 zebraﬁsh larvae rs2071634 23855849C T C T C T C T T T C T 0,28 withCRISPR/Cas9genedisruptionortransientknockdown rs365990 23861811A A G A A A A A A A A A 5,962 rs61731179 23869993G A G A G A G A G A G A 8,182 of the major ELC orthologue in zebraﬁsh, cmlc1, display rs434273 23872666C T C T C T T T C T C T 2,673 signiﬁcantly larger ventricular chamber volume and com- rs2331979 23882855A A A A A A A A A A A A 10,189 promised cardiac function, which cannot be rescued by re- rs2277475 23888665A A T A A A A A T A A A 5,81 rs7157716 23892888A A G A A A A A G A A A 4,223 introduction of human mutant RNA. Our genetic and p. 23893983G T G T G T G T G T G T 1,095 functional data expand the mutational and phenotypic (Gln892Lys) rs2231126 23898994G G A G G G G G G G G G 0,066 spectrum of MY L3
 variants, identifying for the ﬁrst time a rs735712 23899060G G G G G G G G G G G G 0,066 homozygous loss of function variant, and highlighting the rs2069542 23900794G G A G G G G G A G G G 1,734 role of MY L3
 in recessive hypertrophic and dilated cardi- rs2069540 23902753G A A A G A A A A A G A 1,959 omyopathy with occurrence of sudden cardiac death. rs3729992 23902974C C C C C C C C A C C C 0,221 D.P.S.Osborn:None.L.Emrahi:None.M.T.Tabrizi: None. M. Yazdchi: None. N. Mazaheri: None. A. P. Fernández-Álvarez: None. M. Codina: None. J. Mitchell: None. C. Hesse: None. H. Goullée: None. D. Limeres: None. C. Serra-Juhé: None. M. Masas Castro: Burkardt:None.N.Laing:None.A.Y.B.Wan:None.H. None.A.CorderoLopez:None.E.García-Arumí:None. Galehdari: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. G. Shariati: E. Tizzano: None. None. H. Tajsharghi: None. Y. Jamshidi: F. Consultant/ Advisory Board; Modest; DiNAQOR AG.  P05
.65.B Biallelic variants in MY L3
 cause autosomal recessive  P05
.66.C cardiomyopathy Impact of abdominal obesity on postprandial lipid concentrations D. P. S. Osborn1, L. Emrahi2, M. T. Tabrizi3, M. Yazdchi3, N. Mazaheri4, A. Mitchell5, C. Hesse6, H. Goullée7, D. M.R.Christiansen1,T.I.A.Sorensen1,2,T.Hansen1,T.O. Burkardt5, N. Laing7, A. Y. B. Wan1, H. Galehdari4, R. Kilpeläinen1 Marooﬁan1, G. Shariati4, H. Tajsharghi8, Y. Jamshidi1 1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic 1Genetics Centre, London, United Kingdom, 2Tarbiat Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Modares University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, 2Department of Public Health, Section of Epidemiology, IslamicRepublicof,4ShahidChamranUniversityofAhvaz, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 5Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States, 6University of Introduction: Humans spend most of the day in a post- Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 7The University absorptive state, and thus prolonged and high postprandial of Western Australia and the Harry Perkins Institute of lipemia can have major implications for the risk of cardio- Medical Research, Nedlands, Australia, 8University of vascular disease. Abdominal adiposity may inﬂuence post- Skovde, Skovde, Sweden prandial lipemia by inﬂuencing lipid metabolism after a meal. To date, >400 genetic loci have been discovered for associationwithabdominaladiposity,assessedbywaist-hip280 J.delPicchia ratioadjustedforbodymassindex(WHRadjBMI).Whether Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Addenbrooke’s these variants are associated with postprandial lipid con- and Royal Papworth Hospitals, Cambridge, United King- centrations, remains unknown. We thus examined whether dom genetic risk score for increased waist-hip ratio adjusted for body mass index (WHRadjBMI) is associated with lipid Introduction: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a concentrations at fasting state and after a high-fat meal. rare and devastating disease, resulting from progressive Materials and Methods: 771 individuals of European obliteration of small caliber pulmonary arteries leading to ancestry and with obesity from the NUGENOB study cardiac failure. PAH can occur in the context of family consumed a liquid high-fat meal (95% fat of the energy history or genetic mutations causing heritable PAH, or is content). The postprandial concentrations of HDL choles- considered as idiopathic in the absence of an identiﬁed terol, LDL cholesterol, free fatty acids, glycerol and predisposingfactor.BeyondthemajorgeneBMPR2,agene triglycerides were measured at fasting state and postpran- encoding a type 2 receptor of the BMP signaling pathway dially for 3 hours. The associations between the several new genes predisposing to PAH have been identi- WHRadjBMIscoreandlipidconcentrationswereexamined ﬁed during the last decade. Recently, preliminary evidence using linear models. of the involvement of the KDR gene was found in a large Results: At fasting state, the genetic risk score for genetic association study. WHRadjBMI was associated with higher fasting triglycer- Methods: We prospectively analysed the KDR gene by ides (P=0.0013) and lower HDL cholesterol (P=0.0059). targeted panel NGS sequencing in a series of 311 PAH Postprandially, the genetic risk score was not associated patients referred to a clinical molecular laboratory for with changes in triglycerides or HDL cholesterol (P>0.05), genetic diagnosis of PAH. but was signiﬁcantly associated with elevated glycerol Results:TwoindexcaseswithseverePAHwerefoundto concentrations (P=0.012). carry a loss-of-function mutation in the KDR gene. These Conclusions: Genetic predisposition to abdominal adip- two patients were clinically characterized by low diffusing osity is associated with elevated blood glycerol concentra- capacity for carbon monoxide adjusted for hemoglobin tion after a high-fat meal. (DLCOc) and radiological evidence of parenchymal lung M.R. Christiansen: None. T.I.A. Sorensen: None. T. disease.Segregationanalysisinonefamilyrevealedthatall Hansen: None. T.O. Kilpeläinen: None. KDR mutations carriers have a low DLCOc that is more pronounced in affected subjects compared to non-affected  P05
.68.B Conclusions: Our study provided genetic evidence for Familial pulmonary arterial hypertension by KDR considering KDR as a newly identiﬁed PAH causing gene heterozygous loss of function since we describe the segregation of KDR mutations with PAH in two families. Furthermore, KDR mutations are M. EYRIE S1
, D. Montani2, B. Girerd2, N. Favrolt3, M. associated with a particular form of PAH characterized by Riou4, L. Faivre5, G. Manaud6, F. Perros6, S. Gräf7, N. low DLCOc and parenchymal lung disease. Morrell8, M. Humbert2 M. Eyries: None. D. Montani: None. B. Girerd: None. N. Favrolt: None. M. Riou: None. L. Faivre: None. G. 1Département de génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires Pitié Manaud: None. F. Perros: None. S. Gräf: None. N. Salpêtrière - Charles Foix,, Paris, France, 2Service de Morrell: None. M. Humbert: None. Pneumologie, Centre de Référence de l’Hypertension Pulmonaire, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France,  P05
.70.A 3Service de Pneumologie et Soins Intensifs Respiratoires, PHACTR1mRNAexpressionisaffectedbyrs9349379in Centre de référence constitutif des maladies pulmonaires PBMC of patients six months after the ﬁrst MI rares de l’adulte, Centre de compétence de l’hypertension pulmonaire, CHU Dijon-Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Ser- J.Kuveljic1,T.Djuric1,M.Dekleva2,N.MarkovicNikolic2, vice de Pneumologie, Nouvel hôpital civil, Strasbourg, A. Stankovic1, D. Alavantic1, M. Zivkovic1 France, 5Centre de génétique, FHU TRANSLAD, Institut GIMI et UMR INSERM 1231, CHU de Dijon et Université 1Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Laboratory for de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 6UMR_S 999, Université Radiobiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Paris-Saclay, INSERM, Hôpital Marie Lannelongue, Le Belgrade,Belgrade,Serbia,Belgrade,Serbia,2Department Plessis Robinson, France, 7NIHR Bioresource – Rare of Cardiology, University Clinical Center “Zvezdara”, Diseases, Department of Medicine, Department of Haema- Belgrade, Serbia; Faculty of Medicine, University of tology,CambridgeBiomedicalCampus,Cambridge,United Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia Kingdom, 8Department of Medicine, University ofAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 281 Aim:Phosphataseandactinregulator1(PHACTR1)wasat Introduction: Hypertension (HTN) is a major cardiovas- ﬁrstassociatedwith earlyonsetmyocardialinfarction(MI). cularriskfactorandresponsiblefor~50%ofcardiovascular Lateron,itwasassociatedwithothervasculardisorders,but morbidity and mortality. Blood pressure (BP) is also a still the mechanism of its effect is unknown. Rs9349379 is complexgenetic traitwithheritability estimatesof30-50%. aneQTLforPHACTR1incoronaryarteries,whereAallele Genome-wideassociationstudies(GWAS)haveidentiﬁeda leads to higher expression. Also PHACTR1 mRNA high number of genetic loci associated with HTN and BP expression is elevated in the heart after MI, indicating its traits, indicating underlying polygenic architectures. This up-regulation in pathological conditions. The aim of our study proposes to compute polygenic risk scores (PRS) for study was to investigate the association of rs9349379 with HTN and BP for potential genetic risk stratiﬁcation. the ﬁrst MI in Serbian population and its effect on Materials and Methods: We investigated the additive PHACTR1 mRNAexpression in PBMC of MI patients and effect of common genetic variants on HTN and BP by controls. means of regression models based on PRS. We used Methods: Blood samples from 171 controls and 156 genotyping data of 561 cases and 731 controls from patientswiththeﬁrstMIwereobtainedforDNAextraction. Hypergenes cohort. We computed PRS based on clumping For RNA extraction, we collected 32 control samples and and thresholding method using GWAS summary statistics 65 samples of patients six months after the ﬁrst MI. of systolic/diastolic BP measurements from GERA cohort Genotyping and expression analysis were performed with (99,785healthrecords)andtheHTNcase-controlcohortof Taqman technology. Statistical analyses were done by the UK Biobank (144,793 cases and 313,761 controls). Statistica 8 software. Results: PRS for HTN and diastolic/systolic BP are Results: The association of rs9349379 with the ﬁrst MI strongly associated with hypertensive status and BP wasnotsigniﬁcant(p=0.13).PHACTR1mRNAexpression measurements. The highest signiﬁcance is achieved for wassigniﬁcantlyhigherinMIpatientscomparedtocontrols the case-control status by considering UK Biobank effect (p=0.02). We have found that rs9349379 has no effect on sizes (p=6.4e-28, R2=0.09). The area under the curve is PHACTR1 mRNA expression in control group (p=0.90), 0.68. The model remains signiﬁcant after adjusting for sex while AA genotype led to higher expression in patient and body mass index (p=4.1e-27). group (p=0.04). Conclusions: PRS modeling shows a strong polygenic Conclusions: Rs9349379 affects PHACTR1 mRNA component both for HTN status and for BP levels. Despite expression in PBMC of MI patients, six months after the the limited predictive accuracy expected for BP, which is MI. In order to accurately estimate its association with MI, largely inﬂuenced by environmental factors, the strength of further analysis and larger sample size are needed. Funded associationssuggeststhatPRScouldbepotentiallyusedfor by Serbian Ministry, grant III41028. genetic risk stratiﬁcation. J.Kuveljic:None.T.Djuric:None.M.Dekleva:None. O.Borisov:None.E.Salvi:None.L.Citterio:None.C. N. Markovic Nikolic: None. A. Stankovic: None. D. Lanzani: None. C. Barlassina: None. N. Glorioso: None. Alavantic: None. M. Zivkovic: None. P. Krawitz: None. D. Cusi: None. P. Manunta: None. C. Maj: None.  P05
.71.B Polygenic risk scores for hypertension risk stratiﬁcation  P05
.72.C Biallelic variants in PP P1
R13L cause paediatric dilated O. Borisov1, E. Salvi2, L. Citterio3, C. Lanzani3, C. cardiomyopathy Barlassina4, N. Glorioso5, P. Krawitz1, D. Cusi4, P. Manunta3, C. Maj1 H.K.Robinson1,E.Zaklyazminskaya2,I.Povolotskaya3,Y. Surikova4,L.Mallin1,C.Armstrong5,M.R.Chrisant6,P.J. 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn, Benke7, M. McDonald8, C. C. Marboe9, K. McWalter10, G. Germany,2NeuroalgologyUnit,FondazioneIRCCSIstituto Douglas10, K. Agre11, D. Deyle11, K. M. Balashova3, V. Neurologico “Carlo Besta”, Milan, Italy, 3Genomics of Kaimonov3, N. Shirokova3, E. Pomerantseva3, C. Turner12, RenalDiseasesandHypertensionUnit,IstitutodiRicovero S. Ellard1,13 e Cura a Carattere Scientiﬁco (IRCCS) San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute; Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, 1Exeter Genomics Laboratory, Exeter, United Kingdom, Milan, Italy, 4Dept. Of Health Sciences, University of 2Center of Syncope and Cardiac Arrhythmias in Children Milan, Milan, Italy, 5Hypertension and related diseases and Adolescents, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Centre of Centre Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine GeneticsandReproductiveMedicine“Genetico”,Moscow, University of Sassari Italy, Sassari, Italy Russian Federation, 4B.V. Petrovsky Russian National Centre of Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation,282 J.delPicchia 5Paediatric Cardiac Service, Bristol Royal Hospital for None. C. Armstrong: None. M.R. Chrisant: None. P.J. Children, Bristol, United Kingdom, 6Joe DiMaggio Chil- Benke:None.M.McDonald: None.C.C.Marboe:None. dren’sHospital,Hollywood,FL,UnitedStates,7CharlesE. K. McWalter: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, niﬁcant; GeneDx Inc. G. Douglas: A.Employment (full or Hollywood, FL, United States, 8Department of Pediatrics, part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx Inc.. K. Agre: None. D. Division of Medical Genetics, Duke University Medical Deyle: None. K.M. Balashova: None. V. Kaimonov: Center, Durham, NC, United States, 9Department of None. N. Shirokova: None. E. Pomerantseva: None. C. Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Turner: None. S. Ellard: None. Centre, New York, NY, United States, 10GeneDx Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 11Mayo Clinic, Depart-  P05
.75.C ment of Clinical Genomics, Rochester, MN, United States, Identiﬁcation of ANGPT2 mutations as a novel cause of 12Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Department of primary lymphedema Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Founda- tion Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, 13Institute of Biome- V. Leppänen1, P. Brouillard2, E. Korhonen1, N. Revencu3, dicalandClinicalScience,CollegeofMedicineandHealth, G. Koh4, P. Saharinen1, K. Alitalo1, M. Vikkula2,5 Exeter, United Kingdom 1Wihuri Research Institute, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Introduction: Childhood DCM is a leading cause of heart Finland, 2Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, failure requiring cardiac transplantation, with ~5% of cases UClouvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Center for Human Genet- resulting in sudden death. Knowledge of the underlying ics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain, Brus- genetic cause can aid prognostication and clinical man- sels, Belgium, 4Center for Vascular Research, Korea agement and enables accurate recurrence risk counselling. Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Hereouraimwastoidentifythecausativegeneticvariant(s) Daejoen, Korea, Republic of, 5Walloon Excellence in in families with children affected by severe DCM. Lifesciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), UCLouvain, Materials and Methods: Exome/genome sequencing Brussels, Belgium was performed on leukocyte DNA from seven children affectedwithsevereDCMandtheirunaffectedparentsfrom Purpose: Primary lymphedema (PLE) is caused by devel- ﬁve independent families, followed by inheritance-based opmental and functional defects of the lymphatic system gene-agnostic variant ﬁltering. Families were brought resulting in accumulation of protein-rich ﬂuid in tissues. together by an international collaborative effort facilitated The28currentlyknowngenescausinglymphedemaexplain by GeneMatcher. <30% of cases. We search for additional genes to better Results: DCM presented early (range: 3 months – 9 understand pathophysiology. years) and was progressive, resulting in death (n = 3) or Methods: We used WES to screen 543 patients within transplant (n = 3), with one child currently awaiting ourcohortof>900indexpatients.Weﬁlteredvariantsusing transplant. Biallelic variants in PP P1
R13L were identiﬁed our in-house developed Highlander software. In vitro and inthe affected childrenin each family. PP P1
R13L encodes in vivo studies were performed to validate functional inhibitor of apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53 protein effects. (iASPP).iASPPhasrolesinapoptosis,actsasaregulatorof Results: We identiﬁed a complete angiopoietin-2 desmosomes and has been implicated in inﬂammatory (ANGPT2) gene deletion in one family, and four variants pathways.Spontaneousbiallelicloss-of-functionvariantsin of interest in four other families. All are extremely rare or PP P1
R13L orthologues have been shown to underlie absent in controls and databases, and predicted to be bovine and murine models of DCM and biallelic variants pathogenic by several algorithms. Functional analyses of werepreviouslyreportedinasingleconsanguineousfamily the substitution-mutants unraveled that 3/4 showed with paediatric DCM. decreased ANGPT2 secretion and even inhibited secretion Conclusions: Gene-agnostic exome/genome sequencing of the wild-type ANGPT2, suggesting that they have a is valuable for the identiﬁcation of novel and emerging dominant-negative effect. The fourth mutant, located in the candidate genes. The identiﬁcation of these ﬁve families dimerization interphase, showed reduced integrin-α5 bind- now provides sufﬁcient evidence to support a robust gene- ing and its expression in mouse skin promoted hyperplasia disease association between PP P1
R13L and severe paedia- and dilation of cutaneous lymphatic vessels. tric DCM. PP P1
R13L is therefore recommended for Conclusions: We identiﬁed ﬁve mutations in the TI E2
- inclusioninpanel-basedgenetictestingforpaediatricDCM. ligand ANGPT2 as a novel cause of primary lymphedema. H.K. Robinson: None. E. Zaklyazminskaya: None. I. ThemutationsalterANGPT2structureand/orfunction.The Povolotskaya: None. Y. Surikova: None. L. Mallin: data underscore loss of ANGPT2 function as theAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 283 mechanism leading to primary lymphedema, and provide InvitrostudiesdemonstrateapossibleimpairmentofNFƙβ newinsightsintoTI E2
signaling.TheANGPT2geneisnow transcription factors localization of a modulation of included in the diagnostic panel used in our hospital to NFƙβ-inducible genes after inhibition of ABIN2 perform diagnostic testing for primary lymphedema. These and TRAF2. studies were supported by Walloon Excellence in Life- Conclusions:Althoughtheseresultshavetobevalidated sciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO). throughmoredifferentfunctionalassays,theysuggestedan V. Leppänen: None. P. Brouillard: None. E. Korho- associationbetweendiseaseandnewgeneswhichmayalso nen: None. N. Revencu: None. G. Koh: None. P. be considered for inclusion in genetic screening for PAH Saharinen: None. K. Alitalo: None. M. Vikkula: None. patients. Grants: FIS-PI18/01233, Janssen unrestricted grant,  P05
.76.A FCHP. Novel variants in ABIN2 and TRAF2 implicated in N.Gallego:None.D.Condon:None.S.Pienkos:None. pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension V. de Jesús Pérez: None. I. Hernández: None. C. Pérez- Olivares: None. N. Ochoa: None. P. Spanish Consor- N.Gallego1,D.Condon2,S.Pienkos2,V.deJesúsPérez2,I. tium:None.P.Lapunzina: None.P.Escribano:None.J. Hernández3, C. Pérez-Olivares4, N. Ochoa4, P. Spanish Tenorio: None. Consortium5, P. Lapunzina6, P. Escribano7, J. Tenorio6  P05
.77.B 1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, Madrid, Spain, Association of two novel SCN5A intragenic duplications 2Stanford University, Standford, CA, United States, 3Hos- with epilepsy, ventricular tachycardia, ﬁbrillation and pital Universitario Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Brugada-like Syndrome Spain, 4Hospital Universitario Doce de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 5Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, Centro N. Marziliano1, A. Medoro2, D. Fiscella3, A. Fiscella4, L. de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Tursi1, L. Greco1, C. Reverberi5, S. Folzani6, M. Intrieri2 Raras, Madrid, Spain, 6Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 1ASLTARANTO,Taranto,Italy,2UniversitàdegliStudidel Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain, 7Hospital Universi- Molise, Campobasso, Italy, 3Ospedale Garibaldi, Catania, tario Doce de Octubre, Centro de Investigación Biomedica Italy, 4Fondazione Floresta Longo, Catania, Italy, 5Centro en Red en Enfermedades Cardiovasculares, Madrid, Clinico Gemini, Parma, Italy, 6Poliambulatorio Città di Spain Collecchio, Collecchio, Italy Introduction: Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is In the last years, the increasing evidences about the co- an infrequent cardiopathy with poor prognosis despite existence of genetically based cardiac arrhythmias and therapeuticadvances.Mutationinseveralknownriskgenes epilepsybringsouttheemergingconceptofcardio-cerebral predispose to disease however, some cases remain geneti- channelopathy. In this view, we describe two unrelated cally undeﬁned. Increasing knowledge of the underlaying cases presenting cardiac and epileptic phenotypes in which molecular mechanisms may lead to a better understanding two novel intragenic duplications in the SCN5A gene of the disease and the opening of new drug targets that can (c.1627_1653dup, p.Phe543_Ala551dup and improve the treatment of patients. The advance in massive c.1846_1863dup, p.Ser616_Pro621dup, respectively) were paralleled sequencing technologies has allowed improving identiﬁed.TheSCN5Ageneencodesfortheα-subunitofthe the characterization of the molecular proﬁling of the Na 1.5 channel and mutations in this gene are mainly v patients and a better clinical characterization. involved in electrical channelopathies that lead to life- Material and methods: The aim of this project is to threatening arrhythmias (Brugada syndrome, Long-QT study 20 patients and available relatives by whole exome syndrome, Sudden Infant Death syndrome, etc.) or struc- sequencing (WES) technology in order to identify new tural changes in the myocardium, such as in the dilated genes and regions that can be involved in PAH. Variant cardiomyopathy(DCM).Withtheaimofcharacterizingthe prioritization was performed through bioinformatic tools biological effects of such genetic defects, we studied the andacustomalgorithm.Inaddition,tostablishmechanistic biophysicalpropertiesoftheNa 1.5channelsrevealingthat v signiﬁcance, a series of in vitro studies were performed. duplication might prompt for a loss-of-function of the Results:Severalcandidategeneswereidentiﬁedafterthe Na 1.5-mediated current in a zebraﬁsh model without v variantprioritization.Wehaveidentiﬁedtwogenes(TRAF2 alterationsintheheartstructureandfunction(atleastforthe and TNI P2
) in two unrelated families, which are related to ﬁrst mutation). Taking together, clinical and biochemical theNFƙβpathway,associatedwiththeprogressionofPAH. data support the idea that the intragenic in-frame284 J.delPicchia duplications within the SCN5A gene could be responsible Babler: None. S. Ziegler: None. R. Kramann: None. M. for both cardiac and epileptic phenotypes. Bäck: None. P.G. Shiels: None. A. Wernerson: None. P. N. Marziliano: None. A. Medoro: None. D. Fiscella: Stenvinkel: None. M. Eriksson: None. None.A.Fiscella:None.L.Tursi:None.L.Greco:None. C.Reverberi:None.S.Folzani:None.M.Intrieri:None.  P05
.79.A Enrichment of rare variants in Loeys-Dietz syndrome  P05
.78.C genesinspontaneous coronaryarterydissection butnot Clonal occurrence of the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria in severe ﬁbromuscular dysplasia syndrome lamin A mutation in chronic kidney disease J. Meester1, A. Verstraeten1, M. Perik1, L. Van Den G. Revechon1, H. Helgadottir1, N. Viceconte1, A. Witasp2, Heuvel1, M. Kempers2, I. Krapels3, L. Van Laer1, N. A. Sola Carvajal1, D. Whisenant1, D. McGuinness3, G. Samani4, F. Van Dijk5, A. Persu6, D. Adlam4, B. Loeys1 Artiach4, E. Wallen Arzt1, A. Thorell5, A. Babler6, S. Ziegler6, R. Kramann6, M. Bäck4, P. G. Shiels3, A. 1Centre of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Wernerson2, P. Stenvinkel2, M. Eriksson1 Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Depart- ment of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen 1Karolinska Institute, Dept of Biosciences and Nutrition, Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Huddinge, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institute, Dept of CLIN- Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, TEC, Huddinge, Sweden, 3University of Glasgow, Institute Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Department of Cardiovascular for Cancer Sciences, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 4Karo- Sciences and National Institute for Health Research linska Institute, Dept of Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden, Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, Glenﬁeld Hospital, 5Karolinska Institute, Dept of Clinical Sciences, Dept of Leicester, United Kingdom, 5Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, Surgery, Ersta hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 6University National Diagnostic Service, Northwick Park and St. hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany Mark’s Hospitals, Harrow, United Kingdom, 6Pole of Cardiovascular Research, Institut de Recherche Expéri- Somatic mutagenesis occurs continuously across the life mentaleetClinique,UniversitéCatholiquedeLouvain,and course, resulting in tissues composed of clones with dif- DivisionofCardiology,CliniquesUniversitairesSaint-Luc, ferent genetic makeups. While the majority of mutations Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium have no functional signiﬁcance, some can contribute to disease and aging. The nature of the arterial wall, with its Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) is char- media being composed of clonal smooth muscle cells, acterized by separation of the inner intimal lining of the makes this tissue particularly sensitive to somatic muta- coronary artery from the outer vessel wall. It is the prime genesis.Hereweanalyzedprogerin,theproteinresponsible cause of acute myocardial infarction in women below the for the premature aging disorder Hutchinson-Gilford pro- age of 50. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) presents with geriasyndrome(HGPS),foritspossibleinvolvementinthe condensed areas of arterial stenosis, aneurysm, tortuosity accelerated vascular aging process observed in chronic anddissection.IthasbecomeclearthatFMDisprevalentin kidney disease (CKD), due to similarities in vascular phe- SCAD cohorts and vice versa. However, the genetic etiol- notypes. We provide evidence for expression of progerin, ogyofbothconditionsremainslargelyelusive.Weaimedto andtheoccurrenceoftheHGPS-causingLMNAc.1824C>T investigate the contribution of rare genetic variants in vas- mutation as a somatic mutation in CKD patient arteries. cular Ehlers-Danlos and the Marfan, Loeys-Dietz (LDS), Clonal populations of vascular cells with the 1824C>T Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome genes to the etiology of mutation was supported by clusters of progerin positive SCAD and FMD in a large multi-center patient cohort. cellsinthemediaandahighfrequencyofthemutantallele Haloplex-based gene panel sequencing of CO L3
A1, FBN1, in several CKD arteries. Further analysis of proliferation TGFB2/3,SMAD2/3,TGFBR1/2andSKIwasperformedin and DNA damage in the CKD arteries indicated regenera- 191 SCAD patients with or without FMD and 111 isolated tion and progerin-induced genomic damage. Our results FMD patients. Subsequent variant ﬁltering was performed. implicatesomaticmutationsinthefunctional declineofthe The gnomAD database was used as an independent control vascular wall and support that somatic mutations may dataset and ﬁltered identically. Case-control burden ana- become a risk factor during extensive tissue damage. lyses were performed. Rare variants in SMAD2 are sig- G. Revechon: None. H. Helgadottir: None. N. Vice- niﬁcantly enriched in SCAD patients compared to controls conte: None. A. Witasp: None. A. Sola Carvajal: None. (p=0.001). A combined LDS-gene burden analysis was D.Whisenant:None.D.McGuinness:None.G.Artiach: performed, revealing a highly signiﬁcant association (4.5% None. E. Wallen Arzt: None. A. Thorell: None. A. vs1.5%;p=0.000003).WhenperformedforFMD,noneofAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 285 theanalysesyieldedasigniﬁcantp-valueorshowedatrend. androstenedione, 17-OHP and DHEA-S had sex-speciﬁc We here provide evidence for an important contribution of causal effects on coronary artery disease. raregeneticvariantsinLDSgenestotheetiologyofSCAD. Conclusions: Our study greatly improves insight into OurﬁndingssuggestastrongrolefortheTGFbetasignaling geneticregulationofsteroidhormonesandtheirdependence in the pathogenesis of SCAD but not FMD. onsex.ThesigniﬁcantMRestimatessupportthehypothesis J. Meester: None. A. Verstraeten: None. M. Perik: that steroid hormones inﬂuence the development of None. L. Van Den Heuvel: None. M. Kempers: None. I. atherosclerosis, which partly explains the higher risk for Krapels:None.L.VanLaer:None.N.Samani:None.F. men.Theseresultscouldserveasabasisforanalyzingsex- Van Dijk: None. A. Persu: None. D. Adlam: None. B. dimorphisms in other complex diseases. Loeys: None. This project was supported by the HI-MAG Project FundingforYoungScientistsoftheMedicalFacultyofthe  P05
.80.B University Leipzig. Genetic association study of eight steroid hormones and J. Pott: None. Y.J. Bae: None. K. Horn: None. A. implications for sexual dimorphism of coronary artery Teren: None. A. Kühnapfel: None. H. Kirsten: None. U. disease Ceglarek: None. M. Loefﬂer: None. J. Thiery: None. J. Kratzsch: None. M. Scholz: None. J. Pott1,2,3, Y. J. Bae4,2, K. Horn1,2, A. Teren2,5, A. Kühnapfel1,2,3, H. Kirsten1,2, U. Ceglarek4,2, M. Loefﬂer1,2,  P05
.81.C J. Thiery4,2, J. Kratzsch4,2, M. Scholz1,2,3 Genetic post-mortem in drug users with sudden cardiac death 1Institute of Medical Informatics, Statistics und Epidemiol- ogy, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2LIFE H. Massey, J. Dean, L. Deboys, D. O’Sullivan Research Center for Civilization Diseases, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 3IFB AdiposityDiseases, Uni- Aberdeen royal inﬁrmary, Aberdeen, United Kingdom versityHospital,Leipzig,Germany,4InstituteofLaboratory Medicine, Clinical Chemistry and Molecular Diagnostics, Aim:Toquantifyourabilitytomakeageneticdiagnosisin University Hospital, Leipzig, Germany, 5Heart Center drug users with sudden cardiac death (SCD). Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany Background: While there are European recommenda- tions for genetic testing in SCD1, these guidelines do not Introduction:Steroidhormonesactasimportantregulators extend to drug users with positive toxicology at post- of physiological processes in the body. Our aim is to mortem. We wanted to gain a better understanding of the identify genetic factors that inﬂuence steroid hormone genetic pick up rate in this population. metabolism, to detect genetic sexual dimorphisms and to Method: We undertook a 10-year retrospective study investigate possible causal implications for atherosclerotic looking at genetic diagnoses in drug related deaths vascular disease phenotypes. discussed at the joint pathology-genetic MDT. This was MaterialsandMethods:Intwoindependentcohorts,we compared to age and provisional aetiology matched performed genome-wide sex-speciﬁc meta-association stu- controls. dies of eight steroid hormones: progesterone, 17- Results: 60 drug related deaths were identiﬁed, and 40 hydroxyprogesterone(17-OHP),androstenedione,testoster- patientsunderwentgenetictesting.7variantswerefoundof one, estradiol, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), which 3 were classiﬁed as benign and 4 VUS. The most cortisol, and aldosterone (LIFE-Adult, LIFE-Heart, max. n common reason for genetic testing was enlarged heart at = 7667). Genome-wide signiﬁcant loci (p < 5x10−8) were postmortem;howeverthegeneticpickupinthisgroupwas tested for sex differences in effect size. The causal 0. Patients with structurally normal hearts had the most relationships between hormone levels and atherosclerotic variants detected. This would coincide with the majority of vasculardiseaseswereinvestigatedusingsex-speciﬁceQTL variants being found in arrhythmogenic genes. Family analyses and Mendelian Randomization (MR) approaches. history did not inﬂuence genetic pick up. In the control Results:Wedetected22genome-widesigniﬁcantlocifor groupvariantsinarrhythmogenicgenesagainpredominated seven steroid hormones of our panel, of which nine correlatingwiththehighestgeneticpickupinpatientswith displayed signiﬁcant sexual dimorphisms. Eight loci relate normal post-mortems. However in the control group 17 to genes coding for enzymes involved in steroid biosynth- variants were detected of which 3 were pathogenic. esis, almost completing the list of genes of this pathway Conclusions: Our ability to make a genetic diagnosis in withgeneticassociations.Otherlocicorrespond,e.g.,tothe drugusers with SCDislow.Weneedtoundertake a larger WNT4/β-catenin pathway. MR revealed that cortisol,286 J.delPicchia study to characterise those drug users with a positive A.R.Akilzhanova:None.C.Guelly:None.Z.Abilova: genetic diagnosis so testing can be rationalised. None. S. Rakhimova: None. A. Akhmetova: None. U. H. Massey: None. J. Dean: None. L. Deboys: None. D. Kairov: None. S. Trajanoski: None. G. Akilzhanova: O’Sullivan: None. None. M. Bekbosynova: None. Z. Zhumadilov: None.  P05
.82.A  P05
.83.B Insightsintothegeneticbasisofventriculartachycardia Identiﬁcation of the major genetic contributors to in Kazakhstani patients. Targeted next generation Tetralogy of Fallot sequencing R. M. Monaghan1, D. J. Paige2, S. G. Williams1, B. D. A. R. Akilzhanova1, C. Guelly2, Z. Abilova1, S. Keavney1 Rakhimova1,A.Akhmetova1,U.Kairov1,S.Trajanoski2,G. Akilzhanova3, M. Bekbosynova4, Z. Zhumadilov1 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, United 1Center for life sciences, National Laboratory Astana, Kingdom Nazarbayev University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan, 2Center for Medical Research, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is the most common cyanotic Austria, 3Medical University of Semey, Pavlodar branch, congenital heart defect. Rare genetic variants have been Pavlodar, Kazakhstan, 4National Research Cardiac Sur- identiﬁedasimportantcontributorstotheriskofcongenital gery Center, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan heart disease, but relatively small numbers of TOF cases have been studied. We used whole exome sequencing to Introduction:Recentadvancesingeneticscreeningandthe assess the prevalence of unique, deleterious variants in the potential of therapeutic intervention in patents with cardiac largest cohort of nonsyndromic TOF patients reported to arrhythmias have garnered this group of disorders much date. The presence of such variants was deﬁned by their attention in the scientiﬁc community. The purpose of the absence in the Genome Aggregation Database and bioin- study was to identify the genetic basis of ventricular formatic prediction of their deleterious effect on function. tachycardia (VT) in Kazakhstani patients. The enrichment of variants in two genes, NOTCH1 and Material and Methods: using predeveloped a targeted FLT4,surpassed thresholdsfor exome-wide signiﬁcance (P panel of 96 known cardiac disease genes, associated with < 5×10-8) after correction for multiple comparisons. cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia we screened 92 indivi- NOTCH1 was most frequently found to harbour unique, duals, diagnosed with VT and dilated cardiomyopathy (VT deleterious variants (4.5%; 95% CI, 3.2%-6.1%). Three DCM) or idiopathic VT (iVT). Results. Targeted sequen- NOTCH1 variants were subjected to functional evaluation, cing and stepwise ﬁltering of the annotated variants and two showed a reduction in Jagged1-induced NOTCH identiﬁed 307 unique variants in 74 genes totaling up in signalling. FLT4 variants were found in 2.4% (95% CI, 456 variants for the overall study group. Variants included 1.6%-3.8%) of ourcohort. Inaddition, variants inthewell- one in/del, four splice-site and 451 single-nucleotide established TOF gene, TBX1, and the genes were also sig- variants (SNV) within the coding exonic regions. Seven niﬁcantly enriched. Our study underlines the importance of (0.15%) of the SNVs were unique stop-gain variants, three sequencing large cohorts of CHD cases in order to further of those residing in the TTN gene. 168 HGMD mutations discover their genetic basis. (61 unique) were observed in 37 genes. According to Grant reference: BHF (RG/15/12/31616) ACMGallvariantswereclassiﬁedas9pathogenic(KCNJ2 R.M. Monaghan: None. D.J. Paige: None. S.G. R218Q and TTN R5338X in iVT patients, KCNQ1 c.477 Williams: None. B.D. Keavney: None. +1G>A, LMNA Q353X, MYH7 F244L, TTN  L17465
X andW21011X,DSG2c.2334+1G>A,GAAW746CinVT  P05
.84.C DCM patients), 11 likely pathogenic, 97 variants with In search of genetic modiﬁers that explain the pheno- uncertain signiﬁcance and rest as benign. typic variability in SMAD3-related aortopathy Conclusions: Individuals with VT either secondary to DCMorofidiopathicetiologycarrymultipleraremutations J. D. Velchev1, M. Perik1, I. M. B. H. van de Laar2, J. andpotentiallypathogenicsequencevariantsincardiacrisk Richer3, A. Verstraeten1, M. Alaerts1, B. L. Loeys1,4 genes in a similar pattern and at a comparable frequency. Study support: grant from the Ministry Education and 1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Science, Republic of Kazakhstan (A P05134683
). AntwerpUniversityHospital,Antwerp,Belgium,2Department ofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusMC,UniversityMedicalCenterAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 287 Rotterdam,Rotterdam,Netherlands,3DepartmentofMedical Introduction: Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection Genetics,Children’sHospitalofEasternOntario,Children’s (TAAD) is a life-threatening disease, of which genetic Hospital ofEastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, abnormalities are considered as important risk factors. The Canada, 4Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Uni- present research aims at identifying causal variants in Chi- versity Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands nese patients with sporadic non-syndromic type A TAAD (ATAAD). Introduction: Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing (TAAD)isafrequentcauseofmortalityintheWesternworld. (WES) was performed on 73 sporadic Chinese patients Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS), an early-onset TAAD syn- withATAAD,30TAADassociatedgeneswerecuratedfor dromeiscausedbymutationsingenescodingforcomponents bioinformatic analyses. Clinical differences were compared of the TGFbeta signaling, including SMAD3. Remarkably, a between patients with and without causal variants. fractionofSMAD3mutationcarriersremainscardiovascularly Results: 15 pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were unaffectedthroughoutlife,suggestingtheexistenceofgenetic identiﬁed (8 novel and 7 previously described) in 4 known modiﬁers for aortopathy. This study implements a combina- TAAD-causalgenes(FBN1,TGFBR2,SMAD3andACTA2) tion of linkage analysis and whole-genome sequencing in 15 individuals, including 11 variants in FBN1 (7 (WGS) in orderto identifygenetic modiﬁers thatexplain the missense, 3 truncating, and 1 splicing variants), 2 missense variability in SMAD3-related aortopathy. variants in TGFBR2, 1 ACTA2 frameshift variant and 1 Material and Methods: In two large LDS families (n = SMAD3 frameshift variant. Signiﬁcant clinical differences 41 mutation carriers) segregating SMAD3 missense muta- were found between patients with and without causal tions and presenting variable TAAD expressivity genome- variants. Patients with TAAD-causal variants proved to wide SNP-based linkage analysis was performed. LOD have an earlier onset age, a more dilated aorta, and scoreswereobtainedusingMERLINandSUPERLINKand relatively intractable subtypes. Even without risk factor linkage was complemented with WGS of six affected and like hypertension, they might still suffer from TAAD with six unaffected mutation carriers. TAAD-causal variants. Results: In the ﬁrst family linkage analysis identiﬁed a Conclusions: The variants identiﬁed in our research chromosomal region (chr2:149,604,077-155,607,398) with mightnotonlyresultintheoccurrenceofATAAD,butalso a LOD score of 2.68, suggesting the presence of an addcomplexitiesanddifﬁcultiestotheclinicalpractice.Our aggravating modiﬁer. Linkage peak was observed in the data demonstrated that WES was an effective tool for secondfamilywithaLODscoreof2.86(chr18:43,013,157- determining genetic etiologies of non-syndromic ATAAD 57,021,550). Additionally, the WGS data analysis of the and could be helpful in genetic counseling for ATAAD second family resulted in the discovery of a rare variant in patients and their at-risk family members. TGFB2, a known TAA causative gene, exclusively present J. Guo: None. C. Hao: None. X. Hu: None. F. Leng: in affected mutation carriers. None. X. Liu: None. Conclusions: The obtained data indicate that variants in known TAAD genes may play a role in modulating a  P05
.87.C primarycausativemutation;chromosomalregionssegregate Investigating the role of pathogenic TTN variants in with disease severity suggesting a presence of genetic heart failure by whole-exome sequencing modiﬁers and that distinct families may bear different genetic modiﬁers as indicated by the linkage analysis. O. Chazara1, G. Povysil2, S. Deevi1, J. Armisen1, D. B. J.D. Velchev: None. M. Perik: None. I.M.B.H. van de Goldstein2, C. Haeﬂiger1 Laar: None. J. Richer: None. A. Verstraeten: None. M. Alaerts: None. B.L. Loeys: None. 1Astrazeneca, Melbourn, United Kingdom, 2Institute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center,  P05
.85.A New York, NY, United States Identiﬁcation of Clinically Relevant Variants by Whole Exome Sequencing in Chinese Patients with Sporadic Heart failure (HF) affects ~40 million people globally. Non-syndromic Type A TAAD Estimatesofthegeneticpredispositionofdeveloping HFis 1.69 if one parent is affected and 1.92 if both parents have J. Guo, C. Hao, X. Hu, F. Leng, X. Liu HF (Framingham cohort study, Lopez et al. 2013). Recent studies suggest higher cardiovascular genetic risk Genetics and Birth Defects Control Center, Beijing in patients with and without diagnosed heart failure if they Children’s Hospital, Beijing, China288 J.delPicchia carry a pathogenic loss of function variant in the gene cardiac dilatation and systolic dysfunction. Pulmonary encoding titin (TTN). pressures were strikingly elevated. Here, we assess the role of pathogenic TTN variants by Case: A 33 years old woman was admitted in 1997 with whole-exomesequencingin5916patientswithheartfailure limiting dyspnoea. Echocardigram showed non-obstructive from two clinical studies CHARM and CORONA, and asymmetrical septal hypertrophy of17mm maximum atthe 268,451 unrelated Europeans from the UK Biobank septumandrestrictive physiology. Sarcoidcardiomyopathy prospective cohort study, including 4634 individuals with was ruled out with negative scintigraphy and unspeciﬁc ICD-10 codes for heart failure (HF, based on hospital in- biopsy in the absence of other extracardiac features. Atrio- patient diagnoses). ventricular ablation and permanent pacing were required in In both types of cohorts, we detect a signiﬁcant 2002. Clinical deterioration led to frequent heart failure enrichment of pathogenic TTN variants in subjects with admissions and one episode of syncope. Implantable HF diagnosis. Furthermore, after restricting the analysis to cardioverter deﬁbrillator was implanted. Emergency trans- thevariantslocatedinexonsthatarepredominantlyspliced plant was performed with a postoperative complicated intheheart,thegeneticriskwasincreased:from2.54(95% coursein2006.Patientremainedstabletodate.Studyofthe CI, 1.96-3.31) to 4.52 (95% CI, 3.10-6.68) in the clinical explanted heart demonstrated macro and microscopic studies, and from 2.95 (95% CI, 2.42-3.57) to 4.97 (95% hypertrophy, extensive ﬁbrosis, unspeciﬁc vacuolization CI, 3.94-6.19) in the UKBB. The enrichment observed is and disarray. There were no signs of amyloid with usual similar in clinical trial data and routine care health records. stains and immunohistochemical typing. Sequencing of the As expected, individuals with a diagnosis of cardiomyo- TTR gene led to identiﬁcation of a de novo frameshift pathy had the highest rate of TTN mutations, but we also mutation p. S132
fs*25(g.6903_6906delinsGTAGGG) caus- observed TTN variants in up to 5% of HF patients due to ing original stop codon lost, results in prolonged protein. other aetiologies, such as ischaemic and hypertensive Cardiac evaluation of her brother, sister and parents ruled disease. This result highlights the importance of TTN out any sign of cardiomyopathy. All relatives were free for variants beyond cardiomyopathies. the TTR variant. O. Chazara: A. Employment (full or part-time); Conclusions: Case of cardiomyopathy associated with a Signiﬁcant; Astrazeneca. G. Povysil: None. S. Deevi: A. TTR variant. Severe right and left heart failure clinical Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Astrazeneca.J. course with very particularly severe pulmonary hyperten- Armisen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; sionendedupinhearttransplant.Mechanismsofdiseasein Astrazeneca. D.B. Goldstein: F. Consultant/Advisory this case remain unknown. Board;Modest;Astrazeneca.C.Haeﬂiger:A.Employment J. Gimeno Blanes: None. M. Sabater Molina: None. I. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Astrazeneca. San Roman: None. L. Polo: None. I. Garrido: None. C. Salas: None. F. Lopez Andreu: None.  P05
.88.A Non-amyloidotic transthyretin cardiomyopathy  P05
.89.B Searching for genes associated with primary varicose J.GimenoBlanes1,M.SabaterMolina1,I.SanRoman1,L. veins using targeted next-generation sequencing Polo2, I. Garrido3, C. Salas4, F. Lopez Andreu5 E. Strauss1,2, M. Zmyslowski3, B. Budny4, L. 1Inherited Cardiac Disease Unit. Universitary Hospital Dzieciuchowicz3, E. Wrotkowska4, M. Ruchala4, K. Virgen de la Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain, 2Hospital Uni- Ziemnicka4, G. Oszkinis5, Z. Krasinski3 versitario Virgen Arrixaca, Department of Pathological Anatomy., Murcia, Spain, 3Department of Cardiology 1Institute of Human Genetics of the Polish Academy of Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca., Murcia, Sciences in Poznan, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of Spain, 4Hospital Puerta de Hierro, Department of Patho- Vascular, Endovascular Surgery, Angiology and Phlebol- logical Anatomy, Madrid, Spain, 5Hospital General Reina ogy Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Soﬁa, Service of Internal Medicine, Murcia, Spain Poland, 3Department of Vascular, Endovascular Surgery, Angiology and Phlebology Poznan University of Medical Introduction: We aim to present an unsolved case of a Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of Endocrinology, young patient with unclassiﬁed cardiomyopathy associated Metabolism and Internal Medicine, Poznan University of with a genetic TTR variant predicted to cause a dramatic MedicalSciences,Poznan,Poland,5DepartmentofGeneral change in protein structure. Clinical course went from and Vascular Surgery, Poznan University of medical asymmetric hypertrophy with restrictive phenotype to Sciences, Poznan, PolandAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 289 Introduction:Theaimofthisstudywastosearchforgenes quantiﬁed 3-OMD (3-O-Methyldopa), a suggested AADC- involved in the pathogenesis of the primary varicose veins speciﬁc biomarker, in dried blood spots by tandem mass (PVV) using targeted next-generation gene sequencing. spectrometry. Upon suggestive ﬁndings, we subsequently Sporadic cases with the onset of the ﬁrst symptoms of analyzedtheDDCgenebyamplicon-basednextgeneration disease below or equal 40 years of age were considered. sequencing (NGS) and copy number variant (CNV) Methods:Acohortof66PVVpatientswascollectedand screening. This two-step approach identiﬁed several exome sequencing of the 35 candidates´ genes was patients. The ones with at least one hitherto undescribed performed, which focused on the genes encoding structural variant are described here in detail. All three patients had elements of the vessel wall, metalloproteinases, and their pathological levels of 3-OMD. In patient 1, we identiﬁed a protein inhibitors, proteins involved in the homeostasis of novel whole DDC gene duplication in homozygosity. In the coagulation system and regulation of sex hormones patient 2, we identiﬁed the two missense variants p. system, as well as genes previously associated with VV (Ser147Ile) and p.(Val60Ala) in compound heterozygosity; development. interestingly, variant p.(Ser147Ile) was not only novel, but Results: Most of the patients (91.9%) had a positive shown to have occurred de novo. In patient 3, p. family history of VV, considering ﬁrst-, second- or third- (Trp121Arg) and p.(Arg347Gln) were identiﬁed in com- degree relatives. 26 potentially pathogenic changes: 12 pound heterozygosity. The former is novel, while the latter mutations in 9 genes (7 known and 5 novel), 5 rare SNPs hasfrequentlybeendescribedinAADCpatientspreviously. and9commonSNPswerefound.40%ofthepatientshada Usingacombinedbiochemical,NGSandCNVapproach,a potentially causative mutation in the candidate genes: 33% positive identiﬁcation and diagnosis of AADC deﬁciency ofthemhad1mutation,3%had2mutationsand1.5%had patients is reliably reached. This allows for an early treat- 3 mutations. The association between one SNP in the ment of the patients, leading to an improvement of their MMP-9 gene and the age of the onset of PVV symptoms quality of life. Moreover, the identiﬁcation of novel DDC was also observed. variants and the establishment of correlations with 3-OMD Conclusions: This report provides evidence for the levels can be expected to increase our understanding of the heterogeneity and complexity of the genetic background disease. ofPVVinsporadiccasesandshowstheinﬂuenceofgenetic C. Pereira: None. C. Cozma: A. Employment (full or factorsontheageoftheonsetofthisdisease.Italsoreveals part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. L. Demuth: A. attractive targets for further research in a larger group of Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. patients and functional analyses. G. Morales Torres: A. Employment (full or part-time); E. Strauss: None. M. Zmyslowski: None. B. Budny: Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. M. Iurascu: A. Employment None. L. Dzieciuchowicz: None. E. Wrotkowska: None. (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG.P.Bauer:A. M. Ruchala: None. K. Ziemnicka: None. G. Oszkinis: Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. None. Z. Krasinski: None. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. C. Lourenco: None.  P06
 Metabolic and Mitochondrial Disorders  P06
.04.C  P06
.01.C Patients affected by autosomal recessive or dominant Identiﬁcation of AADC patient through combined cutis laxa type 3 show diverse degrees of collagen determination of 3-OMD biomarker and DDC gene alterations sequencing and copy number variation analysis N. El Choubassi1,2, L. Lugli3, C. Spada4, D. de Silva5, O. C. Pereira1, C. Cozma1, L. Demuth1, G. Morales Torres1, Klein1, D. Meierhofer2, D. Horn1, U. Kornak1,2,6, B. M. Iurascu1, P. Bauer1, A. Rolfs1, C. Lourenco2 Fischer-Zirnsak1,2 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Universidade de São 1Charité Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Division of Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deﬁciency is caused Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, Modena, by bi-allelic variants in the DDC gene. This very rare Italy, 4Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for neurometabolic disorder is clinically characterized by Mothers, Children and Adults, Post Graduate School of vegetative symptoms, oculogyric crises, dystonia, and Paediatrics, University of Modena & Reggio Emilia, severeneurologicdysfunction,usuallybeginningininfancy Modena, Italy, 5Department of Physiology, Faculty of orchildhood.Treatmenthasbecomeavailablerecently.We Medicine, University of Kelaniya, Ragama, Sri Lanka,290 J.delPicchia 6Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center and accumulation can cause a multitude of pathologies such Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany as histamine intolerance. There are two enzymes involved in the metabolism of histamine: histamine N-methyltransferase Introduction: Mutations in ALDH18A1, encoding the (HNMT) is responsible for degrading histamine inside cells. mitochondrial enzyme pyrroline-5 carboxylate synthase Diamine-oxidase (DAO) is theotherenzyme involved inthe ( P5
CS),leadtoabroadspectrumofraregeneticconditions. degradation of histamine, mainly exogenous histamine, Besides hereditary spastic paraplegia, ALDH18A1 muta- ingested withthediet. The deﬁciency of DAO activity could tions are causative for autosomal recessive (ARC L3
) and be one of the main causes of histamine intolerance, an dominant (ADC L3
) cutis laxa with progeroid features. alterationinhomeostasisthatiscausedbyareducedintestinal Materials and Methods: We performed whole exome degradation of histamine, with the consequent increase in its (WES) and gene panel sequencing to identify pathogenic plasma levels. Variants in AO C1
/AB P1
 gene, coding DAO variants in our probands. These analyses were complemen- enzyme, have been associated with a reduction in DAO ted by mRNA expression studies, immunoﬂuorescence, activity and accumulation of histamine. immunoblot and mass-spectrometry approaches on patient Objective: The present study aims to demonstrate the derived ﬁbroblasts. negativeeffectthatthevariantsrs10156191,rs1049742and Results: We report on novel pathogenic variants in three rs1049793haveonDAOplasmaactivityinCaucasianmale affected individuals with ARC L3
/ADC L3
. These variants patients with clinical manifestations associated with hista- have variable impacts on the stability of the protein and its mine intolerance. localization within the mitochondrial network. However, Methods: We analyzed 78 white male patients with a targeted metabolomics revealed substantial alterations of clinicalmanifestationassociatedwithhistamineintolerance. mitochondrial proline synthesis rates. Additionally, gene Variants analyzed were genotyped by multiplex SNPE expression proﬁling, comparative proteomics and subse- (Single Nucleotide Primer Extension). quent immunoblot analyses showed alterations in expres- Results: The variants rs10156191 and rs1049742 reduce sion of different collagens. signiﬁcantlyDAOplasma activity.Factorssuchasworsen- Conclusions: Our data expand the mutational spectrum ing symptoms after eating a diet rich in histamine or of ALDH18A1-related diseases and demonstrate the impor- NSAID-type drugs (non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory) are tance of correct ALDH18A1 localization within the associatedwithagreaternumberofalternativeallelesinthe mitochondria for proper functioning. Additionally, they SNVs analyzed, and reduced DAO plasma activity. suggest a potential connection of the mitochondrial proline Conclusions: These results show the predictive value of synthesis pathways with the regulation of collagen this genetic study in patients who have a clinical synthesis. manifestation associated with histamine intolerance. Funding: The study was supported by the Deutsche J. Vinas-López: C. Other Research Support (supplies, Forschungsgemeinschaft (FI 2240/1-1) to BF-Z equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); N. El Choubassi: None. L. Lugli: None. C. Spada: Modest; Genyca. P. Ojeda: None. I. Ojeda: None. A. None.D.deSilva:None.O.Klein:None.D.Meierhofer: Duelo: None. B. García-Velasco: None. C. Lenz: None. None. D. Horn: None. U. Kornak: None. B. Fischer- T. Perucho: None. M. Berbel: None. A. Vásquez: None. Zirnsak: None. E. Ruiz-Casares: None.  P06
.06.B  P06
.10.C Clinical study of the relationship between histamie LowprevalenceofclassicgalactosemiaintheSverdlovsk intolerance and variants in the AO C1
/AB P1
 Gene Region (Russian Federation) J. Vinas-López1, P. Ojeda2, I. Ojeda2, A. Duelo3, B. O.Lagutina1,S.Deryabina1,2,T.Belyaeva1,N.Nikitina1,E. García-Velasco1, C. Lenz2, T. Perucho1, M. Berbel3, A. Nikolaeva1 Vásquez3, E. Ruiz-Casares1,4 1Medical Center “Health Care of Mother and Child”, 1Genyca, Majadahonda, Spain, 2Clínica Ojeda de Asma y Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 2Federal State Auton- Alergia Dres. Ojeda, Madrid, Spain, 3Centro de Nutrición omous Educational Institution of Higher Education «Ural AD Dietistas, Barcelona, Spain, 4Universidad San Pablo FederalUniversitynamedaftertheﬁrstPresidentofRussia CEU, Madrid, Spain B.N. Yeltsin, Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation Introduction: Histamine is a biogenic amine with many Introduction: Classic galactosemia is one of the ﬁve her- essential physiological activities. However, its deregulation editary metabolic diseases, which has been included in theAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 291 State Program of Neonatal Screening of the Russian Fed- adequate clinical-biochemical and genetic analysis to drive eration in 2006. aclinicalresponseinatimelymannerpreventingtheuseof Aim of the study: To estimate the incidence of major invasive techniques. With a pipeline that combined galactosemia in the Sverdlovsk Region based on neonatal speciﬁc datasets from metabolomics sub-sections and phe- screening data. notypic information, with DNA and/or RNA analysis, we Patients and methods: 698 550 children born in the identiﬁed likely pathogenic variants in strong-candidate Sverdlovsk Region from 2006 to 2019 were examined. genes in 64% of a cohort of 39 patients with clinical sus- Initially, the level of total galactose and galactose-1- picion of congenital lactic acidosis. These variants, 14 of phosphate was determined in a dry blood spot, then an whichwerenew,werefoundin19differentnuclearandtwo activity of the enzyme galactose phosphate-uridyl transfer- mitochondrial genes. Speciﬁc biochemical test and/or ase (GALT) has been selected as a biochemical marker of bioenergetics analysis in ﬁbroblasts including measures of galactosemia.Thediagnosisofgalactosemiashouldthenbe oxygen consumption rate, steady-state levels of OxPhos conﬁrmed by genetic analysis. proteins using Blue-native geles, and changes in mito- Results: During the 13-year study period 657 newborns chondrial morphology, sustained the diagnosis for patients were included in the risk group and assigned for molecular carrying novel genotypes. RNA analysis contributed to genetic testing. Eight children were identiﬁed as having solve miss or undiagnosed patients, providing a direct classical galactosemia on the basis of the enzymatic and insight into transcriptional perturbations caused by speciﬁc molecular genetic analysis. Moreover,142 babies had a genetic changes. Finally, by rescuing normal splicing in a galactosemiaDuarte,another134haddecreasingactivityof GFM1-patient cells carrying in heterozygous fashion the the GALT enzyme due to non-genetic reasons. The c.689+908G>A change with antisense oligonucleotide spectrum of revealed mutations in the GALT gene: K285N treatment, we corroborated the importance of molecular (31.3%), Q188R (25.0%), M142K (12.5%),  E352
Q analysis to investigate personalized therapeutic options. (12.5%), W316X (6.2%), R262W (6.2%) and one new LCF/PR/PR16/11110018; PI16/00573; CAM, B2017/ variant  P140
L (6.2%), not described earlier. Conclusion. BMD3721 Based on the results of newborn screening programs, the I. Bravo-Alonso: None. R. Navarrete: None. P. Ruiz- prevalenceofclassicgalactosemiaintheUralpopulationis Sala: None. F. Leal: None. M. Ugarte: None. C. Pérez- 1:87 318 live birth and unlikely that it will undergo Cerdá: None. B. Merinero: None. B. Pérez: None. P. signiﬁcant changes with further increase in the screening Rodríguez-Pombo: None. period. O. Lagutina: None. S. Deryabina: None. T. Belyaeva:  P06
.13.C None. N. Nikitina: None. E. Nikolaeva: None. Hypoglycemia-some of its many reasons-a molecular update.  P06
.12.B What is beyond the congenital lactic acidosis? From K. Brusgaard1, Y. Alhaidan2, M. Balwi2, H. Christesen1 variants to personalized medicine 1Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 2King I. Bravo-Alonso, R. Navarrete, P. Ruiz-Sala, F. Leal, M. Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, Ugarte, C. Pérez-Cerdá, B. Merinero, B. Pérez, P. Saudi Arabia Rodríguez-Pombo Hypoglycemia can be caused by numerous somatic or Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, hereditary causes. Three major reasons are; diabetes, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, UAM-CSIC, hyperinsulinism and ketotic/non-ketotic hyperglycemia. CIBERER, IDIPAZ, Madrid, Spain The brain accounts for 60% of the glucose consumption in the infants’ resting state, leaving the brain vulnerable to Implementation of Next Generation Sequencing has dra- hypoglycemia.Tightplasmaglucosecontrolisensuredbya matically increased the diagnosis success-rate of highly number of complex mechanisms. In the majority of cases heterogeneous inborn-errors of metabolism such as those the underlying pathophysiology are unexplained. The goal underlying congenital lactic acidosis. However, the lack of in the presented study was to ﬁnd new reasons underlying integratedphenotypicdata,thescarcenumberofdatasetsof these disorders. globalmetabolomicsandthenecessaryexpertisetoanalyze 38 families were included for trio analyses performing the functional effects of variants of unknown signiﬁcance, exome sequencing for germline variation. Where available arelimitingthetransferofgeneticdataintoclinicalpractice. exome sequencing was performed on resected pancreatic Our aim in this study was to evaluate the powerful of an tissue if no germline cause was elucidated. Data was292 J.delPicchia analyzed using VarSeq and various ﬁlters considering among biochemical parameters and with the molecular recessive,X-linked,de-novoorautosomaldominantmodes defect was evaluated. of inheritance. Candidate genes was analyzed by in vitro Results: 37 genetic variants were found and the most studies using RIN-m β-cell lines and KO of target genes prevalent genetic variant is c.337T>C p.(F113L), found in using siRNA or Crispercas9. Measurement of RNA 50% of males and females. Males usually present a expression levels was performed by Q-RT-PCR or micro- correlation of reduced α-Gal activity with increased array analysis. Insulin measurements were performed. substrate accumulation. In this group it was possible to In 10 (26%) cases the hypoglycemia was explained. In identify some genetic variant-speciﬁc patterns. Heterozy- threeketotichypoglycemiapatientsthereasonwasfoundin gous females show less pronounced effect on substrate a known GSD gene, four patients was explained by novel accumulation and enzyme deﬁciency. The variability of genes. In one diabetic and one hyperinsulinism patient a patterns within carriers of the same genetic variant is also novel genetic cause was found. A single hyperinsulinism noticed. patient was explained by a previously undetected mutation Conclusions:Somegeneticvariantswhosepathogenicity in a known hyperinsulinism gene. 10 additional candidate iscontroversialareindeed associated with milder biochem- genes are currently under in vitro cellular investigation for icalphenotypes.Plasmaα-Galactivityisnotrecommended their role in manifestation of disease in individual families. asonlydiagnosistestingbecauseinthepresenceofspeciﬁc Asaresultofthecurrentstudythetreatmentwaschangedin variants it may give false negatives. Heterogeneity among three individuals heterozygous females should be further evaluated with K. Brusgaard: None. Y. Alhaidan: None. M. Balwi: relation to X chromosome inactivation proﬁle. None. H. Christesen: None. F.E. Laranjeira: None. P. Rodrigues: None. C. Case- iro: None. I. Ribeiro: None. H. Carmo: None. D.  P06
.14.A Quelhas: None. Biochemical and molecular landscape of Fabry disease in Portugal  P06
.15.B Mutation spectrum and corresponding clinical manifes- F. E. Laranjeira1,2, P. Rodrigues1,3, C. Caseiro1, I. tation of patients with hypertriglyceridemia in a Ger- Ribeiro1,2, H. Carmo3, D. Quelhas1,2 man outpatient clinic 1Unidade de Bioquímica Genética, Centro de Genética F. Bardey1, L. Rieck1, D. Spira1, W. März2, S. Schwab2, P. Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalhães, Centro Hospitalar Binner2, T. Bobbert1, J. Spranger1, E. Steinhagen- Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidade Multi- Thiessen1, I. Demuth1, U. Kassner1 disciplinar de Investigação Biomédica, Instituto de Ciên- cias Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, 1Charite Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, Porto, Portugal, 3UCIBIO, REQUIMTE – Laboratório 2SYNLAB MVZ Humangenetik GmbH, Mannheim, de Toxicologia, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Germany Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal Introduction:Asizeableproportionofpatientswithsevere hypertriglyceridemia (HTG) do have the monogenetic Introduction: Fabry disease is an X-linked progressive familial chylomicronemia syndrome (FCS). It remains dif- inborn error of metabolism originated by mutations in the ﬁcult to clinically distinguish FCS from the multifactorial GLA gene causing a deﬁciency of the lysosomal α-galac- chylomicronemia syndrome (MCS) in the absence of tosidase (α-Gal) hydrolase activity. The breakdown of genetictesting.Ouraimwastocharacterizethegenotypeof glycolipids is impaired and the lysosomal substrate accu- our HTG patients with respect to MCS and FCS as well as mulation triggers the onset of this lysosomal storage dis- to apply the clinical FCS-score proposed by Moulin and order.Malepatientsusuallypresentverylowα-Galactivity colleagues. andmarkedsubstrateaccumulation,andatleastsomeofthe Methods: We studied 90 genotyped patients with severe clinical hallmarks. In females, however, there is a wide HTGinourclinicduringthelastsevenyears.Weclassiﬁed range of phenotypes leading to great controversy regarding the identiﬁed genetic variants (SHERLOC-criteria), fol- clinical diagnosis and therapeutic decisions. Patients and lowed by categorization into MCS or FCS. Clinical data methods were gathered from the medical records and the FCS-score Data concerning leukocytes and plasma α-Gal activity was calculated for each patient. together with plasma and urine substrate accumulation for Results:The genesequencingrevealedtenFCS patients. 141 males and 210 females were obtained. Correlation Four were compound heterozygous and six wereAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 293 homozygous for a pathogenic variant. Another 53 patients obtained during bariatric weight-loss surgery. DESeq2 was were categorized as MCS, of which seven were hetero- used for differential expression analysis. zygous carriers of a pathogenic variant. Altogether, we Results: 266 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) found 16 pathogenic variants of which six have not been showed higher and 197 showed lower expression in describedbefore.Themostcommonwasamissensevariant T2DM vs non-T2DMsamples (Padj < 0.05). We identiﬁed (c.644G>A,p.G215E)intheLPLgene.In27(30%)ofour GABRB2 as the top novel upregulated gene, highlighting a patientswewereunabletodetectanygeneticalterations.In role for GABAergic system in omental fat with T2DM ourcohorttheFCS-scoreyieldedasensitivityof80%anda while ACVR1C expression was most signiﬁcantly down- speciﬁcity of 92.5%. regulated and loss of function variants in ACVR1C have Conclusions: At 11% the prevalence of FCS among our been reported for reduced central obesity and T2DM risks. patients with severe HTG was higher than expected. The UpstreamregulatoranalysisusingourDEGsrevealedOSM FCSscoreperformedsimilartotheoriginalstudy,however as the most signiﬁcant regulator of up-regulated DEGs and 20% of the FCS patients will not be detected correctly, PPARGfordown-regulatedDEGs.Pathway-basedanalyses relying on the score only. using our DEGs connected with OSM revealed signiﬁcant F. Bardey: None. L. Rieck: None. D. Spira: None. W. associationsforimmune-relatedpathways,validatingrecent März: None. S. Schwab: None. P. Binner: None. T. associations of increased HMGB1 and TREM1 signaling Bobbert: None. J. Spranger: None. E. Steinhagen- for increased T2DM risks. Similar analyses on PPARG Thiessen: None. I. Demuth: None. U. Kassner: None. revealed pathways associated with adipogenesis, glucose and lipid metabolism and validated the protective associa-  P06
.17.A tion between increased Apelin signaling in omental fat Gene expression and pathway analysis of omental and T2DM. adipose tissue from Type 2 diabetic and non diabetic Conclusions: Our study on omental fat identiﬁed novel Asian obese patients DEGs associated with T2DM. Omental fats from T2DM subjectsexhibitupregulationofimmunepathwaysprobably R. Dehghan1,2, R. Dorajoo1, M. H. Liu3, L. Wang1, Y. Y. modulated byOSM,and downregulation ingenes involved Sia1,C.B.Lin1,T.H.Koh1,S.Huang4,E.Chan4,W.Liew4, in adipogenesis, glucose and lipid metabolism probably Y.Z.Tan5,C.M.Khoo6,X.Sim7,J.Liu1,6,A.Shabbir5,E.S. modulated by PPARG. Tai4,6,8 R.Dehghan:None.R.Dorajoo:None.M.H.Liu:None. L. Wang: None. Y.Y. Sia: None. C.B. Lin: None. T.H. 1Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Koh: None. S. Huang: None. E. Chan: None. W. Liew: Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore, 2Depart- None.Y.Z.Tan:None.C.M.Khoo:None.X.Sim:None. ment of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of J. Liu: None. A. Shabbir: None. E.S. Tai: None. Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Science, Isfahan, Iran,IslamicRepublicof,3DepartmentofFoodScienceand  P06
.18.B Technology, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Lipodystrophy-associated PPARγ mutants deﬁne sub- Singapore, 4Division of Endocrinology, Department of classes of target genes Medicine, National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore, 5Department of Surgery, National University M.F.Broekema1,M.StahlMadsen2,M.RønnMadsen2,A. Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 6Department of Medicine, Koppen1, M. E. Kranendonk1, M. Groot Koerkamp1, N. Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Hamers1,A.Borgmans1,A.M.Bonvin3,F.C.Holstege1,W. Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 7Saw Swee Hock School Spiering1, H. Monajemi4, D. Cassiman5, S. Mandrup2, E. of Public Health, National University of Singapore, Kalkhoven1 Singapore,Singapore,8Duke-NationalUniversityofSinga- pore Medical School, Singapore, Singapore 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, Introduction: Asians may have increased propensity to 3Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Rijnstate Hos- centralobesityandrelatedType2diabetesmellitus(T2DM) pital, Arnhem, Netherlands, 5Leuven University Hospitals, risks, as compared to populations of European ancestry. Leuven, Belgium Gene expression proﬁling of omental fat in Asians may identify additional T2DM relevant pathways. Introduction:ThenuclearreceptorPPARγ,encodedbythe Methods:WeperformedRNA-seqon37(16T2DMand PPARG gene, is pivotal for adipocyte differentiation and 21 non-T2DM) omental fats from Asian obese patients, function. How the different domains of PPARγ exactly communicate on intra- and intermolecular level to generate294 J.delPicchia the appropriate transcriptional output in the context of retardation since 20w with preserved head circumference chromatinisunresolved.Newinsightscanbeobtainedfrom andabdominalperimeter,withoutrenalmalformationsor natural PPARG mutations, as found in patients suffering vertebral segmentation. Prenatal exome revealed a from familial partial lipodystrophy subtype 3 (FPLD3), homozygous frameshift mutation in exon 1 of the HAAO characterized by repartitioning of adipose tissue causing gene (p.R15Gfs*99). The parents were heterozygous car- insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. We identiﬁed two riers and referred non-consanguinity. After birth the FPLD3 mutations( E379
K andR212Q)- located indistinct length was -3.2SD, we performed an abdominal ultra- PPARγ domains - that impair the adipogenic capacity. sound(normal),skeletalX-rays(normal)andcranialMRI Methods and materials: We have used genome-wide (normal). The patient had elevated levels of 3- sequencing-based strategies in PPARG knockout mouse hidroxyanthralinic acid (3HAA) and 3-OH-kynurenina embryonicﬁbroblaststransducedwithPPARγtodetermine and normal levels of niacin, similar to the two previously howthesePPARGmutationsaffecttheabilityofPPARγto reportedcases.GiventhatdefectsinHaao-nullmiceowing activate PPARG target genes in the context of native toNADdeﬁciencycanbepreventedwithsupplementation chromatin structure. with nicotinic acid (Shi et al., 2017), compasive use of Results: Both mutations impair the ability of PPARγ to niacinsupplementationwasstartedatonemonth.Follow- induce an overlapping subset of target genes, including up at 3 months shows a normal length (-1.63SD). There classical PPARγ target genes such as Lpl, while retaining are only two reported patients from Australia with the ability to activate other genes including Acox1. homozygous variants inHAAO predicting loss-of-function Genome-wide DNA binding proﬁles indicated that regula- changes in HAAO (different mutations that our patient). tory regions that require PPARγ for chromatin remodeling Cardiac, vertebral and renal malformation and hearing are particularly sensitive to the mutations. In addition, the loss were present in both and Mondini defect and intel- exact nucleotide sequence of the PPARγ binding sites can lectualdisabilityinoneofthem.Toourknowledge,thisis potentially contribute to target gene sensitivity. the third patient reported with NAD Deﬁciency and the Conclusions: We propose a model in which recruitment ﬁrsttreatedwithniacin.Ourpatienthasonlythreemonths of PPARγ to chromatin is determined by multiple protein- andlongtermfollow-upisrequiredtodetermineefﬁcacy. protein and protein-DNA interfaces. Our ﬁndings indicate A.M.Cueto-González:None.S.Arevalo:None.M.Del that relatively subtle molecular defects in PPARγ are Toro: None. G. Giralt: None. A. Creus: None. M. sufﬁcient to cause lipodystrophy by dysregulating a subset Torres: None. I. Valenzuela: None. A. Abuli: None. E. of PPARγ target genes. Tizzano: None. M.F. Broekema: None. M. Stahl Madsen: None. M. Rønn Madsen: None. A. Koppen: None. M.E. Kranen-  P06
.29.A donk: None. M. Groot Koerkamp: None. N. Hamers: Research Priorities for Primary Mitochondrial Disor- None. A. Borgmans: None. A.M. Bonvin: None. F.C. ders: Deﬁned by Patients, their Carers and Clinicians. Holstege:None.W.Spiering:None.H.Monajemi:None. D. Cassiman: None. S. Mandrup: None. E. J. Lowndes1, R. Thomas2, S. Rahman3, R. Wheeler4, J. Kalkhoven: None. Sharpe5,S.Holmes6,M.Votruba7,C.Feeney2,L.Weaver8, L. Curtis9, L. Butterworth9, P. Hossain8, K. Staley10, A.  P06
.21.B Hunter10, S. Upadhyaya11 ‘Congenital Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) Deﬁciency Disorder treated with niacin 1Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, supplementation’ Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle, United Kingdom, A.M.Cueto-González,S.Arevalo,M.DelToro,G.Giralt, 3UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, A. Creus, M. Torres, I. Valenzuela, A. Abuli, E. Tizzano London, United Kingdom, 4LHON Society, London, United Kingdom, 5Muscular Dystrophy UK, London, United Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain Kingdom,6NationalHospital forNeurologyandNeurosur- gery, London, United Kingdom, 7Cardiff University and Congenital NAD Deﬁciency is an extremely ultrarare dis- TheUniversityHospitalofWales,Cardiff,UnitedKingdom, order (OMIM 617660, ORPHA 521438) with only two 8Metabolic Support UK, London, United Kingdom, 9The previouscasesreported(Shietal.2017).Wereportanew Lily Foundation, London, United Kingdom, 10Genetic case diagnosed during pregnancy presenting cardiac Alliance UK, London, United Kingdom, 11James Lind malformations (Shone syndrome with high risk of aortic Alliance, London, United Kingdom coarctation) and progressive intrauterine growthAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 295 Introduction: Primary mitochondrial disorders are clini- Introduction: Maternally inherited pathogenic mtDNA cally and genetically heterogeneous, for which there is variants increase in heteroplasmy during passage from currentlyalackofeffectivetherapies.Itisthereforevitalto mothertoaffectedoffspring.Apathogenicvariant,whichis knowthatcompetitivelyfundedresearchmeetstheneedsof present in an affected offspring, is often not detectable in patients and their clinicians. The Priority Setting Partner- varioustissuesofthemother,andthereforeclassiﬁedas“de ships (PSPs) are an established, collaborative methodology novo”. Here we present a case, where an apparent “de that brings patients, charity representatives and clinicians novo” variant is actually not de novo, as it is detectable by together to try to establish the most pressing and unan- high coverage NGS in the mother and other maternal swered research priorities for a particular disease group. relatives. Methods: After a scoping exercise to identify relevant Case: The male index patient is affected by Leigh partners, we chose to include questions relevant to both syndrome, a classical mitochondrial disease. Symptoms are childrenandadultswithprimarymitochondrialdisorders.A psychomotordelayandgeneralizeddystoniaandMRIbrain web-based questionnaire was developed and widely dis- scans show bilateral symmetrical lesions in the basal seminated;askingfor patients, carersandclinicianstopose ganglia and brainstem. Muscle biopsy showed ragged red their important research questions. This yielded 709 ﬁbers. Mother and grandfather are affected by Parkinson´s questions from 50 patients, 47 carers and 50 clinicians. disease. These were grouped in to themes and ﬁltered to exclude Results: Whole exome sequencing identiﬁed pathogenic statements that were personal stories. Extensive literature variant m.10158T>C in mtDNA isolated from blood. High searching was performed to determine which questions are coverage NGS revealed that the variant is present in this unanswered based on current evidence. This process sample with heteroplasmy of 62% (2710 of 4371 reads). resulted in a list of 42 discrete questions. In a second Testing of mother and healthy siblings showed that the web-based questionnaire, patients, carers and clinicians variant is present in all investigated tissues with low were invited to rank these 42 questions. This identiﬁed 24 heteroplasmy (~1%). Therefore the variant is inherited. questions that were taken forward to a workshop attended Discussion: Apparent de novo mtDNA-variants may be byadiverserangeofpatients,carers,charityrepresentatives inherited and maternal relatives may be carriers of such and clinicians. The relative merits and strengths of each variants. High coverage NGS of mtDNA can detect such question were debated to create a deﬁnitive ‘top 10 of cases. Increase of heteroplasmy in cases like this must be unanswered research questions’. duetoastrongbottleneckeffect.Ifthebottleneckworksby Results/Conclusion: Here we present the ‘top 10 of unequal partitioning (segregation), at least 6 cell divisions unanswered research questions for primary mitochondrial without mtDNA replication must have happened in the disorders’, as deﬁned by the patients, their carers and reported affected case. clinicians. U. Ahting: None. B. Lorenz-Depireux: None. R. J. Lowndes: None. R. Thomas: None. S. Rahman: Berutti: None. M. Radivojkov-Blagojevic: None. F. None. R. Wheeler: None. J. Sharpe: None. S. Holmes: Radelfahr:None.C.Stendel:None.J.U.Walther:None. None. M. Votruba: None. C. Feeney: None. L. Weaver: None. L. Curtis: None. L. Butterworth: None. P.  P06
.32.A Hossain: None. K. Staley: None. A. Hunter: None. S. Molecular mitochondrial DNA analysis in patients with Upadhyaya: None. suspected mitochondrial disorder  P06
.31.C K. Grigalionienė, B. Burnytė, D. Vansevičiūtė, G. HighcoverageNGSofmtDNAproofsapparentdenovo Žukauskaitė, L. Ambrozaitytė, A. Utkus variant to be in fact not de novo Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of U. Ahting1, B. Lorenz-Depireux2, R. Berutti2, M. Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Uni- Radivojkov-Blagojevic2, F. Radelfahr3, C. Stendel3, J. U. versity, Vilnius, Lithuania Walther1 Introduction: Mitochondrial diseases represent important 1Institut für Humangenetik. TUM, München, Germany, and common source of inherited metabolic disorders. 2Helmholtz-Zentrum München, Institut für Humangenetik, Mitochondrial dysfunction is characterized by defects in Neuherberg, Germany, 3Friedrich-Baur-Institut, München, oxidative phosphorylation and caused by pathogenic var- Germany iantsineithermitochondrialDNAornuclearmitochondrial genes. A correct diagnosis is challenging due to the com-296 J.delPicchia plexity of the clinical presentations, lack of classical diag- ofMalta,Msida,Malta,5DepartmentofPaediatrics,Mater nostic clues and genetic heterogeneity. Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 6Department of Pathology, Patients and methods: In this study, mtDNA was Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 7Department of examined in a cohort of 71 affected individuals (69 Neurology, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 8Depart- unrelated families) with suspected mitochondrial disorder. ment of Physiology and Biochemistry and Centre for Comprehensive analysis of mtDNA was performed using Molecular Medicine and Biobanking, Msida, Malta followingmoleculargeneticmethods:Sangersequencingof whole-length mtDNA for detection of point variants, long Mitochondrial disorders are rare, genetically heterogenous PCR and MLPA for detection of mtDNA deletions/ diseases which affect the oxidative phosphorylation duplications and RT-PCR for mtDNA copy number (OXPHOS) system. A combined genomic and tran- analysis. scriptomicapproachwasadoptedtodiagnosemitochondrial Results: Six (8.70%) patients were identiﬁed with disordersinacohortof14Maltesepatients.Phenotypicdata pathogenic mtDNA variants in the cohort of 69 unrelated was recorded in the RD-Connect PhenoTips instance. The patients. Common mtDNA pathogenic variant nuclearandmitochondrialgenomewereevaluatedbywhole NC_012920.1:m.3243A>G with variable heteroplasmy exome sequencing. Variant ﬁltration and prioritisation was levels wasidentiﬁedinthreeunrelated femalepatientswith undertaken using the RD-Connect Genome Phenome Ana- heterogeneous phenotype of MELAS. Homoplasmic lysisPlatform(GPAP).Thefulltranscriptomewasanalysed mtDNA pathogenic variants NC_012920.1:m.8993T>C by RNA sequencing. Differential expression of candidate and NC_012920.1:m.9185T>C were identiﬁed in patients variants was conﬁrmed by q-PCR. A HEK-293 cell model presentingwithLeighsyndrome.Novelheteroplasmic5888 was used to functionally characterise the effect of a rare bp mtDNA deletion NC_012920.1:m.6069_11956del caus- homozygous missense variant on mitochondrial complex 1 ing Kearns-Sayre syndrome was identiﬁed using long PCR activity in one of the patients. Pathogenic variants were and Sanger sequencing while MLPA proﬁle was normal. characterised according to their functional roles in MtDNAhaplogroupanalysisrevealeda43.5%frequencyof OXPHOS biogenesis (see Table). The most variants were the most common H haplogroup in the patients group. identiﬁed in Complex 1 OXPHOS subunits (N=8) and Conclusions:BeneﬁtsofmtDNAanalysismanifestinthe Complex 1 assembly factor variants were also identiﬁed in identiﬁcation of pathogenic variants that could direct 4 of these patients. Two patients were diagnosed with patients care, but limitations of the methods should be MELAS.Geneexpressionanalysisalsorevealedtheeffects taken into account while selecting the best investigation of these variants. strategy. Supported by grant TAP LLT-02/2015 OXPHOS OXPHOS Electron mt-tRNA mtDNA Lipid TCA Protein Metabolism Nucleo- Subunits Assembly Carriers biogenesis/ homeo- Modiﬁcation/ cycle Quality oftoxic tide K. Grigalionienė: None. B. Burnytė: None. D. Vanse- Factors acmyliantiooan- stasis Homeostasis amnedta- Control compounds pools bolism vičiūtė: None. G. Žukauskaitė: None. L. Ambrozaitytė:  C1
 CIII ATPase None. A. Utkus: None. Patient NDUFB11 MT-CYB MT-T L1
, A MT-TQ Patient NDUFB11 MT- B AT P6
  P06
.34.C PCatient NNDDUUFFSB69,, ABCCSA1D L9
, ATAD3A NDUFB6, NDUF8 Mitochondrial disorder diagnosis; a combined genomic Patient NDUFB10 MT-CYB D and transcriptomic approach Patient MT-ND1 MT-CO3 E Patient DAR S2
, PDHA1, F YAR S2
 ACACA J.Vella1,S.Laurie2,L.Matalonga3,J.Borg4,D.Soler5,E. Patient NDUF S1
, NDUFAF3 COQ9 SPG7 G NDUFA10, NDUFB9 Said6, I. Borg6, N. Vella7, J. Aquilina7, A. Felice8 Patient MT-CYB,AT P5
A1 COQ2 MT-TQ, H UQCRB CAR S2
 Patient MT-CYB I 1Department of Physiology and Biochemistry and Centre PJatient NDUFV3 MT-CYB ACOTPXA1F0,2, MT-TQ POLG PDHA1 SPG7 NDUFAF2 for Molecular Medicine and Biobanking, University of Patient NDUFB9 NDUFAF2, ACACA HIBCH, SUCLG1 K NDUFAF3 DMGDH, Malta, Msida, Malta, 2Centro Nacional de Analisis  L2
HGDH Patient EAR S2
 L Genomico (CNAG-CRG); Centre for Genomic Regulation; Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), UniversitatPompeuFabra(UBF),Barcelona,Spain,3Cen- This combined genomic and transcriptomic approach tro Nacional de Analisis Genomico (CNAG-CRG); Centre could aid in establishing a diagnosis for these rare disease forGenomicRegulation;BarcelonaInstituteofScienceand patients. Technology (BIST); Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UBF), J. Vella: None. S. Laurie: None. L. Matalonga: None. Barcelona, Spain, 4Department of Health Sciences and J. Borg: None. D. Soler: None. E. Said: None. I. Borg: CentreforMolecularMedicineandBiobanking,University None.N.Vella:None.J.Aquilina:None.A.Felice:None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 297  P06
.35.A  P06
.36.B Mitochondriopathy in pediatric patients with unspeciﬁc Mitochondrial DNA sequence context in the penetrance neuropediatric disease of all mt-tRNA mutations across many species: A study diagnostic implications A. van der Ven1, J. Denecke2, K. Tsiakas2, S. Wortmann3,4,5, D. Lessel1, F. Kortüm1, T. Bierhals1, H. H. O’Keefe, R. A. Queen, J. S. Steyn, P. Lord, J. L. Elson Prokisch3,4, R. Santer2, M. Hempel1 Newcatsle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom 1Dept. Human Genetics, UKE Hamburg-Eppendorf, Ham- burg, Germany, 2Dept. Pediatrics, UKE Hamburg-Eppen- Introduction: Mitochondrial disorders are heterogeneous, dorf, Hamburg, Germany, 3Dept. Human Genetics, TU showingvariablepresentationandpenetrance.Overthelast Munich, Munich, Germany, 4Dept. Human Genetics, three decades, our ability to recognize mitochondrial Helmholz Centre Munich, Neuherberg, Germany, patients and diagnose these mutations, linking genotype to 5Dept. Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University, phenotype, has greatly improved. However, it has become Salzburg, Austria increasingly clear that these strides in diagnostics have not beneﬁted all population groups. It has been suggested that Introduction: Mitochondriopathies account for an impor- haplogroup (or lineage) context might inﬂuence the pre- tant subgroup of neuropediatric conditions but often the sentation and penetrance of mtDNA disease; thus, the clinical presentation may be too unspeciﬁc to hint to an a spectrum of mutations that are associated with disease in priori disease hypothesis. different populations. MaterialsandMethods:Wereportonadeepphenotyp- Methods and Materials: This paper conducted the most ing and trio-WES study of 492 unrelated children affected extensive investigation to date into the importance of by previously undiagnosed and diverse complex neurope- haplogroup context on the pathogenicity of mtDNA diatricdisorders.Allchildrenunderwentastandardizedand mutations. We searched for proven human point mutations comprehensive clinical work-up and trio-WES. In a subset across 726 multiple sequence alignments derived from 33 of 31 children we had an a priori clinical suspicion of a non-human species absent of disease. mitochondriopathy. Results: 58 pathogenic point mutations arise in the Results: Within this group of patients with a clinical sequences of these species. We assessed the sequence suspicion of an underlying mitochondriopathy, we con- context and found evidence of population variants that ﬁrmedthediagnosisbyidentifyingapathogenicvariantina could modulate the phenotypic expression of these point known mitochondriopathy-associated gene in 9/31 children mutations masking the pathogenic effects seen in (29%).In10/31children(32%)wediscoveredapathogenic humans. variant in a disease gene not associated with a mitochon- Conclusions: This supports the theory that sequence driopathy. For 3/31 children we detected a pathogenic context is inﬂuential in the presentation of mtDNA disease mutation in a candidate gene for a mitochondriopathy. In and has implications for diagnostic practices. Our current the group of 461 children with no suspicion of a understanding of the pathogenicity of mtDNA point mitochondriopathy, we identiﬁed pathogenic mutations in mutations, primarily built on studies of individuals with known mitochondriopathy-associated genes in 13 children haplogroups HVUKTJ, will not present a complete picture. (3%). In 226/461 children (49%) we detected pathogenic This will impair our understanding of disease mechanisms mutationsinotherknowndiseasegenes.For222/461(48%) andcreateadiagnosticinequality,wherebyindividualswho patients no deﬁnite genetic diagnosis could be established. do not belonging to more commonly studied lineages will Conclusions: Overall, we molecularly established the be less likely to receive a genetic diagnosis. diagnosis of a mitochondriopathy in 22 of 492 (4,5%) H. O’Keefe: None. R.A. Queen: None. J.S. Steyn: unselectedneuropediatricpatients.Thisstudyhighlightsthe None. P. Lord: None. J.L. Elson: None. importanceofWES fortheidentiﬁcationofchildren with a clinicallylesscharacteristicpresentationoftheirunderlying  P06
.37.C mitochondriopathy. Unraveling Atypical Phenotypes in Neuronal Ceroid A. van der Ven: None. J. Denecke: None. K. Tsiakas: Lipofucinosis type 2 None.S.Wortmann:None.D.Lessel: None.F.Kortüm: None. T. Bierhals: None. H. Prokisch: None. R. Santer: None. M. Hempel: None.298 J.delPicchia A. M. Amaral1, F. Fola1, Z. A. Carneiro1, L. Vagnini2, C. P. Guatibonza, C. Beetz, J. Gutierrez, S. Zafari, V. FischingerMouraDeSouza3,A.Pessoa4,C.M.Lourenco1 Skrahina, C. Cozma, P. Bauer, A. Rolfs 1Faculdade de Medicina - Centro Universitario Estacio de Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany RibeiraoPreto,RibeiraoPreto,Brazil,2CentroPaulistade Diagnostico e Pesquisa, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 3Hospital The term Niemann Pick disease (NPD) denotes a geneti- deClínicasdePortoAlegre,PortoAlegre,Brazil,4Hospital cally and clinically heterogeneous group of lysosomal sto- Infantil Albert Sabin, Fortaleza, Brazil rage disorders. A deeper insight into NPD would beneﬁt from large and uniformly characterized cohorts of patients. Introduction: Late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis We queried our database for patients that had received a (NCL), also called neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 genetic diagnosis of NPD between December 2015 and (CLN2), is caused by the deﬁciency of lysosomal enzyme August 2019. Information was compiled on: affected gene, tripeptidyl peptidase-1 (TP P1
) due to mutations in the age, gender, and country of origin, along with available CLN2 gene. The classical phenotype is late infantile pre- clinical and metabolic data. A genetic diagnosis of NPD sentingwithlanguagedevelopmentaldelay,withitsclinical was issued for 733 patients. With n=472 (64.4%), the signs usually appearing between the ages of 2 to 4 years majority had variants in NP C1
, while SMPD1 and NP C2
 withseizuresandarapiddeclineofpsychomotorfunctions. were identiﬁed as the affected genes in 255 (34.8%) and 6 Most children are bedridden at 5 years and die around the cases (0.8%), respectively. Most patients were infants age of 10 years. Nevertheless, atypical phenotypes have (median age at diagnosis 3.6 years; range 0 to 76 years). been reported in the literature, creating a clinical challenge They had been referred from 52 distinct countries, with the to avoid diagnosis without signiﬁcant delay. top 4 countries (Iran, Germany, Brazil and Egypt) collec- Methods: Clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological tively accounting for more than 50% of referrals. Transla- data retrospective analysis of ﬁve CLN2 patients showing tion of the available clinical information into human atypical/protracted phenotypes phenotypeontology(HPO)termsrevealedthathepato-and/ Results:Allfourpatients(3males;2females)showedan or splenomegaly was present in 76.5% of patients, intel- atypicallateonsetphenotype.Firstsymptonsstartedaround lectual disability in 27.9%, and jaundice in 19.0%. Further 5 - 10 years of age being cerebellar ataxia the most frequent HPO terms (i.e. present in >10%) included, prominent feature. Abnormal ﬁndings in brain MRI were abnormality of movement, ataxia, failure to thrive, and found in all patients (cerebellar atrophy and periventricular seizures. The NPD-speciﬁc biomarker LysoSM-509 was white matter changes). Seizures were present in three pathologically increased in 97.9% of the patients. Our patients, cognitive decline was seen in 4 patients and mild cohort is amongst the largest described to date. By being learningdisabilities in one.TP P1
 enzyme was decreasedin well-characterized at numerous levels, it represents a valu- all patients, although not in the typical range found in able basis for discovering novel correlations and, thereby, “classical” CLN2 patients. for increasing our understanding of Niemann Pick disease. Discussion: The protracted CLN2 phenotype was pre- P. Guatibonza: A. Employment (full or part-time); viously considered globally rare. In South America, the Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG.C.Beetz:A.Employment(full frequency is approximately 50% of affected individuals. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. J. Gutierrez: A. Recently with the recent approval of intraventricular Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with cerliponase alpha S. Zafari: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; for CLN2 disease, early diagnosis is essential to start CentogeneAG.V.Skrahina:A.Employment(fullorpart- treatment before disease progression. time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. C. Cozma: A. Employ- A.M. Amaral: None. F. Fola: None. Z.A. Carneiro: ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. P. None.L.Vagnini:None.C.FischingerMouraDeSouza: Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; None. A. Pessoa: None. C.M. Lourenco: None. Centogene AG. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part- time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG.  P06
.38.A Comprehensive characterization of a large cohort of  P06
.40.C patients with Niemann Pick disease A novel 160Kb deletion identiﬁed in PCCA gene using whole exome sequencing in a patient with propionic acidemiaAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 299 S. Farajzadeh Valilou1,2,3, H. Heydari1, S. Shohani1,4, S. syndrome,butwithouthearinglossandnormallevelsof Samadpour1, H. Abdi1, J. Karimzad Hagh5, M. Salimi Asl1 purine/pyrimidine metabolites 1Division of Medical Genetics, TehranLab, Tehran, Iran, S. Puusepp1,2, K. Reinson1,2, S. Pajusalu1,2,3, A. B. P. van Islamic Republic of, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Kuilenburg4, D. Dobritzsch5, W. Stenzel6,7, K. Õunap1,2 Kasra Hospital, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Med- ical Genetics Network (MeGeNe), Universal Scientiﬁc 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran, Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, IslamicRepublicof,4DepartmentofBiotechnology,Faculty Estonia, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, United Labora- of Allied Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, tories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Depart- Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 5IVF Center, Cuypers ment ofGenetics, Yale University School ofMedicine, New and Cuypers, Hochstr. 152, Heinsberg, Germany Haven, CT, United States, 4Department of Clinical Chemistry, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam Gastro- Background: Propionic acidemia (PA) is a severe meta- enterology & Metabolism, Amsterdam UMC, University of bolic disorder characterized by various clinical features. Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Herein, we present an 18-month-old male patient from Chemistry – BMC, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, consanguineousparents with early-onsetofsymptomssuch 6Department of Neuropathology, Charité– as anemia, respiratory problem, and developmental delay. Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Urine examination exhibited an increased level of 3- Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and hydroxypropionic acid and methylcitric acid, led to the Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany, 7Leibniz primary diagnosis of PA. ScienceCampus Chronic Inﬂammation,Berlin,Germany Methods: To identify the causative variant, DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood of the child and exons Introduction: The PRP S1
 gene, located on Xq22.3, were captured and enriched to perform whole exome encodes phosphoribosyl-pyrophosphate synthetase (PRPS), sequencing (WES). Data were analyzed using bioinfor- a key enzyme in purine de novo synthesis. Three clinical matics techniques and in silico predictors. Conventional phenotypes are associated with loss-of-function PRP S1
 PCR and Sanger sequencing were used to conﬁrm the variants and decreased PRPS activity: Arts syndrome, ﬁndings in WES. Additionally, comparative genomic Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 5 (CMTX5) and X- hybridization (CGH)-array was carried out to study the linked non-syndromic deafness. Hearing loss is present in accurate size of the copy number variation (CNV). all of these patients. CMTX5 patients additionally present Results:Surprisingly,nopathogenicvariantsinpropionic with peripheral neuropathy and optic atrophy. Arts syn- academia causing genes (PCCA and PCCB) or phenotypi- dromeincludesdevelopmental delay, intellectual disability, cally related disorders’ genes. Assuming the probably low ataxia and susceptibility to infections. coverage, we analyzed the PCCA and PCCB regions in the Case report: We report a boy who presented with BAMﬁle.InthePCCA,unlikePCCB,exons12to21were markedgeneralizedmuscularhypotonia,progressiveglobal identiﬁedwithnocoverage,probablysuggestingdeletionof developmental delay, lack of speech, trunk instability, the approximately 220kb-size region. Not only we con- exercise intolerance, hypomimic face with opened mouth, ﬁrmed the novel PCCA deletion via PCR but also oropharyngeal dysphagia, dysarthria, and very frequent performing CGH-array revealed the approximate deletion upper respiratory tract infections.Cardiac, audiological and size of 160Kb. ophthalmological investigations were normal. A novel Conclusions:Weidentiﬁedanovelhomozygousdeletion hemizygous variant c.130A>G p.(Ile44Val) was found in inthePCCAinthepatientwithPAusingWES.Ourresults the PRP S1
 gene by panel sequencing. PRPS activity in showedthatWEScanbeusedforidentifyingCNVsinstead erythrocytes was markedly reduced conﬁrming the patho- of CGH-array. However, a lot of studies should be done to genicity of the variant. In retrospect, serum uric acid levels improve the accuracy of this approach. and the ﬁrst urine purine/pyrimidine analysis were normal, S. Farajzadeh Valilou: None. H. Heydari: None. S. but analysis of the follow-up sample showed nearly absent Shohani: None. S. Samadpour: None. H. Abdi: None. J. hypoxanthine. Karimzad Hagh: None. M. Salimi Asl: None. Conclusions:Wedescribe apatientwith features ofArts syndrome and a novel PRP S1
 loss-of-function variant.  P06
.41.A However, at the current age of ﬁve years, our patient does A novel hemizygous loss-of-function variant in the not present with hearing loss, which has so far been PRP S1
 gene found in a patient with features of Arts reported in all of the Arts syndrome patients as congenital/ early-onset. We would also like to emphasize that the ﬁrst300 J.delPicchia purine/pyrimidine analysis was normal giving no clues P.Tsygankova:None.S.Kurbatov:None.I.Bychkov: towardsadysfunctioninthepurine-pyrimidinemetabolism. None. Y. Itkis: None. A. Galushkin: None. K. Molewa: Funding: Estonian Research Council grants PUT355, None. V. Zabnenkova: None. E. Zakharova: None. PRG471, PUTJD827. S. Puusepp: None. K. Reinson: None. S. Pajusalu:  P06
.44.A None. A.B.P. van Kuilenburg: None. D. Dobritzsch: TYP E2
DIABETESANDCANCERCO-MORBIDITY: None. W. Stenzel: None. K. Õunap: None. IS THERE SHARED GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY?  P06
.43.C L. Zudina1, A. Demirkan1, I. Pupko1, M. J. Gunter2, M. Infantile and early childhood onset mitochondrial Kaakinen1, I. Prokopenko1 myopathy due to mutations in the TK2 gene with a phenotypeofspinalmuscularatrophy5q.Theﬁrstcases 1Department of Clinical & Experimental Medicine, Uni- in Russia. versity of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom, 2Nutrition andMetabolismSection,InternationalAgencyforResearch P. Tsygankova1, S. Kurbatov2,3, I. Bychkov1, Y. Itkis1, A. on Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon, France Galushkin1, K. Molewa4, V. Zabnenkova1, E. Zakharova1 A plethora of epidemiological studies showed relationships 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian between Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) and common cancers, Federation, 2Voronezh Regional Clinical Consulting and reporting increased risks for postmenopausal breast Diagnostic Center, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 3Asso- (RR=1.20), colorectal (RR=1.30) and pancreatic ciation of Neuromuscular Disorders Specialists, Medical (RR=1.94) cancers, and decreased risk for prostate cancer Center “Practical Neurology”, Moscow, Russian Federa- (RR=0.84)inT2Dpatients.Weaimedtodissectthegenetic tion, 4Department of Neurology, "Dagestan State Medical factors shared between T2D, pancreatic and three common University", Machachkala, Russian Federation cancers using genome-wide genetic variability in a large case-control and population-based context. Mitochondrial myopathy (MM) due to thymidine kinase 2 We evaluated the role of signals established for T2D on deﬁciency and spinal muscular atrophy (5q) (SMA-5q) are the susceptibility to postmenopausal breast, prostate, color- two potentially curable hereditary diseases with different ectalandpancreaticcancersinEPIC(EuropeanProspective levelsofdamagetotheneuromuscularsystemandetiology. Investigation intoCancerandNutrition)a combined nested Early childhood forms have a similar phenotype and are case-control study of 14,553 individuals, including 4,345/ difﬁcult for differential diagnosis. We present the clinical 2,120/426/499 with postmenopausal breast/colorectal/pros- characteristics and molecular defect of MM with TK2 tate/pancreatic cancer diagnosis and 476 prevalent cases of deﬁciency and informing health care specialists about the T2D. We generated polygenic risk scores (PRS) for breast/ possibility of optimizing differential diagnosis. Materials colorectal/prostate/pancreatic cancers and T2D using 171/ and methods. This study involved 9 patients with excluded 90/154/21 and 403 established DNA variants for each SMA-5q diagnosis. TK2 mutations were detected by NGS- disease, respectively. To perform reciprocal evaluation of gene panel in 3 of them. In addition, 96 DNA samples of PRS effects on diabetes and four cancer risks, we used the patients with SMA-phenotype were screened for TK2 variants from original phenotype and the estimates of per- mutations by Sanger sequencing. Results. Nine patients allele genetic effects from the other outcome. with MM with TK2 from 6 unrelated families have been For all individual PRSs, we observed signiﬁcant (P < diagnosed. Three of them have been found retrospectively 5x10−5)increaseintheriskoforiginaloutcomes.T2DPRS by analysis of 96 SMA-5q negative samples. Screening for was signiﬁcantly associated with risk of pancreatic cancer mutations in the TK2 gene can be recommended for all (OR=3.82[1.65-8.84], P=1.71x10−3). This effect was children with a manifestation of the disease up to 2 years stronger compared to the T2D PRS effect on T2D risk old, with rapidly progressing muscle weakness, increased (OR=1.53[1.35-1.75], P=9.87x10−11). The T2D and pan- CPKand/orlactateinthebloodand/ordetectionofdamage creatic cancer share signals at GRP, HNF1B BCAR1 and to the leg muscles on MRI. The study revealed four pre- LINC-PINT/KLF14 loci only. viously undescribed mutations in the TK2 gene: c.169G>A Using the pan-European EPIC study data, we provide (p.Gly57Ser), c.310C>T (p.Arg104Cys), c.338T>A (p. evidence for shared genetic factors between T2D and Val113Glu), c.655T>C (p.Trp219Arg). Early molecular pancreatic cancer. diagnostic is important for the choice of experimental Funding: WCRF-2017/1641 nucleosidebypasstreatmentforthisgroupofmitochondrial diseases.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 301 L.Zudina:None.A.Demirkan:None.I.Pupko:None. M. Skopkova: None. K. Brennerova: None. M. M.J. Gunter: None. M. Kaakinen: None. I. Ostrozlikova: None. S. Borecka: None. D. Prokopenko: None. Gasperikova: None.  P06
.45.B  P07
 Immunology and Hematopoietic System Milder form of Vici syndrome due to novel missense variant affecting splicing  P07
.05.A A rare pair in one patient - Bernard-Soulier syndrome M. Skopkova1, K. Brennerova2, M. Ostrozlikova3, S. unraveled by 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome Borecka1, D. Gasperikova1 G.Taurina1,2,D.Murmane1,2,I.Voitovica1,S.Nikulsins1,I. 1Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Biomedical Micule1,3 Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty of 1ChildrensClinicalUniversityHospital,Riga,Latvia,2Riga Commenius University and National Institute of Children’s Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 3Biomedical Research Diseases, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Laboratory and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia Medicine, National Institute of Children’s Diseases, Bratislava, Slovakia Introduction:The22q11.2deletionsyndromeisoneofthe most common microdeletion syndromes. Bernard-Soulier Introduction: Vici syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome, in turn, is a rare autosomal recessive bleeding syndrome caused by mutations in the gene EPG5 encoding disorder (prevalence <1:1 000 000) with dysfunctional ectopic P granules protein involved in autophagy. It is a glycoproteinIb-V-IXcomplex,responsiblefortheadhesion neurodevelopmentaldisorderwithmultisysteminvolvement activity of platelets. We report a patient having both including corpus callosum agenesis, cataracts, hypo- diseases. pigmentation, cardiomyopathy, and immunodeﬁciency. It Casereport:Aboywhowasadmittedtohospitalonthe has been hypothesized that the severity of phenotype is third day of life due to epistaxis, petechias and umbilical related to residual level of functional EPG5. cord bleeding. Brain MRI showed subdural hematoma Patient: A 4 years old boy of Roma ethnicity with among cerebellar lobes. Blood count revealed severe preterm birth, hypotonia, severe hypotrophy and growth thrombocytopenia (8 x 103/uL), that required several retardation, developmental delay, mild brain atrophy, and plateletinfusionsanddidnotimprovewithimmunoglobulin urine organic acid proﬁle suggesting mitochondrial disease treatment. An NGS analysis for Bleeding disorder gene was referred for whole-exome sequencing. panel was ordered, with CNV analysis. On the second Results: We have found a novel variant c.4205G>A (p. month of life ﬂow cytometry revealed reduced CD42b Arg1402Lys) in the EPG5 gene. As it is the last base of expressivity. exon 23, we performed a mini-gene assay to estimate its Results: The NGS gene panel results revealed a effect on splicing. This has shown decreased inclusion of heterozygous pathogenic 22q11.2 microdeletion, encom- exon 23 compared to wild-type (40% vs. 72%, respec- passing 73 genes with G P1
BB gene included. The analysis tively). RNA sequencing conﬁrmed only presence of the also showed a heterozygous likely pathogenic variant in correctly spliced transcript. The patient was further G P1
BB gene c.395T>A, p.(Leu132Gln). The combination examined for symptoms common in Vici syndrome and of the microdeletion on one and the mutation on the other hypopigmented skin areas and immunodeﬁciency were G P1
BB allele explains the bleeding disorder of our patient conﬁrmed. Interestingly, the patient has present corpus and conﬁrms in him Bernard-Soulier syndrome. 22q11.2 callosum, although thin, no seizures, no cataracts and no microdeletionsyndromewasnotsuspectedbeforetheDNA cardiomyopathy. Additionally, he has hemodynamically analysis. Afterwards at a repeated consultation the patient importantstenosisofleftpulmonaryartery.Thetypicalsign demonstrated signs of velopharyngeal insufﬁciency but as - pale skin and hair were also not present. yet no other signs of the Velocardiofacial syndrome. Conclusions: Novel variant c.4205G>A causes aberrant Conclusions: In patients with early onset bleeding splicingonlyinaproportionoftranscripts,therefore,milder disorder genetic testing with CNV analysis must be presentationofVicisyndromeinourpatientisprobablydue performed in order to not miss an autosomal recessive to the residual presence of the EPG5 protein. Supported by diseaseunmaskedbya seeminglypresymptomaticfrequent VEGA 2/083/17 and APVV-17-0296. microdeletion syndrome. G. Taurina: None. D. Murmane: None. I. Voitovica: None. S. Nikulsins: None. I. Micule: None.302 J.delPicchia  P07
.08.A not only underlie the apparent phenotypic variability but High intrafamilial variability in a  C15
orf41 associated also is useful in uncovering previously unidentiﬁed genes. Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia family indicates A. Gurel: None. S. Unal: None. N. Yarali: None. P. involvement of  C2
orf69 in infantile epilepsy Simsek Kiper: None. S. Ceylaner: None. O.A. Bilir: None. F. Gumruk: None. N.A. Akarsu: None. A. A. Gurel1, S. Unal2, N. Yarali3, P. Simsek Kiper4, S. Cetinkaya: None. Ceylaner5, O. A. Bilir3, F. Gumruk2, N. A. Akarsu1, A. Cetinkaya1  P07
.09.B Anoveldisorderinvolvingdyshematopoiesis,inﬂamma- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, tion and HLH due to aberrant CD C42
 function Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Pediatric Hematol- ogy Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, S. Coppola1, M. Lam2,3,4, O. H. Krumbach5, G. Prencipe6, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 3Division of Pedia- A. Insalaco6, C. Cifaldi7,8, I. Brigida9, E. Zara1, S. Scala9, tric Hematology, Ankara Child Health and Diseases S. Martinelli10, M. Di Rocco10,11, A. Pascarella6, M. Hematology Oncology Training and Research Hospital, Niceta12, F. Pantaleoni12, A. Ciolﬁ12, F. Carisey2,4, M. Ankara, Turkey, 4Pediatric Genetics Unit, Department of Akbarzadeh5, L. Farina1,6, L. Pannone10,12, H. C. Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Erichsen13, A. C. Horne14,15, Y. Bryceson16,17, L. Torralba- Ankara, Turkey, 5Intergen Genetic Diagnosis Center, Raga16, K. Ramme18, A. Finocchi19,8, F. Locatelli20, C. Ankara, Turkey Cancrini19,8, A. Aiuti9, M. R. Ahmadian5, J. S. Orange2, F. De Benedetti6, M. Tartaglia12 Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) are a het- erogenous group of disorders characterized by dysplastic 1National center for rare diseases, Istituto Superiore di erythroblasts, ineffective erythropoiesis, iron overload, Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, Columbia splenomegaly and occasionally congenital limb abnormal- University, Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United ities. Here, we report a CDA family with a novel homo- States, 3Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine zygous mutation in  C15
orf41, one of six CDA associated Graduate Program and Medical ScientistTraining Pro- genes, and unusually high intrafamilial clinical variability. gram, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United The proband, 3-month-old male born to consangineous States, 4Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of parents, presented with transfusion-dependent anemia, Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5Institute of malnutrition, recurrent pulmonary infections, hypotonia, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II, Medical Faculty refractoryseizuresandcerebralatrophy.Hisaffectedsibling of the Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany, had a milder neonatal anemia with no additional ﬁndings. 6Division of Rheumatology, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Whole exome sequencing in proband revealed a homo- Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 7Department of Pediatrics, zygous missense mutation in  C15
orf41 (c.58C>A,p. Ospedale Pediatricon Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, Pro20Thr), which is not present in GnomAD and also 8Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor found in the affected sibling. Another mutation in this Vergata, Rome, Italy, 9San Raffaele Telethon Institute for codon (c.58C>T,p.Pro20Ser) had already been associated Gene Therapy (SR-TIGET), IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc withCDA.Inordertodiscoverasecondmutationthatmay Institute, Milan, Italy, 10Department of Oncology and explain the neurological ﬁndings in the proband, we Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, focused on twelve >4Mbp runs of homozygosity and Italy, 11Department of Cellular Biotechnology and Haema- detected a nonsense mutation in  C2
orf69 (c.929G>A,p. tology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 12Genet- Trp310Ter), which is absent in GnomAD and in-house ics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale databases. No other family member was homozygous for Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 13Depart- this variant.  C2
orf69 is highly uncharacterized, but we mentofPediatricandAdolescentMedicine,OsloUniversity predict that absence of any homozygous truncating muta- Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 14Pediatric Rheumatology, Astrid tions in GnomAD indicates selective pressure on  C2
orf69. Lindgren Childrens Hospital, Karolinska University Hos- A high expression in brain is apparent in GTEx dataset. pital, Stockholm, Sweden, 15Department of Women’s and In conclusion, we demonstrate that a novel mutation in Children’s Health, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska Uni-  C15
orf41 affects a hotspot codon leading to CDA. In versity Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden, 16Department addition, we associate biallelic mutations in  C2
orf69 with of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University intractable infantile epilepsy. Multiple molecular diagnoses Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, 17Broegelmann Research Laboratory, Institute of Clinical Sciences,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 303 University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 18Pediatric Hema- Ahmadian: None. J.S. Orange: None. F. De Benedetti: tology, Immunology and HCT Section, Astrid Lindgren None. M. Tartaglia: None. Children’sHospital,KarolinskaUniversityHospital,Stock- holm, Sweden, 19Department of Pediatrics, Ospedale  P07
.11.A PediatricoBambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 20Depart- Studying known autoimmune risk loci in patients with ment of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Ospedale CFS-ME Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy R. Hajdarevic, B. Lie, M. Viken Introduction:Thediagnosisanddelineationofnovelgenetic syndromes is often difﬁcult given the limited availability of University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway patients, genetic heterogeneity, and clinical variability. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is characterized Introduction: CFS/ME is a chronic debilitating disease of by hyper-inﬂammation driven by excessive activation and unknown origin and cause, but a heritable component is expansionofmacrophagesanddefectiveNaturalKiller(NK) implicated, likely harbouring a multifactorial aetiology cytotoxicity; it can be fatal if untreated. Here, we identify a Evidencefromrecentstudiessuggestaninvolvementofthe previouslyunrecognizedhematologicalandautoinﬂammatory immune system as well as a high degree of comorbidity condition in four unrelated patients with superimposable withotherautoimmunedisorders.Thishasledustoexplore features, including neonatal-onset trilinear cytopenia with the genetic architecture of CFS/ME to further explore the dyshematopoiesis, autoinﬂammation, rash, and HLH. immune component of this pathology. Previous genetic Methods:Todelineatethisnewsyndrome,weperformed studies of CFS/ME were limited by heterogeneous diag- phenotype and whole-genome/exome analyses. In silico, nostic criteria as well as sample size (<100 patients), in vitro and in vivo (C. elegans) assays allowed to thereby lacking statistical substance. characterize the impact of mutation on localization and Materials and Methods: We have genotyped 426 CFS/ function. ME patient (diagnosed according to the strict Canadian Results: All patients shared the same de novo CD C42
 criteria) and 973 controls with the Illumnia immunochip. mutation (Chr1:22417990C>T, p.R186C) and altered The Immunochip is designed to screen for more than hematopoietic compartment, immune dysregulation, and 250,000commongeneticvariantscoveringgeneticregions, inﬂammation. We documented unique effects of the p. previously associated with autoimmune and inﬂammatory R186C on CD C42
 localization and function. Indeed, diseases like rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. CD C42
^R186C showed impaired interaction with known Results:Ouranalysishasshown16signiﬁcantandclose CD C42
 regulators and effectors, including RHOGDI, tosigniﬁcant(Pvaluesrangingfrom6.35E-14to9.90E-05) IQGA P1
 and WASP, leading to aberrant Golgi accumula- genetic associations with CFS/ME scattered over several tion, cytoskeleton rearrangement and reduced growth and different chromosomes. The most robust ﬁnding is a block migration, which likely underlie the distinctiveness of the of 4 genetic variants located on chromosome 2. trait of this syndrome. Aberrant CD C42
 function caused Conclusions: To the best of our knowledge, our study is defective NK cytotoxicity, which likely contributes to the theﬁrstofthismagnitudeinCFS/ME.Theresultsfromour HLHphenotype.TimelytherapeuticneutralizationofIL-1β discovery cohort are promising and replication studies in 2 and IFNγ was critical to the survival of one patient, who different cohorts are in progress at the time of writing this underwent successful bone marrow transplantation. abstract(independentDanishcohortwith>700samplesand Conclusions:Thepresenteddataemphasizethecrucialrole aUKBiobankcohortwith>1500samples).Grantprovided played by CD C42
 in hematopoiesis and inﬂammation. Early bytheResearchCouncilofNorwayProjectnumber:27268 recognition of the disorder and establishment of treatment R. Hajdarevic: None. B. Lie: None. M. Viken: None. followedbybonemarrowtransplantareimportanttosurvival. S. Coppola: None. M. Lam: None. O.H. Krumbach:  P07
.14.A None. G. Prencipe: None. A. Insalaco: None. C. Cifaldi: Clonal relationship and mutational landscape of diffuse None.I.Brigida:None.E.Zara:None.S.Scala:None.S. large B-cell lymphoma recurrences Martinelli: None. M. Di Rocco: None. A. Pascarella: None. M. Niceta: None. F. Pantaleoni: None. A. Ciolﬁ: M. R. Berendsen, M. van den Brand, J. Rijntjes, G. Astuti, None. F. Carisey: None. M. Akbarzadeh: None. L. C. J. Hess, K. M. Hebeda, W. B. C. Stevens, P. J. T. A. Farina: None. L. Pannone: None. H.C. Erichsen: None. Groenen, J. H. van Krieken, B. Scheijen A.C. Horne: None. Y. Bryceson: None. L. Torralba- Raga: None. K. Ramme: None. A. Finocchi: None. F. Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands Locatelli:None.C.Cancrini:None.A.Aiuti:None.M.R.304 J.delPicchia Introduction: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is progressive bone marrow failure, abnormal skin pigmenta- anaggressivedisease,witha30-40%relapserateafterﬁrst- tions, skeletal malformations and high risk of malignancy. line chemoimmunotherapy treatment. Some patients Duetoitsrarityandheterogeneous presentation,itisrather develop multiple recurrences, but the clonal relationship challenging to establish a deﬁnite registry on a national between the initial diagnosis and subsequent lymphomas is level. Therefore, this study describes the FA cases in the not routinely assessed. The molecular mechanisms under- NRC 10 year registry, focusing on family history, clinical, lyingtherapyresponseorfailurearestillpoorlyunderstood. hematological and cytogenetic ﬁndings. To support diagnostics, guide therapy choices and even- Methods: This study included 225 patients. Their age tuallyimproveoutcomeofpatientswithDLBCL,weaimto ranged from 4 months to 26 years. All patients were deﬁne the clonal relationship and mutational landscape of subjected to thorough clinical examination, pedigree DLBCL recurrences. construction, hematological and radiological investigations. Materials and Methods: In a cohort of 37 matched Cytogenetic assessment using diepoxybutane(DEB)- DLBCL diagnosis and one to three relapse biopsies, induced chromosomal breakage was done to differentiate clonality analyses were performed by next-generation Fanconi anemia from acquired aplastic anemia. sequencing(NGS)ofimmunoglobulin(IG)generearrange- Results: 131 patients (58%) showed positive chromoso- ments. The clonotypes for the different IG gene rearrange- mal breakage and were diagnosed with FA. 93% of them ments were identiﬁed by ARReST/Interrogate were of consanguineous parents and 21% showed positive bioinformatics. Mutation analysis by whole exome sequen- family history as an affected sibling. Clinical examination cing is currently being performed on a subset of the paired showed; limb anomalies (20%), abnormal skin pigmenta- diagnosis-relapse samples. tion(31%),bleedingtendency(22%)andkidneyanomalies Results:IG-NGSclonalityanalysesonmatcheddiagnosis- (10%) of the cases. Hematological investigations showed: relapse(s)samplesrevealedidenticaldominantclonotype(s)in cytopenia in one or more of blood cell types (52%), bone 33/37oftherecurrences,evenincaseswithanintervalperiod marrow failure (42%) and 34% had received blood /blood of14years.However,in4/37DLBCLpatients,atleastoneof products at least once at the time of diagnosis. Cytogenetic the recurrences was clonally unrelated. study showed mosaicism in 10% of the FA cases which is Conclusions: DLBCL recurrences are clonally unrelated signiﬁcant for treatment assessment. lymphomasin~10%ofthecases,suggestingtheoccurrence Conclusions:Thisstudyistheﬁrsttopresenttheclinical of second primary lymphoma, possibly linked to a genetic and cytogenetic characterizations of a cohort of Egyptian predispositionorimmunodeﬁciency.Ourcohortofclonally FA patients. Further large scale studies are needed to related cases will be subjected to mutational analyses to identify the prevalence of FA in the Egyptian society. deﬁne the patterns of clonal evolution and identify genes M. Farid: None. M.M. Thomas: None. G.Y. Kamah: related to therapy resistance. These studies will help to None. M.M. Eid: None. deﬁne the genetic landscape of relapsed DLBCL. M.R. Berendsen: None. M. van den Brand: None. J.  P07
.19.C Rijntjes: None. G. Astuti: None. C.J. Hess: None. K.M. Myeloperoxidasemodulatesinﬂammationingeneralized Hebeda: None. W.B.C. Stevens: None. P.J.T.A. Groe- pustular psoriasis and further rare pustular skin nen: None. J.H. van Krieken: None. B. Scheijen: None. diseases  P07
.17.A S. Haskamp Clinical and cytogenetic assessment in a cohort of Egyptian patients with Fanconi anemia: A 10 year InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityHospitalErlangen, experience Erlangen, Germany M. Farid1, M. M. Thomas2, G. Y. Kamah2, M. M. Eid1 Generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) is a severe multi- systemicinﬂammatorydiseasecharacterizedbyneutrophilic 1Human Cytogenetics Department, Human Genetics and pustulosis and triggered by pro-inﬂammatory IL-36 cyto- GenomeDivision,NationalResearchCentre,Cairo,Egypt, kines in skin. While 19-41% of patients carry bi-allelic 2Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and mutations in I L36
RN, the majority of patients do not carry Genome Division, National Research centre, Cairo, mutations in known genes. In order to identify and char- Egypt acterizenewpathwaysinvolvedinthepathogenesisofGPP we performed wholeexome sequencingin31 GPPpatients Introduction: Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal anddemonstratedeffectsofmutationsinMPOencodingthe recessive disorder. Common clinical presentations include neutrophilic enzyme myeloperoxidase (MPO) in myeloidAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 305 cells. We discovered eight MPO mutations resulting in identiﬁed an intronic variant, c.1114-8G>Ain FANCEthat MPO-deﬁciency in neutrophils and monocytes. Mutations washomozygousintheindexpatientaswellasheraffected were associated with GPP, primarily those resulting in brother, and it is predicted to generate a new acceptor complete MPO-deﬁciency (p=3.49E-10; OR=8.63). splice-site resulting in alternative-splicing and premature Dosage of mutant MPO alleles showed signiﬁcant differ- proteintruncation(p.Ile372Leufs*2).Sofar,thisvarianthas ences between 82 patients and >3,600 controls (p=2.67E- only been described in a single case also of Turkish origin 10); this effect was stronger when including I L36
RN with a similar phenotype. Besides this patient, there are mutations(p<2.20E-16)andcorrelatedwithayoungerage currently only four additional patients carrying biallelic of onset (p=0.0018). Activity of four proteases, previously mutations in FANCE. All of these patients were diagnosed implicated as activating enzymes of IL-36 precursors, cor- in the ﬁrst decade of their lives. related with MPO-deﬁciency. Formation of neutrophil Conclusions:Weexpandtheclinicalspectrumofpatients extracellular traps (NETs) was reduced following phorbol withFANCEmutationsandshowthattheabsenceofrenal, myristate acetate induction (p=0.015). Phagocytosis assays cardiac and radial ray anomalies might be the cause of late in MPO-deﬁcient mice and human suggested that altered diagnosis of FS caused by FANCE mutations. neutrophil function together with impaired clearance of B. Cavdarli: None. G. Yigit: None. Y. Li: None. V. neutrophilsbymonocytes(efferocytosis)allowedprolonged Topcu: None. B. Wollnik: None. neutrophil persistence in patients’ skin.MPO mutations contribute signiﬁcantly to GPP’s pathogenesis. Our study  P07
.25.C implicates MPO as an inﬂammatory modulator in humans Cell-free DNA in plasma—an essential immune system by regulating protease activity and NET formation, and regulator modifying efferocytosis. Our ﬁndings conﬁne using MPO inhibitors in cardiovascular diseases. MPO and affected M. Korabecna1, A. Zinkova1, I. Brynychova1, B. pathwaysrepresentattractivetargetsforinducingresolution Chylikova1, P. Prikryl1, L. Sedova1, P. Neuzil2,3, O. Seda1 of inﬂammation in neutrophil-mediated skin diseases. S. Haskamp: None. 1First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Northwestern Polytechnical University,  P07
.21.B Xi’an,China,3BrnoUniversityofTechnology,Brno,Czech Arare causeof Acute Myeloid Leukemia and a delayed Republic diagnosis of Fanconi Syndrome: Mutations in FANCE Cell-freeDNA(cfDNA)isalwayspresentinplasma,andit B. Cavdarli1, G. Yigit2, Y. Li2, V. Topcu1, B. Wollnik2 isutilizedinprenataldiagnosticsaswellasinoncologyand transplantologyfor therapyefﬁciency monitoring.Butdoes 1AnkaraBilkentCityHospital,Ankara,Turkey,2Instituteof the cfDNA have a physiological role? Here we show that Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, cfDNA presence in plasma of healthy individuals plays an Göttingen, Germany indispensable role in immune system regulation. We exposed TH P1
 cells to healthy individuals’ plasma with Introduction: Genomic instability syndromes are a group (NP)andwithout(TP)cfDNA.IncellstreatedwithNP,we of inherited disorders that include a high variety of symp- found elevated expression of genes whose products main- toms such as congenital anomalies, bone marrow failure, tain immune system homeostasis. Exposure of cells to TP and cancer susceptibility. Fanconi Syndrome(FS) is a rare triggered an innate immune response (IIR), documented syndrome belonging to this family characterized by neuro- particularly by elevated expression of pro-inﬂammatory developmental delay, radial-ray defects, microcephaly and interleukin 8. The results of mass spectrometry showed a progressivedeﬁciencyofbonemarrowproduction.Material higherabundanceofproteinsassociatedwithIIRactivation and Methods: We present a 33-year-old female who was due to the regulation of complement cascade in cells cul- monitored for Acute Myeloid Leukemia. Clinical ﬁndings tivated with TP. Our results provide evidence that the pre- of the patient included short stature, microcephaly, neuro- sence of cfDNA in plasma of healthy individuals blocks developmental delay, patchy hypopigmented dark-colored fundamental mechanisms of the inﬂammation process. The skin, signs of premature aging and chronic liver disease. expression proﬁles show that this process could play an Results: Chromosomal breakage rate was detected high important role in the regulation of tissue homeostasis. This after mitomycin-C(MMC) treatment of cells suggesting ﬁnding epitomizes one of many intriguing properties and chromosomal instability syndrome. We performed whole- features of the human immune system. Its detailed under- exome-sequencingontheDNAoftheindexpatientandher standing is of crucial interest for future medical applica- affected brother who had parental consanguinity. We tions. Financial support: grants LTACH19005 and Progres306 J.delPicchia Q25/LF1 of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport of invitrostimulation-speciﬁchumancytokineresponsesfrom theCzechRepublic,grantRVO-VFN64165oftheMinistry 463 healthy individuals. We identiﬁed strong NCF4 and of Health of the Czech Republic. P.N. would like to CAS P1
 rare variant associations with IL-6 cytokine pro- acknowledgeﬁnancialsupportfromStateAdministrationof duction induced by phytohaemagglutinin (P=7.2E−05) and Foreign Experts Affairs number W099109 and CEITEC lipopolysacharide (LPS) (P=3.0E−05). Additionally, com- Nano+ project (CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_13/0001728). mon variantsinI L36
A andI L38
were associated toboth C. M. Korabecna: None. A. Zinkova: None. I. Bryny- albicans induced IL-1β and IL-6 (I L36
A P=0.0442 and chova: None. B. Chylikova: None. P. Prikryl: None. L. 0.0037; I L38
 P=0.0092 and 0.0082), an effect that was Sedova: None. P. Neuzil: None. O. Seda: None. magniﬁed on the respective IL-30 subpathway level (IL-1β P=0.0017; IL-6 P=1.8E−04). The common variant sig-  P07
.27.B nature for the immunological response to C.albicans was Theimpactofrareandcommongeneticvariationinthe conﬁrmed by an association with the anti-inﬂammatory Interleukin-1 pathway for human cytokine responses phenotype group (IL-1β P=1.87E−03; IL-6 P=5.75E−04), and we validated this for non-coding common variants. R. C. van Deuren1,2,3, P. Arts2,4, G. Cavalli1,5,6, M. Lastly, we detected an association between rare variants in Jaeger1,3,M.Steehouwer2,M.vanderVorst2,C.Gilissen2,3, pro-inﬂammatory genes and LPS-induced IL-6 cytokine L. A. B. Joosten1,3,7, C. A. Dinarello1,6, M. M. Mhlanga8,9, (P=2.42E−04), and discovered a role for rare variants in V.Kumar1,10,M.G.Netea1,3,11,F.L.vandeVeerdonk1,3,A. anti-inﬂammatory genes on S.aureus induced IL-6 produc- Hoischen1,2,3 tion (P=6.71E−03). In conclusion, we show that both common and rare genetic variation in genes of the IL-1 1Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University pathway differentially inﬂuence in vitro cytokine responses Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of to various stimuli in healthy individuals. This study there- Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, foreprovidesinsightintopotentialmechanismsrelevantfor Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Radboud Institute of Molecular the characterization of genetic variant involvement in Life Sciences (RIMLS), Radboud University Medical variabilityofimmuneresponsesandpossiblyinﬂammatory- Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Genetics mediated diseases. and Molecular Pathology, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA R.C. van Deuren: None. P. Arts: None. G. Cavalli: Pathology and the University of South Australia, Adelaide, None. M. Jaeger: None. M. Steehouwer: None. M. van Australia, 5Unit of Immunology, Rheumatology, Allergy der Vorst: None. C. Gilissen: None. L.A.B. Joosten: andRareDiseases,IRCCSSanRaffaeleHospitalandVita- None. C.A. Dinarello: None. M.M. Mhlanga: None. V. SaluteSanRaffaeleUniversity,Milan,Italy,6Departmentof Kumar:None.M.G.Netea:None.F.L.vandeVeerdonk: Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, United None. A. Hoischen: None. States, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,  P07
.28.C Romania, 8Division of Chemical Systems & Synthetic Correcting clinical diagnosis with targeted immundeﬁ- Biology, Institute for Infectious Disease & Molecular ciencygenepanelsequencing:thecriticalroleofgenetic Medicine (IDM), Department of Integrative Biological & counselling Medical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 9Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of K. Arvai1, A. Illés1, B. Kocsis-Deák1, V. Klujber1, B. Integrative Biomedical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Tóbiás1, B. Balla1, H. Pikó1, P. Lakatos2, J. Kósa1,2 Cape Town, South Africa, 10University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 1PentacoreLab Ltd., Budapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis Genetics,Groningen,Netherlands,11DepartmentforGeno- University 1st Department of Internal Medicine, Budapest, mics & Immunoregulation, Life and Medical Sciences Hungary Institute (LIMES), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany Immunodeﬁciency results from a failure or absence of ele- Interleukin(IL)-1signalingisofmajorimportanceinhuman ments of the immune system including lymphocytes, pha- innate cytokine responses. Common genetic variants in gocytes and complement system. These underlyinggeneshavebeenlinkedtovariousinﬂammation- immunodeﬁciencies can beeitherprimary suchasBruton’s mediated diseases and pathogen induced cytokine respon- disease or secondary as the one caused by HIV infectionIn ses,buttheroleofrarevariantsremainstobeelucidated.In ourcase,a35yearsoldhealthyfemalepatientwasreferred this study, we characterize the role of rare and common to our lab, who lost two of her brothers with severe geneticvariationin48genesrelatedtotheIL-1pathway,on immunodeﬁciency. She is about to have her ﬁrst child andAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 307 wanted to be tested before the pregnancy. The suspected MaterialsandMethods:ClinicalExome,usingacustom familiar diagnosis, based only clinical symptoms, was X- panel including 6920 genes known as associated to genetic linked agammaglobulinemia which is a X-linked mono- diseases, was sequenced on Illumina NovaSeq6000® plat- genic disorder. After sequencing of the BTK gene, MLPA form. In silico analysis was performed on the basis of the were carried out, both returned with negative results. After patient’s clinical phenotype. Peripheral blood mononuclear secondgeneticcounsellingitwasrevealedbythecounsellor cells(PBMCs)wereisolatedfromthepatientandhisfamily that the suspected phenotype is not ﬁt entirely and targeted and stimulated with IFNα or IFNγ; phosphorylation of gene panel test was ordered, included 200 genes which are STAT1andTypeIandIIIFN signatures wereanalyzedby linked to immunodeﬁciencies. A pathogenic heterozygous FACS analysis and RT-PCR. deletion in the CD40LG gene (c.67dupA) was identiﬁed, Results:Weidentiﬁedthetwonovelframeshiftmutations which is a known cause of X-linked immunodeﬁciency, c.234delT and c.555_559delAAAAG, in a compound with hyper-IgM. HIGM is a rare immunodeﬁciency char- heterozygous status, in IFNAR2 gene (OMIM# 602376), acterizedbynormalorelevatedserumIgMlevelsassociated resulting respectively in p.Leu79Ter and p.Ile185Metf- with markedly decreased IgG, IgA, and IgE, resulting in a sTer12 variants. Ex vivo studies on patient’s PBMCs profound susceptibility to bacterial infections and an conﬁrmed the defect in the activation of the type I IFN increased susceptibility to opportunistic infections. Patients signaling, but not in type II IFN response. Treatment with also tend to have neutropenia, as well as a high rate of high dose of intravenous methylprednisolone allowed a gastrointestinal and central nervous system infections. progressive improvement of patient condition and of Based on estimation only 20% of patients will reach the clinical and laboratory features. third decade of life. Our results emphasize the importance Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that HLH episodes of multiple genetic counselling and highlights the difﬁcul- following administration of live-attenuated MMR vaccine ties to interpret clinical results decades ago. could suggest the presence of a defect in the type I IFN K. Arvai: None. A. Illés: None. B. Kocsis-Deák: None. response. V. Klujber: None. B. Tóbiás: None. B. Balla: None. H. C. Passarelli: None. A. Civino: None. M.N. Rossi: Pikó: None. P. Lakatos: None. J. Kósa: None. None. V. Lanari: None. G.M. Moneta: None. A. Pascarella: None. C. Bracaglia: None. R. Montinaro:  P07
.31.C None. F. De Benedetti: None. A. Novelli: None. G. Hyperinﬂammation and secondary HLH in a patient Prencipe: None. with Interferon alpha/beta receptor 2 (IFNAR2) deﬁciency  P07
.32.A Genomewideassociationstudyofcirculatinginterleukin C. Passarelli1, A. Civino2, M. N. Rossi3, V. Lanari1, G. M. 6 levels identiﬁes novel loci Moneta3, A. Pascarella3, C. Bracaglia3, R. Montinaro4, F. De Benedetti3, A. Novelli1, G. Prencipe3 T. S. Ahluwalia1, N. J. Armstrong2, S. Aslibekyan3, M. Beekman4, Y. Cheng5, E. deGeus6, G. E. Delgado7, D. 1U.O.C.LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics,IRCCSPaediatric Marek8, S.Kanoni9, I.M.Nolte10, E. Porcu11, I.Seppälä12, Hospital “Bambino Gesu”, Rome, Italy, 2Rheumatology M.Standl13,A.Teumer14,A.Thalamuthu15,S.Trompet16,E. and Paediatric Immunology, PO "Vito Fazzi", Lecce, Italy, J. Benjamin17, M. F. Feitosa18, G. Homuth19, J. Lahti20, Y. 3Division of Rheumatology, IRCCS Paediatric Hospital Liu21,N.J.Timpson17,S.Visvikis-Siest22,U.Völker19,B.T. “Bambino Gesu”, Rome, Italy, 4Division of Pediatry, PO Baune23,D.Boomsma24,I.J.Deary25,D.M.Evans17,M.A. "Santa Caterina Novella", Galatina, Italy Ferreira26, T. Gaunt17, V. Gudnason27, A. Hamsten28, S. E. Humphries29, W. Koeing30, M. Kumari31, D. A. Lawlor17, Introduction: Interferons α/β (Type I IFNs) play an M. Nauck32, J. F. Price33, T. I. A. Sørensen34, D. Stacey35, important role in defense against viral infections. Here we M. G. Stathopoulou22, T. Tanaka36, S. G. Wannamethee37, report the case of a 22-months-old Caucasian boy present- J. I. Rotter38, A. Dehghan39, E. Boerwinkle40, H. Sneider10, ing with high fever and lethargy ﬁve days after live- B. M. Psaty41, B. P. Prins10, B. Z. Alizadeh10 attenuated MMR (measles-mumps-rubella) vaccine. Laboratory parameters were suggestive for secondary 1Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Gentofte, Denmark, Hemophagocityc lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), with pro- 2Murdoch university, Perth, Australia, 3University of gressive decrease in cell blood count, hyperferritinemia, alabama at birmingham school of public health, Birming- elevation of liver enzymes and lactate dehydrogenase and ham, AL, United States, 4Leiden university medical center, hypoﬁbrinogenemia. Leiden, Netherlands, 5University of Maryland school of medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 6Vrije universiteit308 J.delPicchia amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Vth department of ucla medical center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, medicine university of heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 39Department of epidemiology, erasmus mc, Rotterdam, 8SIB swiss institute of bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzer- Netherlands, 40Human genetics center, university of texas, land, 9William harvey research institute, queen mary Houston, TX, United States, 41Cardiovascular health universityoflondon,London,UnitedKingdom,10university research unit, department of medicine, university of of groningen, university medical center groningen,, Gro- washington, Seattle, WA, United States ningen, Netherlands, 11Istituto di ricerca genetica e biomedica, consiglio nazionale delle ricerche, Cagliari, Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a multifunctional cytokine with both Italy, 12Department of clinical chemistry, tampere univer- proandanti-inﬂammatoryproperties,synthesizedbyawide sity, Tampere, Finland, 13Institute of epidemiology, helm- range of tissues and cell types. Increased levels of circu- holtz zentrum münchen - german research center for lating IL-6 in blood is associated with the pathophysiology environmental health, Neuherberg, Germany, 14Institute of complex disorders like type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular for community medicine, university medicine greifswald, and autoimmune diseases. Albeit, IL-6 levels are heritable Greifswald, Germany, 15Neuropsychiatric institute, prince with estimates up to 61%, only a few common genetic loci of wales hospital, Sydney, Australia, 16Department of associatedwithcirculatingIL-6levelshavebeenidentiﬁed. cardiology, leiden university medical center,, Leiden, We therefore conducted a two stage (discovery and repli- Netherlands, 17MRC integrative epidemiology unit, uni- cation) meta genome-wide association study (GWAS) of versityofbristol,Bristol,UnitedKingdom,18Departmentof circulating serum IL-6 concentrations comprising up to genetics, washington university school of medicine, St. 67,428 individuals of european ancestry. About2.5million Louis, MO, United States, 19Interfaculty institute for singlenucleotidepolymorphisms(SNPs)wereavailablefor genetics and functional genomics, university medicine testing after imputation to Hap Map 2 reference panel. We Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 20Turku institute for conducted an inverse variance based ﬁxed effects meta- advanced studies, university of turku, Turku, Finland, analysis. We identiﬁed three IL-6 associated, independent 21Department of epidemiology and prevention, wake forest signals on chromosomes (chr) 2q14, 6p21 and 1q21, school of medicine, winston-Salem, NC, United States, reaching genome-wide signiﬁcance (p < 5.0 × 10−8) in the 22Université de lorraine, INSERM, Nancy, France, combinedmeta-analyses.AmongtheidentiﬁedlociI L1
F10/ 23Department of psychiatry and the Florey institute of I L1
RN (chr 2q14, p = 1.8 × 10−11), and HLA-DRB1/DRB5 neuroscience and mental health the university of Mel- (chr 6p21, p =1.5 × 10−10) were novel while I L6
R (chr bourne, Melbourne, Australia, 24Department of biological 1q21, p = 1.2 × 10−122) was a known locus. Our study psychology, behaviour and movement sciences, vrije identiﬁes2novellociforcirculatingIL-6levelsuncovering universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 25Centre new immunological and inﬂammatory pathways that may for cognitive ageing and epidemiology, university of inﬂuence IL-6 pathobiology. edinburgh,Edinburgh,UnitedKingdom,26QIMRberghofer T.S. Ahluwalia: None. N.J. Armstrong: None. S. medicalresearchinstitute,Brisbane,Australia,27Facultyof Aslibekyan:None.M.Beekman:None.Y.Cheng:None. medicine, university of iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, E.deGeus:None.G.E.Delgado:None.D.Marek: None. 28Department of medicine solna, center for molecular S. Kanoni: None. I.M. Nolte: None. E. Porcu: None. I. medicine, karolinska institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 29Insti- Seppälä: None. M. Standl: None. A. Teumer: None. A. tute of cardiovascular science, university college london, Thalamuthu: None. S. Trompet: None. E.J. Benjamin: London,UnitedKingdom,30GermanHeartCentreMunich, None. M.F. Feitosa: None. G. Homuth: None. J. Lahti: TechnicalUniversity Munich,Munich,Germany, 31Depart- None. Y. Liu: None. N.J. Timpson: None. S. Visvikis- ment of epidemiology and public health, university college Siest: None. U. Völker: None. B.T. Baune: None. D. london, London, United Kingdom, 32Institute of clinical Boomsma: None. I.J. Deary: None. D.M. Evans: None. chemistry and laboratory medicine, university medicine M.A. Ferreira: None. T. Gaunt: None. V. Gudnason: greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 33Usher institute of None. A. Hamsten: None. S.E. Humphries: None. W. population health sciences and informatics, university of Koeing:None.M.Kumari:None.D.A.Lawlor:None.M. edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 34Department of Nauck: None. J.F. Price: None. T.I.A. Sørensen: None. public health, university of copenhagen, Copenhagen, D. Stacey: None. M.G. Stathopoulou: None. T. Tanaka: Denmark, 35MRC cardiovascular epidemiology unit, uni- None. S.G. Wannamethee: None. J.I. Rotter: None. A. versity of cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Dehghan:None.E.Boerwinkle:None.H.Sneider:None. 36Translational gerontology branch, national institute on B.M. Psaty: None. B.P. Prins: None. B.Z. aging, Baltimore, MD, United States, 37Institute of Alizadeh: None. epidemiology & health care, UCL, London, United King-  P07
.33.B dom, 38Departments of pediatrics and medicine, harbor-Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 309 KIR-HLA class I ligand combinations among cystic K. Varvagiannis1, D. Gerasoudis1, A. Filia1, N. Panousis2, ﬁbrosis patients E. Dermitzakis1,3,4,5, G. Bertsias6,7, D. Boumpas1,8,7,9, A. Banos1, P. Makrythanasis1,3 K.Sosnina1,D.Zastavna1,2,O.Terpyliak1,H.Makukh1,L. Bober3 1Biomedical Research Foundation Academy Of Athens, Athens,Greece,2WellcomeTrustSangerInstitute,Hinxton, 1SI “Institute of Hereditary Pathology Ukrainian National Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Department of Genetic AcademyofMedicalSciences”,Lviv,Ukraine,2Department Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical ofBiotechnologyandBioinformatics,FacultyofChemistry, School, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Institute of Genetics and Rzeszow University of Technology, Al. Powstańców Wars- GenomicsinGeneva(iG E3
),UniversityofGeneva,Geneva, zawy 6, Rzeszow, Poland, 3Lviv Regional Children’s Switzerland, 5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Geneva, Specialized Clinical Hospital, Lviv, Ukraine Switzerland,6DepartmentofRheumatology,ClinicalImmu- nology and Allergy, University of Crete, Medical School, KIRandHLAlociplayacritical roleinNKcellregulation. Heraklion, Greece, 7Institute of Molecular Biology and Different compound KIR-HLA genotypes can impart dif- Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology - ferentthresholdsofactivationtotheNKrepertoireandsuch Hellas (FORTH), Heraklion, Greece, 8Joint Academic genotypicvariation hasbeen found toconfer alteredrisk in Rheumatology Program, National and Kapodistrian Uni- a number of human diseases including infectious diseases. versityofAthens,MedicalSchool,Athens,Greece,9Medical The aim of this study was to establish and analyze the school, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus spectrum of KIR-HLA genes in people with a conﬁrmed diagnosis of CF, homozygote of F508del mutation of the Background: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a СFTR gene for understanding the genetic predisposition of chronic autoimmune disease that can affect virtually any congenital immunity key part functioning during CF. organ/system.Clinicalfeaturesinindividualpatientscanbe Results: KIR and HLA class I ligands ( C1
, C2
) genes dis- highly variable, ranging from mild arthritis, skin manifes- tribution was established in 48 CF patients and 104 prac- tations and antinuclear antibody production to life- tically healthy individuals of control group. HLAC threatening organ disease. SLE exhibits a striking female genotypes frequency did not differ in the CF group and in predominance,with ratios exceeding9:1.The disease often the control. The lower frequency of KIR2D L3
, KIR2D S1
 displaysamoreaggressiveclinicalcourseinmen,resulting and KIR2D S4
 genes (37.5%, 6.25% and 0%) was found in poorer prognosis. Several hypotheses have been put among CF patients (p < 0.05) compared to control group forward to explain this gender bias, including X- (67.3%, 20.2% and 10.5%) indicating a strong inhibitory chromosome inactivation, sex hormones and TLR/miR- effect on NK cells. Respectively, the frequency of KIRBB NAs altered expression. haplotype 8.34% in CF patients was signiﬁcantly higher Methods:ByemployingdatafrommRNAsequencingin compared to the control 0.96 % (p < 0.05). Analysis of wholebloodsamplesfrom142SLEpatientsand58healthy combined frequencies for iKIR+HLA (> = <) aKIR+HLA volunteers we explore gender/disease speciﬁc patterns of showednosigniﬁcantdifference between thestudy groups. geneexpressionandtheirputativefunctionalgenenetworks iKIR+ HLA⁄aKIR analysis showed signiﬁcantly lower fre- as suggested by DAVID analysis. quency iKIR+HLA<aKIR combinations in the CF group Results: Genes displaying a stepwise up-/down-regula- compared to controls (p < 0.05). Thus, the results indicate tion upon comparison of their expression in the order of that people with cystic ﬁbrosis have genetically predis- healthymales(HM),healthyfemales(HF),affectedfemales possition of weak activation and a strong inhibition of NK (AF) and affected males (AM) groups, were themost over- functional activity, that possibly contributing to bronco- represented among all possible combinations. These genes pulmonary infection process development. appeared to belong to pathways highly relevant to SLE K. Sosnina: None. D. Zastavna: None. O. Terpyliak: pathogenesis, including NOD-/Toll-like receptor signaling, None. H. Makukh: None. L. Bober: None. ubiquitin mediated proteolysis, nucleotide excision repair and spliceosome (p-values < 0.05).  P07
.34.C Conclusions: Although preliminary, our results suggest Transcriptome-based elucidation of gender bias in that gender bias may - at least partially - be reﬂected by systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patternsofalteredexpressionofgenes/pathwaysrelevantto SLE. Future analysis in lupus mouse model will reveal genetic impact on gender-speciﬁc gene expression. K.Varvagiannis:None.D.Gerasoudis:None.A.Filia: None. N. Panousis: None. E. Dermitzakis: None. G.310 J.delPicchia Bertsias: None. D. Boumpas: None. A. Banos: None. P. Grants: FAPESP (2018/09126-0 and 2018/24825-2), Makrythanasis: None. CNPQ (310806/2018-6), CAPES(001), FAMERP/ FUNFARME.  P07
.35.A M.F. Mattos: None. O.B. Nascimento: None. G.A.S. MicroRNAs expression may affect the lymphocyte Passos: None. J.M. Biselli: None. E.M. Goloni-Bertollo: concentration in Down syndrome None. É.C. Pavarino: None. M. F. Mattos1, O. B. Nascimento1, G. A. S. Passos2, J. M.  P07
.36.B Biselli3, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo1, É. C. Pavarino1 Surprisinggeneticresultsinacaseofneuroﬁbromatosis- like syndrome 1Unidade de Pesquisa em Genética e Biologia Molecular da Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São M. T. Bataneant1,2, M. Puiu1,2, M. Baica3, E. Boeriu1,2, P. José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 22 Faculdade de Medicina de Urtila1,2, C. Zaica3, A. Beloia4, A. Chirita-Emandi1 Ribeirão Preto da Universidade de São Paulo – USP, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 33Universidade Estadual Paulista 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Victor Babes", Júlio de Mesquita Filho- UNESP, São José do Rio Preto, Romania, Romania, 2Clinical Emergency Hospital for Brazil Children „Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania, 3Louis Turcanu Emergency Children Hospital, Timisoara, Roma- Introduction: Studies have showed the importance of nia, 4Louis Turcanu Emergency Children Hospital, Roma- microRNAs in Down syndrome(DS) pathology and nia, Romania impaired T cell proliferation may result of altered micro- RNAexpression. Therefore, in this study we investigated Introduction:Neuroﬁbromatosisisanautosomaldominant the relationship between expressionpattern of hsa-miR- disorder consisting in cutaneous, neurologic, ophthalmolo- 378a-3p, hsa-miR-668-3p and hsa-miR 942-5p and gic and tumoral signs. But always other disorders that can lymphocytesconcentration in DS. mimic neuroﬁbromatosis should be excluded. Material and Methods: Peripheral blood mononuclear Case presentation: A 10-year-old girl, from consangui- cells were obtained from 52healthy individuals with full neous gipsy parents, was admitted for anemia. Family trisomy 21 (DS) (age 1 to 20) and 53 healthy control (HC) history showed a sister who died due to cerebral tumors at (age 1 to 12). MicroRNAs expression was investigated by theageof3.Thepersonalmedicalhistorywasinsigniﬁcant. real time polymerase chainreaction using Taqman assays. Theclinicalexaminationrevealedmorethan6,cafeaulait” Statistical analysis was performed using One- spots larger than 0,5cm and multiple axillary freckling, SampleWilcoxonSignedRankTest,intheGraphPadPrism signswhichsupportthediagnosisofneuroﬁbromatosis.The 6 software. Bioinformatic analysiswas carried out to clinical exam of the parents was normal. Laboratory identify genes regulated by expressed differentially micro- explorations showed a normochromic, normocytic anemia, RNAs andthe interaction between proteins using MiRTar- normal ferritin level, liver and kidney function, folate base v9 and STRING t-v11.0 tool. deﬁciency, but also immunological abnormalities: IgA, Results: DS individuals presented over-expression of IgG2 and IgG4 deﬁciency, poor response to vaccination, hsa-miR-378a-3p (RQ 1.22, P=0.036) and down- low memory B cells and a normal number of T cell expression of hsa-miR-668-3p (RQ 0.42, P=0.018). More- subpopulations. Ophthalmologic examination was normal. over, thisindividuals presented lower lymphocytes concen- ThecerebralMRI-scanhighlightedmultiple0,5and4cmin tration than HC (mean 36.70, 48.68; respectively, diameter tumors. The cerebral biopsy revealed a diffuse P=0.007). Network analysis showed that genes regulated astrocytoma IDH mutant and she started chemotherapy. by hsa-miR-378a-3p and hsa-miR-668-3p are signiﬁcantly Takinginaccounttheconsanguinity,familyhistoryandthe involved in cell differentiation, celldivision, cell cycle negative clinical exam of the parents we performed genetic (P=<0.001) and regulation of cell growth (P=0.02). exam - WES that revealed a pathogenic homozygous Conclusions: The lower lymphocytes concentration in c.2653A>T mutation in MSH6 gene, parents being carriers DS may in part explain the highfrequency of immune for the same mutation. alterations. Genes that regulates the lymphocyte concen- Conclusions: Homozygous mutation in MSH6 gene is a trationsare probably affected by impaired microRNA very rare type of immunodeﬁciency from DNA repair expression. MicroRNA target genes areinvolved in biolo- syndromes and it must be suspected in atypical cases of gical process relevant to immune response as cell neuroﬁbromatosis associating immunological abnormal- proliferation. ities. A correct diagnosis allows genetic counseling andAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 311 monitoringforthecancerdevelopmentinothermembersof frameshift mutation in HEATR3 (case #1), and a homo- the family. zygous missense mutation in IFNW (case #1). cDNA M.T. Bataneant: None. M. Puiu: None. M. Baica: analysis for splice-site mutation c.373-2A>C in STAT1 None. E. Boeriu: None. P. Urtila: None. C. Zaica: None. demonstrated abnormalities in STAT1 pre-mRNA splicing. A. Beloia: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. Characterizationofthec.1149+14T>CvariantinGB P2
via minigene assay revealed some exon-skipping event from  P07
.37.C themutantconstruct.Additionally,SPRianalysisshoweda Novel candidate genes and sequence variants for greater afﬁnity of silencer-bound hnRNP A1 protein to susceptibility to mycobacterial infections revealed by RNAoligonucleotidesharboringc.1149+14T>Ccompared exome sequencing to the wild type oligonucleotides, providing support to the minigene assay. A.M.Varzari1,2,M.Dembic3,4,5,G.HoffmannBruun3,I.V. Conclusions: Our ﬁndings expand the spectrum of Deyneko6,W.Hofmann7,V.M.Cebotari8,E.G.Privalova9, genetic variation possibly predisposing to mycobacterial B. S. Andresen3, T. Illig2,7 infections in children. Funding: Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and Hanover Uniﬁed Biobank. 1LaboratoryofHumanGenetics,ChirilDraganiucInstitute A.M. Varzari: None. M. Dembic: None. G. Hoffmann of Phthisiopneumology, Kishinev, Moldova, Republic of, Bruun: None. I.V. Deyneko: None. W. Hofmann: None. 2Hannover Uniﬁed Biobank, Hannover Medical School, V.M. Cebotari: None. E.G. Privalova: None. B.S. Hannover, Germany, 3Department of Biochemistry and Andresen: None. T. Illig: None. MolecularBiologyandTheVillumCenterforBioanalytical Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense M,  P07
.38.A Denmark, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense An indel in the promoter region of NFKB1 confers University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 5Department of protection against infection but increases risk of allergy MathematicsandComputerScience,UniversityofSouthern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 6Group of Functional Geno- A. Y. Chong1, N. Brenner2, A. Jimenez Kaufmann3, A. mics, К.А. Timiryazev Institute of Plant Physiology, Cortes4, R. Almond5, M. Hill6, T. J. Littlejohns7, J. J. Moscow, Russian Federation, 7Department of Human Gilchrist1,8,B.P.Fairfax9,F.Hodel10,11,J.Fellay10,11,12,G. Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, McVean4, T. Waterboer2, A. Moreno Estrada3, A. V. S. 8Department of Paediatrics, Municipal Hospital of Phthi- Hill1,13, A. J. Mentzer1,4 siopneumology, Kishinev, Moldova, Republic of, 9Labora- tory of Immunology, Chiril Draganiuc Institute of 1Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Phthisiopneumology, Kishinev, Moldova, Republic of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Infections and Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidel- Introduction: Mendelian Susceptibility to Mycobacterial berg, Germany, 3Human Population Genomics Lab, Disease (MSMD) is a rare genetic disorder with impaired Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la Biodiversidad, immunity against mycobacterial infections; however only Irapuato, Mexico, 4Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre half of patients with MSMD have an identiﬁed genetic for Health Information and Discovery, University of etiology. Here, we attempt to detect causal mutations in Oxford, Oxford,United Kingdom, 5UKBiobank, Stockport, three paediatric patients with possible presentations United Kingdom, 6MRC-Population Health Research Unit, for MSMD. University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7Nufﬁeld Methods: Whole exome sequencing was performed on Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, twopatientswithseverelocalizedBCGinfection(#1and#2) Oxford, United Kingdom, 8Department of Paediatrics, and their parents, and another individual patient with University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Depart- disseminatedTB(#3).Thefunctionaleffectsoftheidentiﬁed ment of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United variants were characterized using RT-PCR analysis of Kingdom,10GlobalHealthInstitute,SchoolofLifeSciences, endogenous and minigene transcripts, and SPRi analysis. EPFL,Lausanne,Switzerland,11SwissInstituteofBioinfor- Results: Six rare heterozygous variants were detected in matics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 12Precision Medicine Unit, the established MSMD genes: I L12
B (case #1, compound Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, heterozygote), TYK2 (cases #1 and #2), I L12
RB1 and Lausanne, Switzerland, 13Jenner Institute, University of STAT1 (case #3). In addition, four disease-associated Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom variants in three presumed causative genes were identiﬁed by trio-based analysis: compound missense and intronic Introduction: Infectious agents contribute signiﬁcantly to variants in GB P2
 (case #2), a de novo heterozygous the global burden of diseases, through both acute infection312 J.delPicchia and increasing risk of diverse chronic conditions. We 4Department of Nephrology and Organ Transplantation, leveraged the rich phenotypic data in the UK Biobank to UniversityHospitalofRangueil,Toulouse,France,5Service identify genetic loci that inﬂuence response to multiple D’Hématologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Tou- infections. louse, Institut Universitaire du Cancer de Toulouse, Methods: We undertook 45 genome-wide association Toulouse, France, 6Inserm U1048 and Paul Sabatier studies of antibody responses against common pathogens, University, Institute of Cardiovascular and Metabolic in9,611participantsfromUKBiobank,identifyingNFKB1 Diseases, Toulouse, France, 7Department of Biology as a common locus. Using incidence of disease in 487,409 Hematology, Toulouse-Oncopole University Cancer Insti- UK Biobank participants, we investigated the association tute (IUCT-O), Toulouse, Germany between NFKB1 variation and 91 infection and inﬂamma- tion phenotypes. To better understand the impact of Classicalparoxysmalnocturnalhemoglobinura(PNH)isan variation on underlying immune mechanisms, we also acquired glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor deﬁ- exploredtheeffectofthesevariantsoneightbloodcelltraits ciencyinahematopoieticstemcell(HSC)duetomutations and cellular expression data. in PIGA. However, the reasons for clonal expansion in an Results: We identiﬁed an insertion-deletion variant acquired loss of function of GPI biosynthesis, is still a (rs28362491), known to affect NFKB1 promoter binding, matter of debate. Here we describe, how PNH also mani- as a likely causal variant. The insertion allele has a fested in a patient with essential thrombocythemia (ET) protective effect against infection, but increases the risk of after a copy number neutral loss-of-heterozygosity (CN- allergicdisease.Thesamevariantwasassociatedwithshifts LOH) in PIGV, another gene of theGPI-anchor deﬁciency. in haematopoietic pathways, and likely impacts cell Similar to other proliferative myeloid malignancies, the survival, antibody production and inﬂammation. Interest- clonal expansion of the HSC with ET resulted in our case ingly, this variant is relatively common in all human from a de novo mutation in MPL (p.W515L) on chromo- populations, suggesting that variation within this locus is some 1 (1p34.2). 16.7 MB upstream of the acquired MPL largely maintained through balancing selection. mutation in cis, the patient carried a heterozygous Conclusions: We ﬁnd that disruptions to the tightly pathogenic mutation in PIGV (p.R469X, 1p36.11), con- regulated immune responses and inﬂammatory processes genitally.AsomaticCN-LOHintheHSCcomprisedalmost can tipthebalance between exacerbatedimmune responses the entire p-arm of chromosome 1. Hence, the MPL and allergy, or increased risks of infection and impaired mutation p.W5151L gained dominance and deteriorated resolution of inﬂammation. This subtle yet demonstrable ET and while homozygosity of p.R469X in PIGV resulted effect across the population is likely driven by modulation in a GPI-anchor deﬁciency and manifestation of PNH. In of NFKB1 gene expression. addition to ET and PNH, the patient presented with A.Y. Chong: None. N. Brenner: None. A. Jimenez nephrotic syndrome that ceased after treatment with Kaufmann: None. A. Cortes: None. R. Almond: None. eculizumab and hydroxycarbamide. We determined the M. Hill: None. T.J. Littlejohns: None. J.J. Gilchrist: origin of kidney injury as a result of podocyte instability None. B.P. Fairfax: None. F. Hodel: None. J. Fellay: duetoanincreaseofnon-GPI linkedsolubleuPAR.Inthis None. G. McVean: None. T. Waterboer: None. A. reportweidentiﬁedPIGVasanovelgenecausingPNHand Moreno Estrada: None. A.V.S. Hill: None. A.J. provide insights into the pathomechanism of acquired GPI Mentzer: None. anchor deﬁciency and expansion of PNH cells. Further- more,wediscussthecontributionofPNHtokidneyinjury.  P07
.39.B A. Maurel-Ribes: None. A. Knaus: None. C. Garcia: CN-LOH in PIGV causes PNH, in a case of ET and None. H. Engels: None. S. Sivalingam: None. H. nephrotic syndrome Hundertmark:None.D.Ribes:None.S.Tavitian:None. B. Payrastre: None. S. Faguer: None. P. Krawitz: None. A. Maurel-Ribes1, A. Knaus2, C. Garcia1, H. Engels3, S. F. Vergez: None. Sivalingam2, H. Hundertmark3, D. Ribes4, S. Tavitian5, B. Payrastre6, S. Faguer4, P. Krawitz2, F. Vergez7  P07
.40.C Human genomics of the humoral response against 1Laboratoire d’Hématologie, Centre Hospitalier Universi- polyomaviruses tairedeToulouse,Toulouse,France,2InstituteforGenomic StatisticsandBioinformatics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof F. Hodel1,2, A. Y. Chong3, P. Scepanovic4, C. W. Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Thorball1,2,Z.M.Xu1,2,P.Marques-Vidal5,M.Begemann6, 3InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 313 H.Ehrenreich6,N.Brenner7,N.Bender7,T.Waterboer7,A. Conclusions: These results provide insights into the J.Mentzer3,8,A.V.S.Hill3,9,C.Hammer10,11,J.Fellay1,2,12 humangeneticcontrolofafamilyofveryprevalentviruses, highlighting polymorphisms that play a modulating role on 1Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, EPFL, the humoral immune response against speciﬁc human Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, polyomaviruses. Functional follow-up studies will be Lausanne, Switzerland, 3The Wellcome Centre for Human needed to uncover the biological mechanisms responsible Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, for the newly discovered associations. 4Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, F. Hodel: None. A.Y. Chong: None. P. Scepanovic: F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland, 5Service of None. C.W. Thorball: None. Z.M. Xu: None. P. Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Lausanne Marques-Vidal: None. M. Begemann: None. H. Ehren- UniversityHospitalandUniversityofLausanne,Lausanne, reich: None. N. Brenner: None. N. Bender: None. T. Switzerland, 6Clinical Neuroscience, Max Planck Institute Waterboer: None. A.J. Mentzer: None. A.V.S. Hill: of Experimental Medicine, DFG Research Center for None. C. Hammer: None. J. Fellay: None. Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the Brain, Göttingen, Germany, 7Infections and Cancer Epide-  P07
.42.B miology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Increasing the diagnostic yield in patients suspected for Germany, 8Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for primary immunodeﬁciency Health Information and Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9The Jenner Institute, Oxford, A. Niskakoski, P. Kokkonen, I. Saarinen, J. Sistonen, H. United Kingdom, 10Department of Cancer Immunology, Junnila, A. Kere, M. Andreevskaya, M. Muona, J. Genentech Inc., San Francisco, CA, United States, Djupsjöbacka, L. Koskinen, H. Duzkale, S. Myllykangas, J. 11Department of Human Genetics, Genentech Inc., San Koskenvuo, T. Alastalo Francisco, CA, United States, 12Precision Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Blueprint Genetics, Espoo, Finland Lausanne, Switzerland Background: Finding the genetic diagnosis for patients Introduction: Human polyomaviruses are widespread in with suspicion of primary immunodeﬁciency (PID) is human populations and some cause severe disease in becoming increasingly important in the management of immunocompromised individuals. There remains an primary immunodeﬁciency and estimating the risk for incomplete understanding of the potential impact of human family members. Simultaneous sequence and copy number genetic variation on inter-individual responses to variant analysis combined with customized analysis for polyomaviruses. difﬁculttosequenceregionsinspeciﬁcgenessuchasNCF1 Material and methods: To identify human genetic improvesthediagnosticyieldinpatientssuspectedforPID. determinants of the humoral immune response against Methods: A retrospective review of nearly 1700 patients polyomaviruses, we performed genome-wide association suspected for PID and referred for genetic testing at studies and meta-analyses of immunoglobulin G (IgG) BlueprintGeneticsbetween2018and2019wasperformed. responses against the major capsid protein V P1
 of Human PatientsweretestedwithBlueprintGeneticsnextgeneration polyomavirus6(HPyV6),BKvirus(BKV),JCvirus(JCV) sequencing panels related to immunology. and WU polyomavirus (WUPyV), using data from three Results: Diagnostic yield including all immunology independent studies grouping 15’660 individuals of Eur- related panels was 14.9% (253/1698). The diagnostic yield opean ancestry. washighlyvariablebetweenthedifferentpanels;diagnostic Results: We found evidence for an involvement of HLA yieldforPrimaryImmunodeﬁciencyPanelwas13.3%(138/ classIIvariationinthedeterminationofantibodyresponses 1036), whereas for Severe Combined Immunodeﬁciency to JCV (P=1.5e-78) and HPyV6 (P=3.2e-14). We also Panelitwas46.7%(7/15).ThediagnosticyieldforChronic observed associations in ABO for JCV (P=6.2e-11), and Granulomatous Disease Panel is high (10/21, 48%) FUT2forBKV,JCVandWUPyV(P=2.3e-18;P=9.7e-26; although analysis of the NCF1 gene included in this panel P=9.0e-09,respectively),involved inbloodgroupdetermi- is complicated by two highly homologous pseudogenes nation and secretor status. Lastly, we found a functional NCF1B and NCF1C. Out of the 296 reported diagnostic variant in MU C1
, previously associated with the risk of sequence variants, 234 (79%) were unique, and only 7 developing gastric cancer and Helicobacter pylori asso- diagnostic variants were reported over 3 times. Copy ciated gastritis, to be associated with IgG levels against numbervariants,includingdeletionsandduplications,were WUPyV (rs4072037, P=3.6e-33). reported for 19 patients from 17 different genes.314 J.delPicchia Conclusions:Weconstantlyincreasethediagnosticyield Kingdom, 6Division of Rheumatology and IME- forPIDsbyimprovingthesequencingtechnology,updating Fraunhofer Project Group Translational Medicine and the panels with new genes discovered related to PID, and Pharmacology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, ﬁnding diagnoses from difﬁcult to sequence regions and Frankfurt/ Main, Germany, 7Department of Internal regions with high homology. Medicine 3 - Rheumatology and Immunology, University A. Niskakoski: A. Employment (full or part-time); of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 8Department of Internal Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. P. Kokkonen: A.Employ- MedicineI,José-Carreras Centrum for Immuno-andGene ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. I. Therapy,UniversityofSaarlandMedicalSchool,Homburg/ Saarinen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Saar, Germany, 9Department of Rheumatology, Fachklinik Blueprint Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employment (full or Bad Bentheim, Bad Bentheim, Germany, 10Karolinska part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. H. Junnila: A. Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 11University Hospital of Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Umeå, Umeå, Sweden, 12University of Bath, Bath, United Genetics. A. Kere: A. Employment (full or part-time); Kingdom, 13Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry, Uni- Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Andreevskaya: A. versityofErlangen-Nürnberg,Erlangen,Germany,14NIHR Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Manchester Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Genetics. M. Muona: A. Employment (full or part-time); Central Manchester Foundation Trust and University of Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Djupsjöbacka: A. Manchester, Manchester Academy of Health Sciences, Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Manchester, United Kingdom Genetics.L. Koskinen:A.Employment (fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. H. Duzkale: A. Employ- Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA) is a chronic inﬂammatory joint ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S. disease occurring in up to 30% of patients with the most Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- common psoriatic skin manifestation, psoriasis vulgaris cant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, (PsV). PsA is considered a T-cell mediated disease with a stock options, patent or other intellectual property); complex genetic basis. To date, GWAS identiﬁed >60 lar- Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.J.Koskenvuo:A.Employ- gely overlapping susceptibility loci for PsA/ PsV including ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. RUNX3, while the respective disease-contributing mechan- Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other ism remained mostly uncertain. RUNX3 encodes a tran- intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. scriptionfactorexpressede.g.inimmunecells,includingT- Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; cells, and skin. As genotyping arrays had insufﬁcient cov- Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock erageatthislocus,weselected32taggingSNPsforfurther options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; ﬁne-mapping. Association analysis in 3,049 PsA patients Blueprint Genetics. and 6,178 controls of the Psoriatic Arthritis Genetics in Europe consortium showed signiﬁcant association to an  P07
.45.B LD-wiseisolatedintronicSNP(p=1.50E-11)andto5SNPs Common RUNX3 missense variant contributes to (5.43E-12≤p≤2.78E-07) within one intragenic LD block. psoriatic arthritis by affecting splicing and modifying Genomicannotationsfor38SNPsinhighLD(r2≥0.9)with signaling, activation and differentiation of T-cells the SNPs were inconclusive, including histone modiﬁca- tionsandDNAse-sensitivesitesinimmunecells.Haplotype U.D.Hüffmeier1,S.Löhr1,S.Uebe1,B.Popp1,2,J.Bowes3, and conditional analyses, though, pointed to disease- P. Kirchner1, E. Giardina4, E. Korendowych5, A. B. Ekici1, contribution of the common, evolutionary conserved var- P. Ho3, F. Behrens6, M. Köhm6, G. Schett7, J. Rech7, G. iant c.53T>A/p.Ile18Asn in alternative exon 1. Targeted Assmann8, A. Nimeh9, L. Padyukov10, G. Alenius11, N. J. deep-sequencing of cDNA from CD8+ T-cells unveiled McHugh12, H. Sticht13, H. Burkhardt6, A. Barton3,14, A. alternative splicing in homozygous wildtype carriers, but a Reis1 reducednumberofsplicingproductsandlackofalternative splicing in homozygous risk-allele carriers. Comparative 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, transcriptome analysis in CD8+ T-cells of homozygous Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of carriersprovidedevidencefordifferentiallyexpressedgenes LeipzigHospitalsandClinics,Leipzig, Germany,3Arthritis involvedinT-cellexhaustionsignaling,Th1/Th2activation ResearchUKCentreforGeneticsandGenomics,University and T-helper-cell differentiation. Our study indicates that of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4University the RUNX3 risk-allele in PsA reduces splicing variability of Rome Tor Vergata and Fondazione Policlinico Tor thereby contributing to altered signaling, activation and Vergata, Rome, Italy, 5Royal National Hospital for Rheu- differentiation of T-cells. matic Diseases, NHS Foundation Trust, Bath, UnitedAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 315 U.D. Hüffmeier: None. S. Löhr: None. S. Uebe: None. L.Olfe1,S.v.Hardenberg1,C.Klemann2,U.Baumann2,E. B. Popp: None. J. Bowes: None. P. Kirchner: None. E. Tolosa3, D. Lessel4, B. Auber1 Giardina: None. E. Korendowych: None. A.B. Ekici: None. P. Ho: None. F. Behrens: None. M. Köhm: None. 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical G. Schett: None. J. Rech: None. G. Assmann: None. A. School, Hanover, Germany, 2Department of Pediatric Nimeh: None. L. Padyukov: None. G. Alenius: None. N. Pneumology, Allergy and Neonatology, Hannover Medical J.McHugh:None.H.Sticht:None.H.Burkhardt:None. School, Hanover, Germany, 3Department of Immunology, A. Barton: None. A. Reis: None. UniversityMedicalCenterHamburg-Eppendorf,Hamburg, Germany,4InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityMedical  P07
.46.C Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany Functional study of peptidylarginine deiminases in collagen-induced arthritis mice BC L11
B encodes a Cys2His2 zinc ﬁnger transcription fac- tor involved in the development of nervous and immune A. Suzuki, T. Shibuya, K. Yamamoto systems. BC L11
B heterozygous loss-of-function variants have been associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. alterationsintheT-celldevelopmentandreducednumberof type 2 innate lymphoid cells (IL C2
s). Moreover, a single Previously,peptidylargininedeiminasetype4(PADI4)was patient presenting with syndromic features and severe identiﬁed as a susceptibility gene for Rheumatoid arthritis combined immunodeﬁciency (SCID) due to a pathogenic (RA) by genome-wide association studies in Japanese missense variant in BC L11
B has been reported. Here we population. PADI genes can provide peptidyl citrulline report a newborn with developmental SCID diagnosed which is a target antigen of anti-citrullinated peptide anti- through neonatal SCID screening based on T-cell receptor bodies (ACPAs) that is highly sensitive and speciﬁc anti- excision circles. The child presented with microcephaly, bodies in RA. After that, PADI2 was also identiﬁed as hirsutism, loose skin folds and dysmorphic facial features, susceptibility gene with RA. But, it is not clear how these whichincludethineyebrows,hypertelorism,shortpalpebral PADIgenesareinvolvedinthedevelopmentofrheumatoid ﬁssures, broad nasal bridge, anteverted, small nares, thin arthritis. The aim of this study was to investigate the rela- upper and lower lip vermillion and long philtrum. Immu- tionship between PADI4 gene and PADI2 gene in the nophenotyping showed absence of T-cells with remaining progression of RA. B- and NK-cells, and in strong contrast to loss-of-function To clarify the physiological function of PADI4 and BC L11
B cases a normal amount of IL C2
-cells. Whole- PADI2,weusedcollagen-inducedarthritis(CIA),knownas exome sequencing identiﬁed a likely pathogenic BC L11
B a RA model mouse. We examined that localization of missense variant c.2428A>C, p.(Asn810His), affecting one PADI4 and PADI2 protein was indicated by immunohis- of the four speciﬁcity residues of the DNA-contacting tochemistry in CIA mice. We also measured expression of alpha-helix within the fourth zinc ﬁnger domain. Bioinfor- PADIgenesandvariousinﬂammatorycytokinesinimmune matic prediction algorithms suggest this missense variant cells by real-time TaqMan assay and ELISA, respectively. binds to identical alternative genomic sequences, resulting We generated PADI4−/− and PADI2−/− mice, and in acquisition of novel DNA-binding regions, as the pre- performed experimental arthritis. We demonstrated that viouslyreportedone.Thereby,providinganexplanationfor the clinical disease score was signiﬁcantly decreased in the striking clinical similarities of the two missense cases. PADI4−/− mice and PADI2−/− mice. Our ﬁndings further suggest that only speciﬁc BC L11
B PADI4 expression was induced by CII immunization. missensevariantsresultinasevereimmunodeﬁciency.This Interestingly, PADI2 expression was compensationally case further highlights the importance of neonatal SCID induced in CD11b+ cells of PADI4-/- mice. However, in screening for early diagnosis and consequently the ther- PADI2-/-mice,conpensationalinductionofPADI4wasnot apeutic option of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. obsered. It appears that PADI4 and PADI2 enhance L. Olfe: None. S. v. Hardenberg: None. C. Klemann: collagen-initiated inﬂammatory responses. None. U. Baumann: None. E. Tolosa: None. D. Lessel: A. Suzuki: None. T. Shibuya: None. K. None. B. Auber: None. Yamamoto: None.  P07
.50.A  P07
.49.C An atypical presentation of Immunodeﬁciency Centro- Likelypathogenicvariantwithinzincﬁngerdomain4of meric Instability Facial anomalies syndrome BC L11
Binachildwithfacialanddermalabnormalities and severe combined immunodeﬁciency316 J.delPicchia C. Mehawej1, H. Khalife2, G. Dbaibo3, R. Wakim4, C. Farra1 Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS) is an autosomal recessive disorder with clinical features that include pan- 1UnitédeGénétiqueMédicale,FacultédeMédecine,Saint- creaticexocrineinsufﬁciency,hematologicdysfunction,and Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, 2Al Zahraa Hospital skeletal abnormalities, Haematological malignancies occur University Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon, 3Pediatrics in one third of patients. SDS is caused by homozygous or Department, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Leba- compound heterozygous mutations in SBDS gene. non, 4American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon We present a sibling pair with mild to moderate neutropenia, episodes of autoimmune hemolysis and Severe Combined Immunodeﬁciency Diseases (SCID) are recurrent infections of the oral cavity and respiratory genetic disorders characterized by profound impairment of airways. Prior investigations were inconclusive. Family cellular and humoral immunity. They are deﬁned by a sig- history suggested AR mode of inheritance. We performed niﬁcantdeﬁciency inTlymphocytes.Patientswith SCIDare whole-exome sequencing of siblings and parents. Whole- asymptomatic at birth but infections can lead to their early exome libraries were prepared according to the Nimblegen death unless appropriate treatment is applied. A 10 day old SeqCap EZ Exome v3 protocol and sequencing was girl,borntoconsanguineousLebaneseparentswasreferredto performed on NextSeq 500 for all of them. Furthermore, ourMedicalGeneticsUnit forgenetic evaluation,because of we performed in silico analysis of a virtual gene panel, a family history ofSCID. Lymphocytic immunophenotyping focused on congenital neutropenias. Whole-exome sequen- and serum immunoglobulin testing revealed a low absolute cing identiﬁed a compound heterozygous genotype in lymphocyte count, T cell lymphopenia with a signiﬁcant SBDS gene in both siblings. We identiﬁed a likely decreaseinnaïveTcellsandnormalcirculatingBcellscount pathogenic missense variant c.355T>C; p.(Cys119Arg) in includingmainlyimmatureBcells.SCID/atypicalSCIDwas exon 3 of SBDS gene, leading to substitution of strongly suspected in the patient. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) conserved cysteine for arginine. This variant has been was conducted and did not reveal any mutation in the SCID previouslyreportedinaFrenchfamilywithSDS(Donadieu genes.However,reanalysisofWESdatashowedthepresence et al., 2012). Furthermore, we identiﬁed a rare, previously of a homozygous missense variant, likely pathogenic, in the undescribed missense variant, c.536C>T; p.(Pro179Leu), DNMT3B gene (NM_ 006892; c.2477G>A, p.R826H). This leading to prolin - leucine substitution. In-silico analysis gene is involved in the autosomal recessive ICF1 syndrome (Align GVGD, SIFT, MutationTaster) predicts pathogenic (Immunodeﬁciency-Centromericinstability-Facialanomalies or likely pathogenic effect. Molecular-genetic analysis of syndrome). A reevaluation of the patient’s clinical presenta- parents conﬁrmed heterozygous carrier status. Compound tion and laboratory ﬁndings revealed undetectable immu- heterozygous mutations in SBDS leads to disruption of noglobulin levels and facial dysmorphism (hypertelorism, SBDS gene and clinical manifestation of Shwachman- micrognathiaandlowsetears),bothcharacteristicofICF1.T Diamond syndrome in the siblings. This study was celllymphopeniapresentingatanearlyageinourprobandis supported by Czech Ministry of Health (grant AZV 16- an unusual feature in ICF1 patients. Altogether, this case 29447A) and Masaryk University (grant MUNI/A/1395/ describes a severe presentation of ICF1 and highlights the 2019). heterogeneityofprimaryimmunodeﬁciencies.Italsostresses J. Trizuljak: None. Z. Vrzalová: None. I. Blaháková: on the importance of early management of patients born to None. L. Radová: None. Š. Pospíšilová: None. M. families with a history of SCID. Doubek: None. C. Mehawej: ; Research council of Saint-Joseph University (FM362). H. Khalife: None. G. Dbaibo: None.  P07
.52.C R. Wakim: None. C. Farra: None. Genome-to-genome analysis identiﬁes an Asian-speciﬁc variantinthegeneencodingNTCPthatleadstospeciﬁc  P07
.51.B HBV escape mutations during chronic infection Uncovering rare hematological entities: Shwachman Diamond syndrome in a pair of siblings with congenital Z. Xu1, S. Rüeger1, P. Shea2, M. Buti3, H. L. Y. Chan4, P. neutropenia and recurrent infections Marcellin5, O. Podlaha6, Z. Jiang6, V. Suri6, A. Gaggar6, M. Subramanian6, E. Gane7, D. Goldstein2, J. Fellay1,8 J. Trizuljak1,2, Z. Vrzalová1,2, I. Blaháková1,2, L. Radová2, Š. Pospíšilová1,2, M. Doubek1,2 1School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Institute for Genomic 1University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Central Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, United European Institute of Technology, Brno, Czech Republic States, 3Liver Unit, Hospital Universitario Vall d’HebronAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 317 and CIBEREHD del Instituto Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain,  P07
.53.A 4TheChineseUniversityofHongKong,HongKong,China, Relationships between smoking methylation biomarkers 5Service d’Hépatologie, Hôpital Beaujon, Clichy, France, and GPR15+ helper T cell levels in peripheral blood 6Gilead Sciences Inc, Foster City, CA, United States, 7Auckland Clinical Studies, Auckland, New Zealand, 8Pre- W. Philibert1, S. R. H. Beach2, A. M. Andersen1 cision Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland 1University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 2Uni- versity of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States Introduction: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a major cause of chronic liver diseases, including liver cirrhosis and hepa- Introduction: Smoking causes epigenetic changes asso- tocellular carcinoma. In chronic infections, the interplay ciated with inﬂammatory diseases and elevated mortality. between human and viral genetics contributes to HBV Of particular interest are changes in the level of T cells evolutionary changes. Here, we use a genome-to-genome expressing G-protein-coupled receptor 15 (GPR15), a che- (G2G) approach to identify sites of host-pathogen genomic mokine receptor linked with inﬂammatory bowel disease, interactions. multiple sclerosis and psoriasis. Accordingly, a better Materials and Methods: We obtained paired human understanding of the mechanisms by which smoking exome and HBV genome data from 424 chronically inﬂuences variation in GPR15+ T cell subpopulations is of infected individuals of Asian ancestry from three Phase potential interest. 3 studies evaluating tenofovir-based regimens. For each Materials and Methods: Flow cytometry and digital + + + variableHBVaminoacid,agenome-wideassociationstudy PCR assays were usedto measurethe GPR15 CD3 CD4 was conducted using generalized linear mixed models and helper T (T ) populations in peripheral blood from n = 62 h controlling for human and viral population structures. primarily African American young adults (aged 27-35 Results: We identiﬁed strong associations (p=1.9E-12) years) with a high rate of tobacco and cannabis use. between an Asian-speciﬁc missense SNP in the SL C10
A1 Results: Tobacco and cannabis smoking predicted + gene encoding the HBV receptor NTCP (rs2296651) and GPR15 (T ) cell levels using linear regression models. h amino acids in HBV large surface (pre S1
 domain) and Methylation of two candidate CpGs, cg19859270, located polymerase proteins. The minor allele is present in 7% of in GPR15, and cg05575921, located in Aryl Hydrocarbon East Asians (1KG Project) and was previously reported to Receptor Repressor (AHRR), were both signiﬁcant pre- + associatewithdecreasedriskofcirrhosisandhepatocellular dictorsofGPR15 T celllevels,mediatingtherelationship h carcinoma in chronic HBV. We also identiﬁed signiﬁcant between smoking and increases in GPR15+ T cells. As h associations (p=8.7E-13) between variants of HLA-A hypothesized, the interaction between cg05575921 and protein and amino acids in HBV polymerase and core cg19859270 was signiﬁcant, indicating that low proteins. cg05575921 methylation was more strongly associated + Conclusions: Our joint analysis of human and viral with GPR15 T cell levels for those with lower h genomes shows that variation in NTCP exerts selective cg19859270 methylation. pressureonHBVduringchronicinfection,andconﬁrmsthe Conclusions: Smoking leads changes in two CpGs, impact of HLA class I variation on HBV epitopes. These cg05575921 and cg19859270, that mediate 38.5% of the results demonstrate the power of the G2G approach to relationship between tobacco and cannabis smoking and identify host restriction factors and identify speciﬁc HBV increased GPR15+ T levels in this sample. The impact of h aminoacidslikelytobeinvolvedintheinteractionbetween cg19859270 in amplifying the association between + HBV and its cellular receptor. cg05575921andincreasedGPR15 T levelsisofpotential h Z.Xu:None.S.Rüeger:None.P.Shea:None.M.Buti: theoretical interest because it may reﬂect a permissive None. H.L.Y. Chan: None. P. Marcellin: None. O. interaction between different parts of the immune system. Podlaha: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; W. Philibert: None. S.R.H. Beach: None. A.M. GileadSciencesInc.Z.Jiang:A.Employment(fullorpart- Andersen: None. time); Signiﬁcant; Gilead Sciences Inc. V. Suri: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gilead  P07
.54.B Sciences Inc. A. Gaggar: A. Employment (full or part- Somatic mutations in HLA loci in patients with myeloid time); Signiﬁcant; Gilead Sciences Inc. M. Subramanian: leukemia A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gilead Sciences Inc. E. Gane: None. D. Goldstein: None. J. Fellay: None.318 J.delPicchia J. Neupauerová1, P. Crivello2, Š. Půbalová1, C. Šálek1, S. assessmentandminimalresidualdisease(MRD)monitoring Nazarová1, M. Vraná1 duringthetreatmentofhematologicalmalignancies.Despite their estimated lineage, B-cell leukemias manifest a 1Institute of hematology and blood transfusion, Prague 2, remarkably high incidence of TCR gene rearrangements. Czech Republic,2Instituteofexperimental cellular therapy, According to indirect estimation, TCR alpha (TRA) inci- University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany denceinB-cellprecursorALLcouldreach46%.Currently, rearrangements of all BCR and 3/4 TCR loci are used for Introduction: In the HLA department of Institute of this purpose with the exception of TRA due to the large hematology and blood transfusion in Prague we deal with number of multiplex primers needed to amplify all TRA HLAtypingofhematooncologicalpatientsandtheirrelated/ segments. unrelateddonors.Thebestdonorcompatibilityisimportant MaterialsandMethods:Wedevelopedtheﬁrsttargeted for succesful hematopoetic stem cell transplantation sequencing-based method for identiﬁcation of TRA clonal (HSCT). rearrangements. gDNA was extracted from a bone marrow Materials and methods: Using NGS (Omixon, Hun- of children with B-ALL. Ampliﬁcation of TRA rearrange- gary), we investigated more than 2000 patients and their ments was performed in multiplex PCR and subsequently HSC donors. New alleles found were conﬁrmed by Sanger sequenced on Illumina platform. sequencing (Inno-train, Germany; CareDx, USA). Results: TRA rearrangements were detected in 5/ Results:. From our recent studies (2017 - 2019), in our 45 samples and associated with myeloid CD33+ co- cohort of patients, 15 new alleles were detected. Two of expression (p-value 0.0147, two-tailed Mann-Whitney U- them were a somatic mutation in patients suffering from test). Clonal rates of TRA varied from 31% to 98% and acutemyeloidleukemia(AML);onewasintheHLA-Band corresponded to main leukemic clones. All found TRA the other in the HLA-C locus. In both cases, the somatic rearrangementswerenonfunctional.TRAclonesaroseafter mutation represents a single nucleotide polymorphism. leukemic transformation and have high clonal rate, which Conclusions: Our ﬁndings are in agreement with the indicates these clones are most viable of all other leukemic known genome instability in AML. In the HLA region, clones. somatic mutations are not so common, however, they Conclusions: The innovative study provides pathbreak- shouldbegivenmoreattentionsincetheycanaffectdisease inganalysesofTRAoccurrenceinB-ALLattheDNAlevel progression and may impact also on HSCT. Our future andsuggeststhatparticularTRArearrangementsmaybeof studies will focus on the precise identiﬁcation of the new clinical relevance in childhood B-ALL by adding a allelles and their characterization in HLA typing. signiﬁcant marker to MRD detection panel based on Supported by the Ministry of Health, Czech Republic- TCR/BCR rearrangements analysis. conceptual development of research organization The study is supported by PFBR grants 20-015-00462, (CZ00023736, UHKT). 18-29-09132. J.Neupauerová:None.P.Crivello:None.Š.Půbalová: A. Miroshnichenkova: None. A. Komkov: None. A. None. C. Šálek: None. S. Nazarová: None. M. Popov:None.E.Volchkov:None.M.Maschan:None.A. Vraná: None. Karachunskiy: None. Y. Olshanskaya: None. I. Mamedov: None.  P07
.55.C High-throughput sequencing of T-cell receptor alpha  P07
.56.A chainclonalrearrangementsinB-lineageacutelympho- Gene mutation spectrum of thalassemia patients from blastic leukemia Azerbaijan A. Miroshnichenkova1, A. Komkov1,2, A. Popov1, E. A. AGHAYEV1, V. Huseynov2, E. Aliyev2, A. Najaﬂi2, K. Volchkov1, M. Maschan1, A. Karachunskiy1, Y. Jafarova2, A. Mammadova2, R. Bayramli2, Z. Uyguner3 Olshanskaya1, I. Mamedov2 1National Hematology and Transfusiology Center, Depart- 1Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric ment of Genetic Diagnosis, Baku, Azerbaijan, 2National Hematology,OncologyandImmunology, Moscow,Russian Hematology and Transfusiology Center, Baku, Azerbaijan, Federation, 2Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioor- 3Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical ganic chemistry, Moscow, Russian Federation Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey Introduction: Rearrangements of T- and B-cell receptor Introduction: Thalassemias are deﬁned by the absence or (TCR and BCR) genes are useful markers for clonality decrease of globin chain(s), which may lead imbalances ofAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 319 globin chains, ineffective erythropoiesis, hemolysis, and thus required to assess the causal association between RSV eventually to a variable degree of anemia. With the esti- and asthma. To determine whether there are genetic variants mated carrier frequency of β-thalassemia is 4%-8.6% in involved with susceptibility or resistance to infection, we country, the importance of premarital genetic testing, performed the ﬁrst GWAS on non-severe RSV infection. informed family counseling and preventive medical treat- Methods:WeperformedGWASanalysesofhealthyterm ment cannot be overstated. Screening for traits by hemo- infants in a population-based birth cohort (INSPIRE) globinelectrophoresisandbiochemicalanalysishasbecome speciﬁcally designed to determine the effect of infant aroutineapplicationtestpriortotheissuanceofamarriage RSV infection on later child health. We compared infants license throughout Azerbaijan. who were and were not infected with RSV in the ﬁrst year Methods: We aimed to evaluate prevalent mutations of life as determined by biweekly surveillance for RSV spectrum, the effect and their co-inheritance and/or role of infection and serology at age 1 year. polymorphisms (BC L11
A, HB S1
L-MYB and Xmn1 SNP) Results:Among1959enrolled,54%ofinfantswereRSV on disease phenotype by using reverse dot-blot hybridiza- infected and 46% were uninfected at age 1. There were tion using customized strips, sequencing analysis of the signiﬁcant differences in environmental factors associated complete genes and MLPA. with RSV infection, including daycare (p=0.001), siblings Results:WereporthereasummaryﬁndingofHBBgene (p=0.002) and black race (p=0.002). GWAS analyses of a analysis for 265 patients and HBA1-HBA2 genes analysis subset of 663 participants with available genotyping data, for 28 patients, along with their family members totaling adjusted for birth month, sex, race, daycare and siblings 570 individuals. β; thalassemia-66 were found to have revealed no signiﬁcant associations. homozygous,76possessedcompoundheterozygousand80 Conclusions: We found no genome wide associations possessed heterozygous mutations. Overall, a total of 416 with risk of infant RSV infection; environmental factors alleles were found to have 34 mutations. The ﬁrst 20 were signiﬁcantly associated with infection risk. These frequented mutations covered 87% of the entirety of all ﬁndings supportusing RSV infection as a means of natural mutations. The summary range is as following: randomization free from genetic confounding to study the c.25_26delAA(p.Lys9Valfs) 27.9%; c.93-21G>A(IV S1
 effects of RSV infection on long-term outcomes. +110G>A) 11.3%; c.315+1G>A(IV S2
+1G>A) 8.9%. Grants:NIH-U19AI095227,NIH-U L1
RR024975,SNSF α; thalassemia-Genotyping of 45 alleles revealed 9 IZSEZ0_191968 mutations,the3.7kbdeletionisthemostfrequentmutation D. Lawless: None. C. Rosas-Salazar: None. T. (35.6%), followed by 20.5 kb deletion (24.4%) and α2 Gebretsadik: None. K. Turi: None. B. Snyder: None. P. polyA2(HBA2:c.*92A > G, 13.3%). Wu: None. J. Fellay: None. T. Hartert: None. Conclusions: The results may help inform decisions in the design and implementation of prevention strategies and  P07
.60.B diagnostic approaches. The HLA and ABO genetic background impact on A. Aghayev: None. V. Huseynov: None. E. Aliyev: SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 severity None. A. Najaﬂi: None. K. Jafarova: None. A. Mamma- dova: None. R. Bayramli: None. Z. Uyguner: None. T. Vaisitti1, A. Amoroso2, P. Magistroni3, F. Vespasiano4, F. Puoti4, S. Alizzi3, P. Grossi5, S. Trapani4, L.  P07
.59.A Lombardini4, P. Pezzotti6, M. Cardillo4 Genome-wide association study of susceptibility to respiratory syncytial virus infection during infancy 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin,Italy,2DepartmentofMedicalSciences,Universityof D. Lawless1, C. Rosas-Salazar2, T. Gebretsadik2, K. Turi2, TurinandImmunogeneticsandTransplantBiologyService, B. Snyder2, P. Wu2, J. Fellay1, T. Hartert2 Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy, 3Immunogenetics and Transplant Biology 1Global Health Institute, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Vander- Service, Città della Salute e della Scienza University bilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, United Hospital,Turin,Italy,4NationalTransplantCenter,Istituto States Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 5Department of Medicine & Surgery University of Insubria – ASST-Sette Laghi, Introduction: Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) Varese, Italy, 6Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Mathema- infection is associated with asthma development. However, tical models, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy this association is confounded by shared heritability, and genetic studies have focused exclusively on severe infection. At the beginning of 2020, the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak has Longitudinal, population-based studies of RSV infection are been deﬁned by the WHO asa global health emergency.A320 J.delPicchia peculiarfeatureofthisinfectionistheextremevariabilityin Introduction: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodeve- clinical presentation, ranging from very mild sub-clinical lopmental disorder characterised by moderate to severe ﬂu-like symptoms to acute respiratory distress syndrome developmental delay, absent or near absent speech, gait with high mortality. This heterogenous presentation poses ataxia, microcephaly and seizures. Deﬁcient expression or the question whether individual variability of immune functionofthematernallyinheritedUB E3
Aalleleresultsin response to the virus can be inﬂuenced by genetic factors. AS. Pathogenic UB E3
A sequence variants (predominantly Speciﬁcally, it is unknown whether HLA and AB0 can loss-of-function) account for ~11% of Angelman explain the different prevalence in population of SARS- syndrome cases. CoV-2 infection and its clinical evolution. To address this A maternally inherited c.1900G>C (p.(Val634Leu)) point, a retrospective analysis was performed on an Italian variant of uncertain signiﬁcance was identiﬁed in a seven- cohort composed by subjects who received organ trans- year-old male with clinical features consistent with Angel- plantation and candidates in a waiting list in a 2002-March man syndrome (although no seizures noted). This variant 2020timeframe.Atotalof56,304caseswerestudiedwith affects the ﬁrst nucleotide of UB E3
A exon 7 (transcript theaimofcomparingHLAandAB0frequenciesaccording NM_130838.2) and in silico splicing tools predict weaken- tothepresence(COVID+)orabsence(COVID−)ofSARS- ing of the canonical 3’-splice site. CoV-2infection.TheprevalenceofCOVIDwas0.112%in Methods:RT-PCRandSangersequencingofgel-puriﬁed the Italian population and 0.462% in waitlisted and trans- amplicons was performed on mRNA isolated from the planted patients. HLA-B*51 and HLA-DRB1*08 were proband and maternal peripheral blood mononuclear cells + − more frequent in COVID compared to COVID , while (PBMCs). To detect aberrantly spliced transcripts targeted HLA-DRB1*07 showed a protective effect. In transplant bynonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), PBMCs were recipients, HLA-DRB1*08 was an indicator of mortality cultured in the presence of cycloheximide (CHX) to (1.9% in living vs 15.2% in the deceased, OR=9.4 95%CI inhibit NMD. [1.9-47.3]; P=.006). Moreover, blood group A was more Results: The UB E3
A:c.1900G>C variant causes aberrant frequent in COVID+ (45.5%) than in COVID− (39.0%). splicing and use of a cryptic 3’splice site (r.1899_1900ins Overall, this study shows for the ﬁrst time that some HLA [1900-38_1900-1]) resulting in a frameshift: p.(Val634- antigens inﬂuence SARS-CoV-2 infection and its clinical Phefs*19). Cycloheximide inhibition of transcripts demon- evolution and conﬁrms that blood group A subjects are at strated an increase in the relative abundance of abnormally greater risk of infection. spliced transcripts, suggesting targeting by NMD. The T. Vaisitti: None. A. Amoroso: None. P. Magistroni: c.1900G>C variant was re-classiﬁed as a pathogenic. None. F. Vespasiano: None. F. Puoti: None. S. Alizzi: Conclusions: The maternally inherited UB E3
A: None. P. Grossi: None. S. Trapani: None. L. Lombar- c.1900G>C variant induces abnormal splicing of the dini: None. P. Pezzotti: None. M. Cardillo: None. predominant UB E3
A isoforms expressed in blood and brain, introducing a frameshift consistent with the patho-  P08
 Intellectual Disability genesisofAngelmansyndrome.Therefore,UB E3
Asplicing outcomes observed in mRNA isolated from blood can  P08
.003.C inform the molecular consequences of cryptic splice Angelman syndrome: a novel UB E3
A splice variant variantsfordiagnosisandgeneticcounsellingofAngelman syndrome. M. G. Williams1,2, B. Hanna3, M. Freckmann4, S. M.G. Williams: None. B. Hanna: None. M. Freck- Bommireddipalli5, A. Bournazos5, S. Cooper5, J. mann: None. S. Bommireddipalli: None. A. Bournazos: Harraway6, P. Dawson1, H. Heussler1,2,7 None.S.Cooper:None.J. Harraway:None.P. Dawson: None. H. Heussler: None. 1Mater Research Institute – The University of Queensland, Woolloongabba, QLD, Australia, 2Faculty of Medicine,  P08
.004.A University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, Australia, 3Clin- De novo loss of function mutations in ANK2 cause a ical Genetics, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW, neurodevelopmental disorder with autism and early Australia, 4Clinical Genetics, Royal North Shore Hospital, onset epilepsy St Leonards, NSW, Australia, 5Kids Neuroscience Centre, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, M. W. A. Teunissen1, E. Lewerissa2, C. Ockeloen3, D. Australia, 6Mater Pathology, South Brisbane, QLD, Koolen3, M. R. F. Reijnders4, R. Pfundt4, S. Seiffert5, M. Australia,7ChildDevelopment,TheQueenslandChildren’s Primiano6, E. Brilstra7, J. L. Howe8, S. Scherer9, R. J. Hospital, South Brisbane, QLD, AustraliaAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 321 Vermeulen1, R. P. W. Rouhl1,10, H. Brunner1,3, N. Nadif heterozygous heterozygous LoF mutations in ANK2 affect Kasri3,11, M. H. Willemsen3 neuronal function. M.W.A. Teunissen: None. E. Lewerissa: None. C. 1MaastrichtUniversityMedicalCentre,Maastricht,Nether- Ockeloen: None. D. Koolen: None. M.R.F. Reijnders: lands, 2Cognitive Neuroscience, RadboudUMC, Nijmegen, None. R. Pfundt: None. S. Seiffert: None. M. Primiano: Netherlands, 3RadboudUMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, None. E. Brilstra: None. J.L. Howe: None. S. Scherer: 4Maastricht University Medical Centre, The Netherlands, None. R.J. Vermeulen: None. R.P.W. Rouhl: None. H. Maastricht,Netherlands,5HertieInstituteforClinicalBrain Brunner: None. N. Nadif Kasri: None. M.H. Research, Tuebingen, Germany, 6Morgan Stanley Chil- Willemsen: None. dren’s Hospital of New York-Pretbytarian, New York, NY, United States, 7Universitair Medisch Centrum Utrecht,  P08
.005.B Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Centre for Applied Genomics, The Biallelic variants in ANKRD12 cause intellectual dis- Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 9The ability, developmental delay, aphasia, hypotonia and Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 10Aca- hearing loss demic Center for Epileptology Kempenhaeghe/MUMC, Maastricht, Netherlands, 11Donders Institute for Brain, M.Ansar1,2,S.A.Paracha3,E.Wohler4,M.T.Sarwar3,E. Cognition, and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands Ranza1,5,6, F. A. Santoni1,7, J. Ahmed3, H. Goel8, D. A. Scott9, S. E. Antonarakis1,5,10 Aim:MutationsinAnkyrin2(ANK2),previouslyknownto cause cardiac arrhythmia, may also cause neurodevelop- 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, mental disorders and epilepsy. We will provide insight in University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Clinical the spectrum of neurodevelopmental phenotypes associated Research Center, Institute of Molecular and Clinical with ANK2 and explore the effects of ANK2 mutations on Ophthalmology Basel (IOB), Basel, Switzerland, 3IInstitute neuronal function. of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University, Methods: We describe clinical and molecular data of Peshawar, Pakistan, 4McKusick-Nathans Institute of seven individuals with de novo loss-of-function (LoF) Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, mutations in ANK2. These patients were collected through MD, United States, 5Service of Genetic Medicine, Uni- our database, international contacts and contacting authors versity Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 6Medi- of previous reports. Furthermore, we generated a hetero- genome,TheSwissInstituteofGenomicMedicine,Geneva, zygous loss-of-function of ANK2 using CRISPR/Cas9 in Switzerland, 7Department of Endocrinology Diabetes and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hIPSCs). HiPSCs Metabolism, University Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, were differentiated towards excitatory neurons to study Switzerland, 8Medicine and Public Health, University of neuronalfunction.Wemeasuredaxoninitialsegment(AIS) Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia, plasticity, which plays an important role in regulating 9Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, and homeostatic plasticity in response to increased neuronal Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics excitability. We stimulated ANK2-CRISPR neurons with Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, KCl to induce chronic depolarization. We immunostained 10iG E3
 Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, neuronsforAnkG,ascaffoldingproteinthatactsasmarker Geneva, Switzerland for AIS. Results: All patients had intellectual disability or The Ankyrin repeat domain-containing protein 12 is enco- developmentaldelay.Sixpatientshadaformalorsuspected ded by the ANKRD12 gene. The function of this protein, diagnosis of autism, four patients had early onset epilepsy. and its role in human health is unclear. However, is highly Two patients had concurrent cardiac abnormalities. All expressed in the cerebellum and cerebellar hemisphere patients with neurodevelopmental disorders have LoF regions of brain (gtexportal.org). It is hypothesized that mutations, in contrast almost all reported patients with ANKRD12 plays a role in inhibiting the ligand dependent cardiac problem had missense mutations. Functionally, transactivation by recruiting histone deacetylases (HDACs) heterozygous loss of ANK2 causes a more diffuse AnkG to the p160 coactivators/nuclear receptor complex. HDACs staining and showed impaired AIS plasticity upon KCl are involved in the regulation of gene expression. Patho- treatment. genic variants in another member of the Ankyrin repeat Conclusions:WeshowthatheterozygousdenovoANK2 domain-containing protein, ANKRD11, cause the KBG LoF mutations cause a novel neurodevelopmental disorder syndrome whose phenotypes include intellectual disability, with early onset epilepsy. Furthermore, we showed that developmental delay and seizures in some patients. Here, we report six affected individuals from three unrelated322 J.delPicchia familiesthatcarry homozygousorcompoundheterozygous Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, variants in ANKRD12. Four of these individuals are from a 11Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of consanguineous Pakistani family, and have a homozygous Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 12Pediatric Neurology and non-synonymous variant c.3425A>C,p.(Lys1142Thr) in Muscular Diseases Unit, IRCCS "G. Gaslini" Institute, ANKRD12 (NM_015208.4). The other two are from the Genova, Italy, 13Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilita- USA and carry compound heterozygous variants in tion,Ophthalmology,Genetics,MaternalandChildHealth, ANKRD12; c.4511C>T,p.(Ser1504Leu)/c.3375_3377del in University of Genoa, Genova, Italy, 14Department of one,andc.5251C>G,p.(Leu1751Val)/deletionofexon1of Neuromuscular Diseases, Queen Square Institute of the transcript NM_001204056.1 in the other. Phenotypes Neurology, University College of London, London, United noted in these individuals include intellectual disability, Kingdom, 15McLaughlin Centre, University of Toronto, aphasia,delayedmotormilestones,hypotonia,mildhearing Toronto, ON, Canada, 16Genetics & Genome Biology loss, and seizures (in one patient). Functional experiments Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, in drosophila are in progress and will be presented in the Canada meeting. Further investigations need to be done to under- stand the disease mechanism. However, the phenotypic CAPRIN1geneishighlyexpressedinbrainanditsproduct, similarityofthepatientsandtheexpressiondatafromGTEx Caprin-1 protein, is involved in the transport of mRNAs in indicate that pathogenic ANKRD12 variants may cause a neuronsanditlocalizesatneuronalRNAgranules,whereis recessive disease characterized by intellectual disability, able to directly interact with the Fragile X Mental Retar- developmental delay, hypotonia and mild hearing loss. dation protein. Genome-wide studies have suggested M. Ansar: None. S.A. Paracha: None. E. Wohler: CAPRIN1 as a new autism spectrum disorders (ASD) can- None. M.T. Sarwar: None. E. Ranza: None. F.A. didate gene. Interestingly, Caprin-1+/- animal models show Santoni: None. J. Ahmed: None. H. Goel: None. D.A. defectsinthedevelopmentofdendritesanddendriticspines Scott: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. and are characterized by a reduction in social interactions andlowerresponsetonovelty. Despite aclear involvement  P08
.007.A of Caprin-1 in neurodevelopment, the gene is still not Loss-of-function variants in CAPRIN1 in patients associated with a human disease. Here we report the affected by autism spectrum disorder, language delay description of seven affected individuals with de novo and andintellectualdisabilitywithvariableexpressivity and threecaseswithinheritedloss-of-function(LoF)variantsin incomplete penetrance CAPRIN1.Ourcasesshowabroadspectrumofphenotypes, that ranges from ASD to language delay, intellectual dis- L. Pavinato1, J. L. Howe2, D. Carli3, E. Agolini4, D. A. ability, attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder and epileptic Coviello5, I. M. B. H. Van de Laar6, P. Y. B. Au7, E. Di seizures. Other traits, such as abnormal facial features and Gregorio8, E. Giorgio1, E. Pozzi1, M. Ferrero1, S. skeletal anomalies are observed in subgroup of cases. Cardaropoli3, A. Delle Vedove9,10,11, V. Salpietro12,13,14, F. CAPRIN1 is predicted to be an haploinsufﬁcient gene by Zara12, A. Novelli4, B. Wirth9, G. B. Ferrero3, S. W. computational pLI score (GnomAD). Taking advantage of Scherer15,16,2, A. Brusco1 theavailabilityofpatients-derivedcells, wedemonstrateda half-dose of CAPRIN1 mRNA levels, caused by nonsense 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, mediated decay of the transcripts with LoF variants, that is Turin, Italy, 2The Centre for Applied Genomics, The followed by a parallel protein level half-dose. Our data lay HospitalforSickChildren,Toronto,ON,Canada,3Depart- the bases for further characterization of the involvement of ment of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of Turin, CAPRIN1 in neurodevelopmental disorders, suggesting the Turin, Italy, 4Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino haploinsufﬁciency of this gene as causative of a form of Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 5Laboratory of ASD with a possible incomplete penetrance and variable Human Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Gen- expressivity. ova, Italy, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, L. Pavinato: None. J.L. Howe: None. D. Carli: None. University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Nether- E. Agolini: None. D.A. Coviello: None. I.M.B.H. Van de lands,7DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,AlbertaChildren’s Laar: None. P.Y.B. Au: None. E. Di Gregorio: None. E. Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, Cal- Giorgio: None. E. Pozzi: None. M. Ferrero: None. S. gary, AB, Canada, 8Medical Genetics Unit, Città della Cardaropoli:None.A.DelleVedove:None.V.Salpietro: Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy, None. F. Zara: None. A. Novelli: None. B. Wirth: None. 9Institute of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular G.B. Ferrero: None. S.W. Scherer: None. A. Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 10Institute for Brusco: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 323  P08
.008.B placental development but how TLK2 mutated protein TLK2-associated intellectual disability: expanding the affectscentralnervoussystemdevelopmentremainslargely disease phenotype and characterizing missense variants unclear. Using spatial proteomics (BioID), we have inves- at the molecular level tigated the proximity interaction landscape of TLK2 and analysed the effects of missense mutations on TLK2 inter- L. Pavinato1, M. Villamor-Paya2, M. Sanchiz-Calvo2, C. actions, localization and activity. These results demon- Andreoli3, S. Martinelli4, E. Giorgio1, D. Carli5, V. strated that TLK2 activity is strongly impaired by the p. Antona6, K. Ranguin7, C. Colson7, S. De Rubeis8, B. (Asp529Gly) mutation and identiﬁed new links between Alessandro4, T. Pippucci9, P. Dimartino10, M. TLK2 and other proteins implicated in neurological dis- Scaramuzzino1, V. Rizzo1, A. Ciolﬁ11, C. Radio11, J. orders. Moreover, single cell gel electrophoresis demon- Buxbaum8, G. B. Ferrero5, T. Marco11, T. H. Stracker2, A. stratedamorerelaxedstateofchromatininlymphoblastoid Brusco1 cells harbouring the p.(Asp529Gly) variant compared to control cells. In conclusion, our study has identiﬁed novel 1DepartmentofMedicalSciences,Turin,Italy,2Institutefor TLK2-patient pathogenic variants and provided new Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona insights into the role of TLK2 in intellectual disability. Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, L. Pavinato: None. M. Villamor-Paya: None. M. 3DepartmentofEnvironmentandHealth,IstitutoSuperiore Sanchiz-Calvo: None. C. Andreoli: None. S. Martinelli: di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 4Department of Oncology and None. E. Giorgio: None. D. Carli: None. V. Antona: Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, None.K.Ranguin:None.C.Colson:None.S.DeRubeis: Italy, 5Department of Pediatrics and Public Health and None. B. Alessandro: None. T. Pippucci: None. P. Pediatric Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, Dimartino: None. M. Scaramuzzino: None. V. Rizzo: 6Department ofSciencesforHealth PromotionandMother None. A. Ciolﬁ: None. C. Radio: None. J. Buxbaum: andChildCare"G.D’Alessandro",UniversityofPalermo, None. G.B. Ferrero: None. T. Marco: None. T.H. Palermo, Italy, 7Centre de référence Maladies rares et Stracker: None. A. Brusco: None. Anomalies du développement, Service de génétique, Caen, France, 8Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of  P08
.009.C Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, Exposure of heterozygous Tsc2 KO mice to chronic 9Medical Genetics Unit, Polyclinic Sant’Orsola-Malpighi social defeat stress leads to improvement in speciﬁc University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 10Department of behavioural domains Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 11Genetics and Rare Diseases Research A. Arlt1, M. Wendelmuth1, K. Rolski2, R. Schneider2, S. Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Schweiger1,3 Italy 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre The Tousled-Like Kinase 2 (TLK2) gene was recently Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Center of Molecular Biosciences associated with “Mental Retardation Autosomal Dominant (CMBI), Institute of Biochemistry, University of Innsbruck, 57” (MIM:618050), a neurodevelopmental disorder char- Innsbruck, Austria, 3Leibniz Institute for Resilience acterizedbyahighlyvariablephenotype,includingmild-to- Research (LIR), Mainz, Germany moderate intellectual disability, behavioural abnormalities, facial dysmorphisms, microcephaly, epilepsy and skeletal Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by anomalies. By whole-exome sequencing, we identiﬁed a impairment of communication and social interaction, as novel patient with a de novo likely pathogenic variant well as by high levels of repetitive behaviours. Due to (c.1586A>G;p.(Asp529Gly))andafamilialcasewiththree atypical information processing within the brain, indivi- siblings who inherited a nonsense change from an affected duals with Autism highly rely on predictable procedures, mother (c.1357G>T; p.(Glu453*)). Moreover, we report a e.g. daily routines. Changes of these procedures increases de novo 39-kb deletion encompassing TLK2 gene. Clinical stress in the individuals. To investigate stress effects on phenotype included intellectual disability, facial dys- autistic phenotype development, we used a Tsc2 hetero- morphisms, microcephaly and anomalies of the hands as zygous KO mouse model. Heterozygous mutations in the prevalent features, in accordance with previously reported TS C1
 or TS C2
 genes, which both negatively regulated the cases.TLK2 is involved in many fundamental processes, mTOR kinase cause tuberous sclerosis, which is frequently including DNA replication, cell cycle checkpoint recovery associatedwithmentalretardation,autismandepilepsy.We and chromatin remodelling, through its regulation of the assessed sociability, anxiety, cognition and sensorimotor ASF1 histone chaperone. TLK2 is essential in mice for gating, and found signiﬁcant deﬁcits in Tsc2 heterozygous324 J.delPicchia KOanimals.Inasecondstepweasked,howchronicsocial Conclusions: We suggest germline mosaicism as the defeatstressaffectsthebehaviorofthesemice.Thechronic most probable explanation for occurrence of the same social defeat stress (CSD) procedure used had been shown deletion inthese twosiblings.To ourknowledge this isthe to effectively induce a depression-like phenotype in wild- ﬁrst report of germline mosaicism for AUT S2
 syndrome. type animals. Interestingly, in Tsc2 heterozygous KO mice This report additionally provides further evidence of exposure to CSD stress lead to an improvement in some intrafamilial phenotypic variability and adds clinical behavioural domains including repetitive behavior, senso- information to the phenotypic spectrum of patients with motoric gating and working memory suggesting an inverse AUT S2
 exon 6 deletions. stress reaction in these animals. Proteomic analysis of L. Gieldon: None. A. Jauch: None. K. Hinderhofer: synaptosomal fractions of the prefrontal cortex in stressed None. K. Obeid: None. U. Haug: None. U. Moog: None. and non-stressed animals revealed a signiﬁcant overlap of pathways affected in Tsc2 animals and stressed wildtype  P08
.011.B and Tsc2 KO animals. This data suggests that the mTOR Disruption of the STK24 and KLF13 genes in a female kinase is involved in the response following chronic social patient with a de novo balanced chromosomal translo- defeat stress and surprisingly point towards a potentially cation t(13;15) and a severe neurological phenotype beneﬁcial effect of manageable stress in autistic children. A. Arlt: None. M. Wendelmuth: None. K. Rolski: M. Kucharczyk1, V. Murcia Pieńkowski2, K. None. R. Schneider: None. S. Schweiger: None. Wojciechowska3,M.Lejman4,A.Pollak2,M.Rydzanicz2,M. Młynek1, K. Pachota1, A. Madej-Pilarczyk1, A.  P08
.010.A Cieślikowska1, D. Wicher1, M. Białecka1, A. Marczak1, D. Germ cell mosaicism for AUT S2
 exon 6 deletion Sielska-Rotblum1, P. Berko1, A. Gutkowska1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, R. Płoski2 L. Gieldon1, A. Jauch1, K. Hinderhofer1, K. Obeid1, U. Haug2, U. Moog1 1Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw, Poland, 2Warsaw Medical 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Heidel- University, Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw, berg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Center for Child Neurology Poland, 3University Children’s Hospital, Division of and Social Pediatrics Maulbronn, Maulbronn, Germany Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantology, Lublin, Poland, 4Medical University of Lublin, Department Introduction: Genomic rearrangements causing hap- of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantology, loinsufﬁciency of AUT S2
 have been associated with neu- Lublin, Poland rodevelopmental disorders and dysmorphic features. Over 50 patients have been described, mostly carrying de novo Background: Mapping the breakpoints in de novo single exon deletions, including eight patients with exon 6 balanced chromosomal translocations (BCTs) in symp- deletions. Small in-frame 5’ deletions have been associated tomatic individuals provides a unique opportunity to with a mild phenotype and parental inheritance. identify in an unbiased way the likely causative genetic Clinical Report and Methods: We report on two defect and thus ﬁnd novel human disease candidate siblings, a girl and a boy aged 11 and 13 years, in whom genes. The aim was to ﬁne-map breakpoints of de we identiﬁed the same pathogenic 85 kb deletion on novo BCT in a female patient with the global develop- 7q11.22encompassingexon6ofAUT S2
bySNP-arrayand mental delay. At the age of 13 years she was referred to subsequent conﬁrmation with MLPA and FISH. Both genetic counseling because of severe intellectual dis- children had typical symptoms of AUT S2
-syndrome such ability, macrocephaly and the lack of the speech. The as intellectual impairment and behavioral problems, but autistic features and outbursts of aggression were also with markedly different expression. As in most children observed. with exon 6 deletions, there were no feeding difﬁculties, Methods and results: Conventional G-banding karyo- which are otherwise common in AUT S2
-syndrome. We typingrevealedadenovobalancedchromosomaltransloca- subsequently performed targeted testing of both parents. tion 46,XX,t(13;15)(q32;q13). Microarray-based Results:MLPAandFISHexcludedthedeletioninblood comparative genomic hybridization did not detect any samples of both parents. Conventional karyotyping did not imbalance. Shallow genome-wide mate pair sequencing show any structural rearrangements. Additional FISH (SGMPS) was applied to identify the exact structure of the analysis marking the ﬂanking regions of the deletion breakpoints in the translocation. The breakpoint on showed normal arrangement of the signals on chromosome chromosome 13 disrupted the STK24 gene, while the 7 in both parents. Parenthood was molecularly conﬁrmed. breakpoint onchromosome 15was located inKLF13 gene.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 325 Discussion: The BCT identiﬁed in the presented girl shown to be paternally inherited. The same compound- disrupted genes with so far unknown (STK24) or poorly heterozygous situation was conﬁrmed in material from one delineated impact on the phenotype (KLF13; only one oftheothertwodeceasedchildren.Furthermore,themildly previous report on mutation in this gene in the context of affected son was found to be heterozygous for the paternal neurodevelopmentaldisorders).ThefunctionofSTK24and CACNA1A variant, thus conﬁrming his initial clinical KLF13geneswillbediscussedbasedonavailableliterature diagnosis of episodic ataxia type 2. data. Their role as good candidates for disease loci will be In conclusion, we report two different variants in suggested. CACNA1A segregating in either heterozygous or Conclusions:SGMPSinsymptomaticcarriersofBCTsis compound-heterozygous states in a single family with apowerfulapproachtodelineatenovelhumangene-disease variableneurologicalphenotypes.Toourknowledge,thisis associations. This study was supported by the NCN Grant only the second observation of a severe, fatal epileptic No. UMO-2016/21/B/NZ5/02541. encephalopathy associated with bi-allelic variants in M. Kucharczyk: None. V. Murcia Pieńkowski: None. CACNA1A. This case demonstrates the necessity of K. Wojciechowska: None. M. Lejman: None. A. Pollak: additional analyses to clarify unusual phenotypes even if a None. M. Rydzanicz: None. M. Młynek: None. K. pathogenic variant has already been identiﬁed. Pachota: None. A. Madej-Pilarczyk: None. A. Cieśli- C.Kraus:None.D.Mammadova:None.T.Leis:None. kowska: None. D. Wicher: None. M. Białecka: None. A. A. Ekici: None. C. Thiel: None. A. Reis: None. R. Marczak: None. D. Sielska-Rotblum: None. P. Berko: Trollmann: None. None. A.Gutkowska: None. K. Chrzanowska:None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. R. Płoski: None.  P08
.015.C Next generation candidates - Case-Level Evaluation of  P08
.013.A Candidate Genes for Neurodevelopmental Disorders Unexpected phenotypic variability in a family with epilepsy explained by independent segregation of C. Klöckner, R. A. Jamra, K. Platzer biparental CACNA1A loss-of-function variants Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical C. Kraus1, D. Mammadova2, T. Leis2, A. Ekici1, C. Thiel1, Center, Leipzig, Germany A. Reis1, R. Trollmann2 Recent work on discovery of genes to cause neurodeve- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander Uni- lopmentaldisorders(NDD)hasindicatedthatprobablyover versität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Depart- 1000 monogenetic causes, including those with reduced ment of Pediatrics, Neuropediatrics, Friedrich-Alexander penetrance, remain to be discovered. To fulﬁl the aspira- Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany tions of personalized medicine and power downstream research, a validation and extensive description of every CACNA1A encodes a transmembrane subunit of a voltage- candidate gene turned morbid gene is inevitable. This gated calcium channel. Autosomal dominant mutations are requires case-level evaluations to provide detailed pheno- causative for familial hemiplegic migraine, episodic ataxia typic information and functional validation on every gene type 2, spinocerebellar ataxia type 6, and neurodevelop- thatisusuallybeyondthescopeoflargemeta-analysessuch mental disorders. as DDD. We now report on a family with ﬁve members affected If single exome sequencing of the index individual does with variable CACNA1A-associated neurological pheno- not identify a genetic cause for NDD, we follow this up types. The mother was diagnosed with episodic ataxia type with parental exome sequencing on a research basis to 2 due to the heterozygous mutation p.(Ala868Profs*24). A identify novel candidate genes. In a subset of 120 similarly affected son was tested negative for this variant. individuals consisting of 60 individuals with NDD + Three further children presented with severe muscular epilepsy and 60 individuals with NDD, we identiﬁed more hypotension,refractoryepilepticseizures,opticatrophyand than150candidategenesusingourin-housescoringsystem dysphagia, fatal in all within the ﬁrst years. One of them of 0-15 points considering variant and gene attributes, was positively tested for the known maternal CACNA1A literatureresearchandinheritance.Aprerequisiteforallour variant. However, as this was not sufﬁcient to explain the candidate genes is a minimal expression in brain tissue very severe phenotype, we performed exome sequencing. derived from the GTEx database. Recurrent pathways with Surprisingly, we identiﬁed a second heterozygous variant multiple candidate genes identiﬁed in our cohort include p.(His1826Thrfs*30) in the CACNA1A gene, which was axon guidance, mTOR signaling, Ras signaling and326 J.delPicchia regulationoftranscription.Asofnow,wecontributedseven facial features with sloping forehead, ﬂat philtrum, and patients to promising efforts validating novel NDD genes. anteverted nares. At the time of the conference, we will present comprehen- Discussion:ESisrapidlychangingthediagnosticprocess sive data on our full cohort of candidate genes and and the ‘genotype-ﬁrst’ approach is rapidly becoming the progression on ongoing validation efforts. methodofchoice.InthecontextofES,reverse-phenotyping C. Klöckner: None. R.A. Jamra: None. K. (i.e., reﬁnement of clinical presentations in light of the Platzer: None. identiﬁed genetic variants) is important for gene variant interpretation. The small case series of individuals with  P08
.016.A biallelic CENPF variants herein presented offers evidence Core clinical features of CENPFrelated disorder of clinical variability of Stromme disease. Microcephaly, DD/ID and dysmorphic features are consistent even in the M.Gensini1,G.Cappuccio1,2,S.Douzgou3,E.Bijlsma4,T. absence of intestinal atresia or malformation of the anterior Koopmann4, L. Hendon5, B. Isidor6,7, B. Cogné8,9, M. chamber of the eye. Pinelli1,2, A. Torella2,10, V. Nigro2,10, N. Brunetti-Pierri1,2 M. Gensini: None. G. Cappuccio: None. S. Douzgou: None. E. Bijlsma: None. T. Koopmann: None. L. 1FedericoIIUniversity,Naples,Italy, 2TelethonInstituteof Hendon: None. B. Isidor: None. B. Cogné: None. M. GeneticsandMedicine,Pozzuoli,Naples,Italy,3Divisionof Pinelli: None. A. Torella: None. V. Nigro: None. N. Evolution & Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Brunetti-Pierri: None. Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK;  P08
.017.B Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Further evidence to link CHD family-chromatin remo- Hospital, Manchester University NHS Found, Manchester, deler genes and neurodevelopment: de novo variants in United Kingdom, 4DepartmentofClinicalGenetics, Leiden CHD5areassociatedwithintellectualdisability,epilepsy University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 5Depart- and autism ment of Pediatrics, University of Mississippi Medical Center,, Jackson, MS, United States, 6CHU de Nantes, D. Lehalle1, T. Mizuguchi2, C. Nava1, N. Matsumoto3, H. Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes 44093 Cedex 1,, Cope4, S. de Man5, J. Friedman6, P. Joset7,8, M. Kato9, I. Nantes, France, 7INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, l’institut Muffels10, K. Nakamura11, R. E. Person12, F. Petit13, A. du thorax,, Nantes, France, 8CHU de Nantes, Service de Rauch7, V. Shashi14, T. Smol15, K. Steindl7, E. Torti12, I. Génétique Médicale, Nantes 44093 Cedex 1, Nantes, Van de Laar16, S. Fuchs17, C. Depienne1,18, C. Mignot1 France, 9INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, l’institut du thorax, Nantes, France, 10Department of Precision Medi- 1Service de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, cine, University of Campania ‘Luigi Vanvitelli’, Naples, France, 2Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City Italy University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku,, Yokohama, Japan, 3Department of Human Introduction: Exome sequencing (ES) allows both expan- Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of sion of the phenotype of known disorders and discovery of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan, novel disease-causing genes. Biallelic loss-of-function 4Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, (LOF) variants in CENPF gene are responsible for Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, United Stromme disease, a condition presenting with intestinal States,5DepartmentofPediatrics,AmphiaHospital,Breda, atresia, anterior ocular chamber anomalies, and Netherlands, 6Rady Children’s Institute for Genomic microcephaly. Medicine, San Diego, CA, United States, 7Institute of Cases: Through an international collaboration, 5 indivi- Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzer- duals (2 females and 3 males) carrying novel CENPF land, 8radiz - "Rare Disease Initiative Zurich, Clinical biallelicvariants(1missenseand4LOF)wereidentiﬁedby ResearchPriorityProgramforRareDiseasesUniversityof ES. Four individuals were lacking the distinctive clinical Zurich,", Zurich, Switzerland, 9Department of Pediatrics, abnormalities of Strommedisease, such asintestinal atresia Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, oranteriorchambermalformationoftheeye.Allindividuals 10Department of Metabolic Diseases, University Medical had microcephaly (average-3.2 SDS, ranging from -2 SDS Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 11Department of to-5.1SDS)anddevelopmentaldelay/intellectualdisability Pediatrics, Yamagata University Faculty of Medicine, (DD/ID). Genitourinary malformations (3/5), short stature Yamagata, Japan, 12GeneDx, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, (2/5), and epilepsy (2/5) were also observed. The ﬁve United States, 13CHU Lille, Clinique de Génétique, Lille, individuals shared a recognizable pattern of dysmorphic France, 14Program in Genetics and Genomics, DukeAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 327 UniversitySchoolofMedicine,Durham,NC,UnitedStates,  P08
.018.C 15EA7364, RADEME, Université de Lille, Lille, France, CLTC mutations are also associated with familial forms 16DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusMC,University of intellectual disability Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 17Department ofMetabolic Diseases, University Medical C. Engel1, A. Garde1,2, B. Chalot2,3, S. Moutton1,2, C. Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 18Institute of Human Philippe1,4, F. Tran Mau-Them1,4, N. Philip5, F. Riccardi5, Genetics, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg- A. Verloes6, M.Nizon7,B. Cogne7,S. Kury7,C. Thauvin1,2, Essen, Essen, Germany P. Callier1,3, L. Faivre1,2, A. Bruel1,4, A. Sorlin1,2 Introduction: Located in the critical region for 1p36 1Inserm UMR 1231 GAD, Université de Bourgogne microdeletion syndrome, CHD5 encodes a member of the Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 2Centre de Génétique et chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein (CHD) Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et family of proteins, which play a role in regulating gene SyndromesMalformatifsdel’InterrégionEst,FHUTRANS- transcription via modiﬁcations of histone marks and chro- LAD, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon Bourgogne, matin remodeling. To date, six of the nine members of the Dijon, France,3Laboratoire de GénétiqueChromosomique CHD family (CHD1, CHD2, CHD3, CHD4, CHD7 and et Moléculaire, Plateau technique de biologie, Centre CHD8) have been associated with dominant neurodeve- Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, lopmental disorders. Either CHD3, CHD4 or CHD5 form 4Unité Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique des mala- the core of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation dies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, (NuRD) complex, required for neural development. Dijon, France, 5Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Material and methods: We assembled 10 unrelated Marseille, Marseille, France, 6Service de génétique méd- individuals with a de novo CHD5 variant and a neurode- icale, AP-HP Robert-Debré, Paris, France, 7Service de velopmental phenotype in different centers through Gene- génétique médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France Matcher. All patients were diagnosed through exome sequencing performed in a diagnostic setting. MissenseandnonsensevariantsinCLTCareresponsiblefor Results: The patients (seven males and three females) a form of intellectual disability (ID) with variable non- wereaged3-18yearsold.Theypresentedwithmoderateto speciﬁc morphological features of autosomal dominant severeintellectualdisability(ID)(8/10),speechimpairment transmission (OMIM #617854). Since 2016, 32 patients (7/10), epilepsy (7/10) - including suppression bursts with mild to severe ID have been reported in the literature encephalopathy (1/10), West syndrome (3/10), generalized [A S1
], all carrying de novo variations. We report here new tonic-clonic seizures (2/10) and atypical absences (1/10) -, patients carrying a pathogenic CLTC variant, including autisticfeatures(6/10),and/orhypotonia(4/10).BrainMRI inherited mutations, suggesting the existence of familial showed non-speciﬁc white matter changes in two patients forms.ByacollaborationthroughttheFrenchAnDDi-Rares and focal cortical dysplasia in one. Of the ten de novo reference centers network, we collected 10 patients (4 girls CHD5 variants, nine were missense and one was a splice and 6 boys), from 8 families, with CLTC pathogenic var- sitevariant.SevenwereabsentfromthegnomADdatabase, iants(diagnosedbysoloexomesequencingorarray-CGH). while three were present at a low frequency. They presented with mild to moderate ID, variably asso- Conclusions:Ourﬁndingssuggestthat,inlinewithother ciated withepilepsy, stereotypies, developmentaldelay and CHD-related disorders, heterozygous CHD5 variants are autism spectrum disorders. For ﬁve patients, from three associated with a variable neurodevelopmental disorder families, the variation was inherited from a parent initially including ID, epilepsy and autism as the main features. considered asymptomatic, including one with a somatic D.Lehalle:None.T.Mizuguchi:None.C.Nava:None. mosaicism (52%). After being questioned again about their N. Matsumoto: None. H. Cope: None. S. de Man: None. personalhistory,itturnedoutthattheseparentshadinitially J. Friedman: None. P. Joset: None. M. Kato: None. I. presented with learning difﬁculties or behavioural disorder Muffels: None. K. Nakamura: None. R.E. Person: A. and a favorable evolution. The identiﬁcation of pathogenic Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx Inc.. CLTC variations inherited from paucisymptomatic parents F. Petit: None. A. Rauch: None. V. Shashi: None. T. allows us to envisage that this gene’s phenotype is not Smol: None. K. Steindl: None. E. Torti: A. Employment limited to the initially described forms, exclusively caused (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx Inc.. I. Van de by de novo variations. Familial forms appear to be less Laar: None. S. Fuchs: None. C. Depienne: None. C. severe and permit to expand the phenotypic spectrum Mignot: None. associated with CLTC mutations. This work also illustrates howdifﬁcultitistointerpretinheritedvariations,andthatit328 J.delPicchia is sometimes necessary to reconsider the initial clinical N.VanderAa:None.D.Koolen:None.K.Neas:None. hypothesis with a more precise familial history. T. Brunet: None. A. Schoonjans: None. M. Bruger: C. Engel: None. A. Garde: None. B. Chalot: None. S. None. H. Goel: None. B. de Vries: None. B. Ceulemans: Moutton: None. C.Philippe: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. F. Kooy: None. None. N. Philip: None. F. Riccardi: None. A. Verloes: None. M. Nizon: None. B. Cogne: None. S. Kury: None.  P08
.020.B C. Thauvin: None. P. Callier: None. L. Faivre: None. A. Whole Genome Sequence Analysis of Individuals with Bruel: None. A. Sorlin: None. Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) and CdLS-like Disorders With No Genetic Diagnosis from Targeted  P08
.019.A Sequencing CMIP is candidate gene for a neurodevelopmental disorder K. A. Williamson1, M. Ansari2, M. R. Halachev3, A. M. Meynert4, J. Campos Parada4, D. A. Parry4, D. R. N. Van der Aa1, D. Koolen2, K. Neas3, T. Brunet4, A. FitzPatrick1 Schoonjans1, M. Bruger5, H. Goel6, B. de Vries2, B. Ceulemans1, F. Kooy1 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh; Simons 1University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, 2Radboud Initiative for the Developing Brain, Simons Foundation Universiteit, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Genetic Health Ser- Autism Research Initiative (SFARI), Centre for Discovery vice NZ, Wellington South, New Zealand, 4Institute of Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Human Genetics, Technical University Munich, Munchen, United Kingdom, 2South East Scotland Genetics Service, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Technical Uni- NHS Lothian, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3MRC Human versity Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Hunter Genetics, Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Newcastle, Australia Medicine, University of Edinburgh; South East Scotland Genetics Service, NHS Lothian, Edinburgh, United King- In 2012 we reported on a 16q23.2 de novo deletion in a dom,4MRCHumanGeneticsUnit,InstituteofGeneticsand patientwithautismspectrumdisorder,developmentaldelay Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, andintractable epilepsy.TheregioncontainedCMIPasthe United Kingdom only candidate gene for the clinical presentation of the patient. More recently we have gathered an additional 6 Typical Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a severe, deletion cases with CMIP as the only commonly deleted highly-characteristic multisystem neurodevelopmental dis- gene.Threeofthosewerereportedasdenovo,intwocases order almost exclusively caused by heterozygous loss-of- the deletion was inherited and in one case parental testing function de novo mutations (DNM) in the gene encoding wasnotperformed.Oneofthetwoinheritedcaseswasfrom the cohesin loader, NIPBL. Atypical CdLS shows locus an affected parent. Two more de novo deletions were heterogeneity and can be caused by monoallelic DNM in reported by others in the literature. In an additional patient genesencodingcomponentsofthecohesinsystemandother we diagnosed a de novo stop mutation in CMIP. Common chromatin associated proteins. The MRC HGU cohort of clinical features of the patients include: developmental CdLSindividuals(HGUCdLS)hasbeenextensivelyscreened delay and intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder by arrayCGH, Sanger-, targeted gene panel-, and exome and epilepsy. Other neurological symptoms are coordina- sequencing, identifying pathogenic variants in the known tion disorders and behavioural problems. CMIP encodes a cohesin-related genes (NIPBL, SM C1
A, SM C3
, RAD21, protein that is part of the scaffold that links the plasma HDA C8
) and in core SFARI genes (SETD5, ANKRD11, membrane to the cytoskeleton. Cytoskeletal remodelling is KMT2A). We have now performed whole genome essential in neuronal migration and synaptic formation. sequencing (WGS) of DNA from 107 “mutation-negative” Association studies found an association between CMIP CdLSindividualsfrom105families,analysedas42nuclear and speciﬁc language impairment (SLI1). According to trios, 2quads (affectedsibs andparents),and 63singletons gnomAD, the gene is intolerant to genetic LoF variation (197 individuals WGS in total). We have identiﬁed intra- (pLi=1). Thus, we report in total 9 CMIP containing genic likely causative variants in E P300
 (2), MED13L (1), deletions,themajoritydenovoorinheritedformanaffected EHMT1 (2), and ARID1B (1), together with previously parentandonedenovostopmutation.Incombinationwith unidentiﬁed mutations in NIPBL (9), ANKRD11 (6), thepredictedfunctionofthegeneourdatastronglysuggest KMT2A, and SETD5. We have also identiﬁed plausibly that haploinsufﬁciency of CMIP is causative of a novel causativeDNMinthe5’UTR(2)anddeepintronicregions neurodevelopmental disorder. of NIPBL together with both balanced and unbalancedAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 329 structuralvariants (SV) atthis andother loci.In total WGS Munich, Germany, 18Institute for Neurogenomics, Helm- hasidentiﬁedalikelypathogenicvariantin30%ofaffected holtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 19Depart- individuals providing a higher than expected diagnostic ment of Fundamental Oncology, Lausanne University, uplift from knownloci. Thisalso providesuswith acohort Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Epalinges, Switzer- of genuinely undiagnosed individuals for new gene land discovery. K.A. Williamson: None. M. Ansari: None. M.R. ThePAF1complex(PAF1C),consistingofseveralsubunits Halachev: None. A.M. Meynert: None. J. Campos including PAF1, CTR9, CD C73
, RTF1 and LEO1, plays a Parada: None. D.A. Parry: None. D.R. crucial role in transcription regulation by binding of CTR9 FitzPatrick: None. to RNA polymerase II. It is involved in transcription- coupled histone modiﬁcation, by promoting H3K4 and  P08
.021.C H3K36 methylation. Moreover, CTR9 also modulates the CTR9 heterozygous variants result in a neurodevelop- cellular trafﬁcking of the dopamine transporter. Through mental disorder by disruption of the PAF1 complex GeneMatcher, molecular and clinical data of 11 probands were collected. In all probands, whole exome sequencing M. E. C. Meuwissen1,2, E. Ranza3, A. Verstraeten2, J. identiﬁed CTR9 missense variants, encompassing 10 de Iwaszkiewicz4, A. Afenjar5, M. Amaral6, D. Ballhausen7, S. novo and 1 inherited from an affected father. Recurrent Barnett8,M.Barth9,J.Bassetti10,P.Blackburn8,X.Blanc3, patient ﬁndings were intellectual disability, ranging from K. Casas11, T. Courtin12, D. Doummar13, F. Guerry3, B. borderline to severe (10/11), speech delay (8/11), autism Keren12,J.Pappas14,R.Rabin14,M.Shinawi15,A.T.Vulto- spectrum disorder (5/11) associated with regression and VanSilfhout16,M.Wagner17,18,A.Ziegler9,V.Zoete19,S.E. aggressivebehaviorduringlatechildhood(3/11),hypotonia Antonarakis3, B. Loeys1,2 (6/11), joint hyperlaxity (5/11), fatigability (4/11), coordi- nation problems (3/11) and mild dysmorphism. EM and 1Center of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital, crystal structure modelling of the activated human tran- Edegem/ Antwerp, Belgium, 2Center of Medical Genetics, scription complex Pol II-DSIF-PAF-SPT6 and the PAF1/ University of Antwerp, Edegem/ Antwerp, Belgium, 3Med- CTR9 complex predict a likely disruptive effect on local igenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine, Geneva, CTR9 structure and/or protein interaction of the different Switzerland,4MolecularModelingGroup,SwissInstituteof missensevariants.Inyeast,theroleofthePAF1CinH3K4 Bioinformatics, Quartier Sorge - Bâtiment Amphipôle, andH3K36methylationisexertedbyregulatingtheactivity Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Sorbonne Université, Centre de of Set1 and Set2. Interestingly, pathogenic variants on the Référence Malformations et maladies congénitales du human orthologues SETD1A, SETD1B and SETD2 are cervelet et déﬁciences intellectuelles de causes rares, known causes of neurodevelopmental deﬁcits. In skin départementdegénétiqueetembryologiemédicale,Hôpital ﬁbroblastsfromfouroftheCTR9mutantpatients,aneffect Trousseau,AP-HP,Paris, France, 6Hudson AlphaInstitute on H3K4 and H3K36 methylation is currently under for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, United States, 7Unité investigation. In conclusion, we describe a novel dominant pédiatrique des maladies métaboliques, Service de Pédia- neurodevelopmental disorder caused by (mainly) de novo trie, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 8Department of variants in CTR9, likely affecting PAF1C function. Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Roche- M.E.C. Meuwissen: None. E. Ranza: None. A. ster, MN, United States, 9Biochemistry and Genetics Verstraeten: None. J. Iwaszkiewicz: None. A. Afenjar: Department, University Hospital of Angers, Angers, None. M. Amaral: None. D. Ballhausen: None. S. France, 10Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Barnett: None. M. Barth: None. J. Bassetti: None. P. Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, United Blackburn: None. X. Blanc: None. K. Casas: None. T. States, 11Sanford Broadway Clinic, Fargo, ND, United Courtin:None.D.Doummar:None.F.Guerry:None.B. States, 12Sorbonne Université, Dept. of Genetics, AP-HP, Keren: None. J. Pappas: None. R. Rabin: None. M. La Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 13Sorbonne Shinawi: None. A.T. Vulto-Van Silfhout: None. M. Université, Neuropédiatrie, AP-HP, Hôpital d’enfants Wagner: None. A. Ziegler: None. V. Zoete: None. S.E. Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 14NYU Langone Med- Antonarakis: None. B. Loeys: None. ical Center, New York, NY, United States, 15Dept. of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine,  P08
.022.A Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, Expanding the clinical and molecular spectrum of the United States, 16Department of Human Genetics, Radboud novelCYFI P2
-relatedneurodevelopmentaldisorderand University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 17Insti- functional proof of aberrant WRC-mediated actin tute of Human Genetics, Technical University München, dynamics330 J.delPicchia A. Begemann1, H. Sticht2, K. McWalter3, A. Vitobello4, L. Wellington, New Zealand, 24Department of Pediatrics, Faivre4, B. Alhaddad5, S. Banka6, J. Becker7, T. Bierhals8, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, K. Brown9, A. Bruel4, T. Brunet5, M. Carneiro10, K. 25UMR1141 INSERM, Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Cremer7, R. Day11, A. Denommé-Pichon4, D. A. Dyment12, Paris Cité, Paris, France, 26Département Génétique H. Engels7, R. Fisher13, M. Glassford13, E. S. Goh14, M. Médicale, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France Hajianpour15, L. R. M. Haertel16,N. Hauer17, M. Hempel8, T. Herget8, C. Kraus17, G. Le Guyader18, G. Lesca19, F. T. We and others have recently described de novo missense Mau-Them4,J.H.McDermott6,P.Meyer20,K.Õunap21,B. variants in CYFI P2
 as a novel cause of severe intellectual Popp17,22,T.Reimand21,K.M.Riedhammer5,M.Russo1,L. disabilitywithseizuresandmuscularhypotoniainatotalof Sadleir23,E.Schuler24,G.Siegel1,S.Syrbe24,A.T.Vander 18patients,withArginineatproteinposition87recurrently Ven8, A. Verloes25, M. Willems26, C. Zweier17, K. Steindl1, substitutedinthemajority.CYFI P2
playsanimportantrole M. Zweier1, A. Rauch1 intheregulationofactinpolymerizationasamemberofthe WAVE regulatory complex (WRC) and in transcription 1University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Genetics, regulation via the interaction with the fragile X mental Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland, 2Institute of Biochemistry, retardation protein. We evidenced that the pathogenic Emil-Fischer Center, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität CYFI P2
 variants spatially cluster and are predicted to Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 3GeneDx, weaken the interaction of CYFI P2
 with WASF1 or Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 4INSERM UMR 1231 NCKA P1
 of the WRC-complex. We now have identiﬁed Equipe GAD, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, further 18 patients harboring two previously described, one 5Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, novel recurrent and 10 novel unique pathogenic missense Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Man- variants, as well as the ﬁrst three loss-of-function variants. chester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Genotype-phenotype correlation indicates a profound Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Health phenotype for substitutions at the mutational hotspot p. Innovation Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, Arg87 and a more variable phenotype in other recurrent 7Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, missense alterations, while there is currently no evidence Germany, 8Institute of Human Genetics, Universitätsklini- that haploinsufﬁciency leads to a similarly severe pheno- kumHamburg-Eppendorf,Hamburg,Germany,9University type.ConsistentwiththeroleofCYFI P2
inWRC-mediated of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Children’s Hospi- actin polymerization our functional studies demonstrate tal Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States, 10Department of aberrant regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in all six Neuropediatrics, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France, availablepatientﬁbroblasts.Ourstudyfurtherdelineatesthe 11Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Biochem- clinical and molecular spectrum of this novel disease and istry, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, provides evidence for WRC-mediated actin dynamics as a 12Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, cellular pathomechanism. ON,Canada,13DivisionofPediatricGenetics,Metabolism, AR was supported by the Swiss National Science and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Uni- Foundation (SNSF) grant 320030_179547. AB was sup- versityofMichigan,Arbor,MI,UnitedStates,14Laboratory portedbytheForschungskreditCandocbytheUniversityof Medicine and Genetics, Trillium Health Partners, Mis- Zurich grant FK-18-025. sissauga, ON, Canada, 15Department of Pediatrics, Divi- A.Begemann:None.H.Sticht:None.K.McWalter:A. sion of Medical Genetics, East Tennessee State University, Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. A. Quillen College of Medicine, Mountain Home, TN, United Vitobello:None.L.Faivre:None.B.Alhaddad:None.S. States, 16HospitalSanta Catarina deBlumenau,Blumenau, Banka: None. J. Becker: None. T. Bierhals: None. K. Brazil,17InstituteofHumanGenetics,Friedrich-Alexander- Brown: None. A. Bruel: None. T. Brunet: None. M. Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Ger- Carneiro: None. K. Cremer: None. R. Day: None. A. many, 18CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 19Department Denommé-Pichon:None.D.A.Dyment:None.H.Engels: of Medical Genetics, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, None. R. Fisher: None. M. Glassford: None. E.S. Goh: France, 20Department of Pediatric Neurology, CHU None. M. Hajianpour: None. L.R.M. Haertel: None. N. Montpellier, PhyMedExp, University of Montpellier, Hauer: None. M. Hempel: None. T. Herget: None. C. INSERM, CNRS, Montpellier, France, 21Department of Kraus: None. G. Le Guyader: None. G. Lesca: None. F. ClinicalGenetics,InstituteofClinicalMedicine,University T.Mau-Them:None.J.H.McDermott: None.P.Meyer: of Tartu and Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, None. K. Õunap: None. B. Popp: None. T. Reimand: 22Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig None. K.M. Riedhammer: None. M. Russo: None. L. Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany, 23Department of Sadleir: None. E. Schuler: None. G. Siegel: None. S. Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Syrbe:None.A.T.VanderVen:None.A.Verloes:None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 331 M. Willems: None. C. Zweier: None. K. Steindl: None. Center, University of Cincinnati School of Medicine, M. Zweier: None. A. Rauch: None. Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 20Department of Medical Genetics, CHU Nantes, Nantes,  P08
.024.C France, 21Fullerton Genetics Center, Mission Hospital, Phenotypicandgenotypicdescriptionof44patientswith Asheville, NC, United States, 22Child Neurology Unit. variants in DLG4 encoding the post-synaptic density Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Vall d’Hebron protein PSD-95 Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain, 23Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), A. Rodríguez-Palmero Seuma1,2, M. Boerrigter3,4, G. Madrid, Spain, 24Department of Pediatrics, Amphia Mandrile5, A. Pelle6, E. Giorgio7, A. Lindstrand8,9, M. Hospital, Breda, Netherlands, 25Institute for Human Johansson8,9, M. Kvarnung8,9, D. Everman10, V. Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San Bahrambeigi10, A. MacKenzie11,12, J. Morton13, C. Francisco, CA, United States, 26Cincinnati Children’s Ruivenkamp14, T. Challman15, A. Hurst16, J. Hoyer17, F. Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati School Elmslie18, T. Dye19, B. Isidor20, C. Haldeman-Englert21, D. of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 27INSERM Gómez-Andrés22,A.Schlüter1,23,S.deMan24,J.Shieh25,C. UMR1231, GAD, University of Burgundy, FHU-TRANS- Prada26,S.Moutton27,A.Denommé-Pichon27,S.Motti28,A. LAD, CHU Dijon-Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 28Bioinfor- Bruel27, F. Tran Mau-Them27, S. Reiter29, C. van matic unit, Cancer research center, Sheba Medical Center Ravenswaaij-Arts30, C. Shaw-Smith31, S. Parikh32, K. and Sackler Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, and Aldinger33,A.Lovgren34,A.Rauch35,M.Ross36,P.Gómez- Maccabi HMO, Tel Aviv, Israel, 29Department of Medical Puertas37, B. de Vries38, A. Pujol1,23,39, Z. Tümer3,40 Genetics,Haukeland UniversityHospital, Bergen, Norway, 30Department of Genetics, University Medical Center 1Neurometabolic Diseases Laboratory, Bellvitge Biomedi- Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 31Department of cal Research Institute (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet de Llobre- ClinicalGenetics,RoyalDevonandExeterNationalHealth gat (Barcelona), Spain, 2Paediatric Neurology Unit, ServiceFoundationTrust,Exeter,UnitedKingdom,32Mito- Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, chondrial Medicine & Neurogenetics, Cleveland Clinic, Spain, 3Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Cleveland, OH, United States, 33Center for Integrative CopenhagenUniversity Hospital,Rigshospitalet, Copenha- Brain Research, Seattle Children’s Research Institute, gen, Denmark, 4Department of Gastroenterology and Seattle, WA, United States, 34Center for Mendelian Hepatology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijme- Genomics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cam- gen, Netherlands, 5Thalassemia Centre and Genetic Unit, bridge, MA, United States, 35Institute of Medical Genetics, San Luigi University Hospital, Orbassano, Italy, 6Depart- University of Zurich, Schlieren, Switzerland, 36Department ment of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of of Pediatrics, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, Turin, Torino, Italy, 7Department of Medical Sciences, NY, United States, 37Molecular Modelling Group, Severo University of Turin, Torino, Italy, 8Department of Clinical Ochoa Molecular Biology Centre, Madrid, Spain, Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 38Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Sweden, 9Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 39Catalan Institu- Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 10Greenwood tion of Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barce- Genetic Center, Greenville, SC, United States, 11Rare lona, Spain, 40Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Neurologic Disease Therapeutics, Department of Paedia- Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, trics, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Copenhagen, Denmark Institute,Ottawa,ON,Canada,12DepartmentofPediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Introduction: Synapses are the basic functional structures Canada, 13Clinical Genetics Unit Birmingham Women’s that allow the transmission of information between neurons. Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 14Department of PSD-95 protein, encoded by DLG4, is located in the post- Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, synaptic density and regulates excitatory synaptic maturation Leiden, Netherlands, 15Medical Director, Geisinger Autism andfunction.Onlyafewpatientsheterozygousforpathogenic & Developmental Medicine Institute, Lewisburg, PA, variants in DLG4 have been reported to date. The character- United States, 16Department of Genetics, University of istic features include intellectual disability (ID) (some with Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States, marfanoid habitus (MH)), developmental disorders including 17Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Uni- autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and schizophrenia. versität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany, Materials and Methods: A total of 44 patients (33 18South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London, unpublished) were included. The unpublished cases were United Kingdom, 19CincinnatiChildren’sHospital Medical identiﬁed through GeneMatcher or Decipher and clinical332 J.delPicchia investigations were carried out by the local clinicians. brain development. It is therefore important to timely con- Pathogenic variants in DLG4 were identiﬁed through next- trolseizureactivity.Althoughnumerousantiepilepticdrugs generation sequencing (NGS) based technologies. are available, it remains a challenge for clinicians to select Results: Mean age of clinical onset was 1.4 years and effective drugs with minimal side effects for each speciﬁc meanageatlastevaluationwas14years(1.5-47).Themost patient, and a predictive tool to investigate treatment frequent manifestations were developmental delay (25 options is lacking. Moreover, Dravet syndrome is asso- patients) (developmental regression; 12), ID (37)(severe 9, ciated with both genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity, moderate15,mild9),ASD(20),epilepsy(19),ADHD(16), whichincreasesthecomplicationsofﬁndinganappropriate ophthalmologicalmanifestations(16).MHwaspresentin5 treatment. ln 70%-80% of the cases, DS results from de cases. MRI abnormalities were reported in 11 cases. Most novo mutations in the SCN1A gene, encoding the voltage of the DLG4 variants were truncating whereas 6 were gatedsodiumchannelNa 1.1.Conversely,noteverypatient v missense, located in the functional domains of the protein. with a mutation in SCN1A develops DS, and also milder There were no differences in clinical severity between clinical phenotypes can arise. In addition to SCN1A, other patients with the two groups of variants. genes have been associated with a DS phenotype. Animal Conclusions: Clinical manifestations associated with modelscanneitherrecapitulatemutation-speciﬁceffectsnor DLG4 variants are similar to those of other synaptopathies, genetic background factors, and are unsuitable for devising mainly ID, ASD and epilepsy. MH is not a characteristic personalizedmedicineinterventions.Thisresearchproposes feature of the condition. NGS is fundamental to establish a the development of human induced pluripotent stem cells molecular diagnosis, given the non-speciﬁc clinical spec- (hiPSC), differentiated into induced neurons as a patient- trum here reported. speciﬁc disease model. The neurons are cultured into a A. Rodríguez-Palmero Seuma: None. M. Boerrigter: neuronal network on micro-electrode arrays (MEAs), able None. G. Mandrile: None. A. Pelle: None. E. Giorgio: to record network activity by embedded micro-electrodes. None. A. Lindstrand: None. M. Johansson: None. M. Here, we report a patient speciﬁc neuronal network (PNN) Kvarnung: None. D. Everman: None. V. Bahrambeigi: ﬁngerprint of DS on both the single cell and the network None. A. MacKenzie: None. J. Morton: None. C. level.WiththisPNN,weaimtoprovideapredictivetoolto Ruivenkamp: None. T. Challman: None. A. Hurst: None. model DS and to explore treatment options in vitro. J.Hoyer:None.F.Elmslie:None.T.Dye:None.B.Isidor: E.J.H. van Hugte: None. E. Lewerissa: None. M. None. C. Haldeman-Englert: None. D. Gómez-Andrés: Frega: None. J. Nicolai: None. H.J.M. Majoie: None. H. None.A.Schlüter:None.S.deMan:None.J.Shieh:None. J.Schelhaas:None.J.S.Verhoeven:None.J.H.L.M.van C.Prada:None.S.Moutton:None.A.Denommé-Pichon: Bokhoven: None. N. Nadif Kasri: None. None. S. Motti: None. A. Bruel: None. F. Tran Mau- Them: None. S. Reiter: None. C. van Ravenswaaij-Arts:  P08
.031.A None. C. Shaw-Smith: None. S. Parikh: None. K. Exome Pool-Seq Reloaded Aldinger: None. A. Lovgren: None. A. Rauch: None. M. Ross: None. P. Gómez-Puertas: None. B. de Vries: None. B. Popp1,2, G. Vasileiou2, M. Zweier3, A. B. Ekici2, S. A. Pujol: None. Z. Tümer: None. Moortgat4, D. Lederer4, I. Maystadt4, A. Destrée5, S. Drunat5, A. Verloes5, A. Rauch3, K. Steindl3, L. Van  P08
.027.C Maldergem6, J. Piard6, E. B. Brischoux6, C. Engel6, M. Towards personalized treatment of Dravet syndrome Serey-Gaut6, A. Reis2, C. Zweier2 using induced neurons as an ex-vivo tool 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig E. J. H. van Hugte1,2,3, E. Lewerissa1,3, M. Frega1,3, J. Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany, 2Institute of Nicolai2, H. J. M. Majoie2, H. J. Schelhaas2, J. S. Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlan- Verhoeven2, J. H. L. M. van Bokhoven1,3, N. Nadif Kasri1,3 gen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzer- 1RadboudUMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Academic Centre land,4CentredeGénétiqueHumaine,InstitutdePathologie for Epileptology Kempenhaeghe, Heeze, Netherlands, et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium, 5Department of 3Donders Institute, Nijmegen, Netherlands Genetics,APHP-RobertDEBREUniversityHospital,Denis Diderot School of Medicine, Paris University, France; Dravetsyndrome(DS)isasevereepilepticencephalopathy, INSERM UMR1141, Paris, France, 6Centre de génétique characterized by recurrent and prolonged seizures. In humaine CHU, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, addition, DS is associated with substantial cognitive and France neuropsychological decline as a result of seizures duringAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 333 Falling sequencing costs has greatly advanced the identiﬁ- Isidor22,A.Goldenberg23,C.Vincent-Delorme24,O.Boute- cation of genetic causes for neurodevelopmental disorders Benejean10, L. lambert25, M. Asensio26, P. Callier1,2, Y. (NDDs), but trio-based exome/genome sequencing remains Duffourd1,2, C. Lejeune26, C. Binquet26, C. Philippe1,2, L. expensive and time-consuming for large cohorts. Faivre1,2,7, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3 To screen for knownand novel geneticscauses of NDDs at scale we recently developed Exome Pool-Seq. This 1UMR1231INSERM,GAD,UniversitédeBougogne,Dijon, approachcombinesDNApoolingandcapture-basedexome France, 2Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic sequencing with variant ﬁltering in curated lists of known génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU NDD genes and candidate genes. Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 3Centre de Référence We now performed Exome Pool-Seq in a cohort of 576 maladies rares « Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de causes individuals with unsolved NDDs, collected and clinically rares », CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Institute characterized by a collaboration of ﬁve institutions from of Genetics and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Illkirch, four European countries. Most individuals had previous France; French National Center for Scientiﬁc Research, normal microarray analysis (93.7%) and Fragile-X testing UMR7104, Illkirch, France, 5National Institute of Health (67.7%).Remarkably,48.7%alreadyhadgenepaneltesting and Medical Research U964, Illkirch, France, 6University without conclusive result. of Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 7Centre de Référence Weidentiﬁed(likely)pathogenictruncatingorpreviously maladies rares « Anomalies du Développement et syn- described variants in known NDD genes in 11.5%. This dromes malformatifs », centre de génétique, FHU-TRANS- includes four cases with truncating ANKRD11 and other LAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 8Direction commonly mutated genes like SYNGA P1
, ARID1B and Clinique de la Recherche et de l’Innovation, CHU Dijon MED13L. Several pathogenic variants in autosomal domi- Bourgogne,Dijon,France,9Servicedegénétiquemédicale, nant NDD genes (MED13, CNOT3) were inherited, high- CHU de Bordeaux, Centre de Référence, Anomalies du lighting a potential pitfall when ﬁltering only for de novo développement et Syndromes malformatifs du Sud-Ouest variants. Analysis of missense variants absent from public Occitanie Réunion, Saint-Pierre, INSERM U1211, Univer- databases but predicted as deleterious by novel ensemble sité de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 10Centre de référence scores increased the diagnostic yield by 5.2%. Finally, we maladiesrarespourlesanomaliesdudéveloppementNord- analyzed truncating variants in candidate and constrained Ouest, Clinique de Génétique médicale, CHU de Lille et genes and identiﬁed several candidate variants, e.g. in EA7364,UniversitédeLille,Lille,France,11Departmentof KMD2B and MARK2, which have subsequently been Medical Genetics, Women Mothers and Children’s Hospi- submitted to matchmaking platforms. tal, Lyon Hospices Civils, Claude Bernard Lyon 1 This study provides new insights into the clinical and University, CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, mutational spectrum of a representatively pre-analyzed Lyon, France, 12Service de génétique médicale, CHU de European cohort of individuals with NDDs and highlights Marseille, Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, MMG, Marseille, the value of curated disease gene lists. France, 13Département de génétique médicale, Maladies B. Popp: None. G. Vasileiou: None. M. Zweier: None. rares et médecine personnalisée, CHU de Montpellier, A.B.Ekici: None. S. Moortgat: None.D.Lederer: None. INSERM U1183, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, I. Maystadt: None. A. Destrée: None. S. Drunat: None. France, 14Département de Génétique, APHP-Robert A. Verloes: None. A. Rauch: None. K. Steindl: None. L. DEBRE University Hospital, USPC University and Van Maldergem: None. J. Piard: None. E.B. Brischoux: INSERM UMR1141, Paris, France, 15Service de génétique None. C. Engel: None. M. Serey-Gaut: None. A. Reis: clinique, CHU de Rennes, Univ. Rennes, Institute of None. C. Zweier: None. Genetics and Development of Rennes (IGDR) UMR6290  P08
.033.C CNRS, Rennes, France, 16Département de Génétique et DISSEQ: Double-blind Next-Generation-Sequencing Procréation, Hôpital Couple-Enfant, Université de Greno- technologies (exome and gene panel) in the diagnosis ble, CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 17Service de ofacohortof330patientswithanintellectualdisability: génétique,CHUdeTours,UMR1253,iBrain,Universitéde concordance, discrepancies, and efﬁciencies. Tours, Inserm, Tours, France, 18Centre Hospitalier Uni- versitaire de Angers, Département de Biochimie et A. Bruel1,2,3, B. Gérard4,5,6, A. Piton4,5,6, F. Tran Mau- Génétique, Angers, France, 19Mitochondrial and Cardio- Them1,2, A. Sorlin1,2,7, A. Sorly8, D. Lacombe9, S. vascular Pathophysiology (MITOVASC), Unité mixte de Manouvrier10, P. Edery11, N. Philip12, D. Geneviève13, A. Recherche, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque Verloes14, S. Odent15, J. Thevenon16, A. Toutain17, D. 6015, Inserm 1083, Université d’Angers, Angers, France, Bonneau18,19, S. El Chehadeh20, M. Doco-Fenzy21, B. 20Département de Génétique Médicale, CHU de334 J.delPicchia Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 21Service de Génétique, None.Y.Duffourd:None.C.Lejeune:None.C.Binquet: CHU de Reims, EA3801, SFR CAP Santé, Reims, France, None. C. Philippe: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin- 22Service de Génétique Médical, CHU Nantes, Nantes, Robinet: None. France, 23Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Department of Genetics  P08
.034.A andReferenceCenterforDevelopmentalDisorders,Rouen, DOES GENDER AFFECT THE FACIAL FEATURES France, 24Service de Génétique Clinique Guy Fontaine, OF FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME? EVIDENCE CHRU de Lille-Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, FROM A COHORT STUDY 25Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 26EPICAD LNC-UMR1231, Burgundy & Franche M. F. Urban1, L. T. Brink1, C. Lombard2, H. ComteUniversity,ClinicalEpidemiologyUnit,Inserm,CIC Bezuidenhout1, G. de Jong1, H. J. Odendaal1 1432 University Hospital, Dijon, France 1Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of The introduction of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Stellenbosch,CapeTown,SouthAfrica,2MedicalResearch technologies, in combination with a broad panel of bioin- Council of South Africa, Cape Town, South Africa formaticstoolsanddatabases,hasrevolutionizedtheﬁeldof human genetics, making it possible to have the unprece- Background: By Institute of Medicine criteria, smooth dented ability to establish molecular diagnoses in a time- philtrum and thin vermilion border of the upper lip, and and cost-effective manner. The DISSEQ study aims to short palpebral ﬁssure length (PFL) are cardinal features of assess the efﬁciency of different NGS strategies in the fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS). Lip assessment is by visual diagnosis of patients with intellectual disability from a comparisonwithaphotographic5-pointLikertscale(Astley cohort of 330 patients (205 males/127 females) without score),andPFLbymeasurement.Astleyscoresofphiltrum previous genetic investigation, using double-blind strategy and vermilion >4, and PFL<10th centile deﬁne the facial 1(array-CGH+FRAXA+largegenepanelsequencing(459 features. We assessed gender differences in these features. genes))andstrategy2(FRAXA+exome(ES)).Preliminary Methods: The Safe Passage Study is an international results in 235/330 patients display a positive diagnosis in cohort study of prenatal alcohol exposure effects on infant 85/235 (36 %) (62 SNV, 21 CNV, 1 FRAXA, 4 double- outcomes.Datafrom7060pregnancieswereassessedatthe hits): 29.7% with strategy 1 and 30% with strategy 2. The Cape Town site. Case report forms prospectively collected results were concordant in 88%. Gene panel and ES iden- exposure information. Dysmorphologists examined one- tiﬁed a positive diagnosis in 58/235 (25%) and 66/235 year-olds. Multivariate statistical analysis included gender, (28%), respectively. No SNV interpretation was missed in alcohol and smoking levels per trimester, maternal mea- gene panel sequencing. Different reasons explain the surements,socio-economicstatus,andexcludeddrugusers. defects in ES interpretation (28/235; 12%): atypical phe- Results: After exclusions, 4399 one-year-olds were notype, double-hits, bioinformatics misalignments and dif- compared: 2224 (50.6%) females and 2175 (49.4%) males. ﬁcultiestointerpretmissensevariantswithinasolostrategy. Astley score >4 was commoner in males than females for But ES identiﬁed variants in new disease-causing genes, philtrum (21.0% versus 13.3%, p < 0.001) and vermilion recently described and new candidate genes. For CNV (20.6% versus 17.3%, p=0.005). On multivariate analysis diagnosis, gene panel sequencing appeared limited and males had relative risk of Astley score >4 for philtrum of required to be coupled with array-CGH, whereas ES 1.53 (95%CI=1.33-1.76; p < 0.001) and vermilion of 1.14 appeared efﬁcient. Overall, solo ES obtain slightly higher (95%CI=1.01-1.35; p=0.03). Males had wider PFLs results than gene panel but a trio-based analysis should be (correlation coefﬁcient 0.53; p < 0.001). preferred for a greater efﬁciency. Moreover, the possibility Conclusions: Gender differences in facial features for toreanalyzeESdataconfersasigniﬁcantbeneﬁtduetothe FAS diagnosis are independent of alcohol use and may continuous development of knowledge. confound dysmorphic assessment.Males aremore likelyto A. Bruel: None. B. Gérard: None. A. Piton: None. F. scorepositiveonlipfeaturesbutlesslikelyonPFL.Caution TranMau-Them:None.A.Sorlin:None.A.Sorly:None. is warranted in reifying cut-off measurements for FAS D. Lacombe: None. S. Manouvrier: None. P. Edery: diagnosis. None. N. Philip: None. D. Geneviève: None. A. Verloes: Funding support: National Institutes of Health grants None. S. Odent: None. J. Thevenon: None. A. Toutain: U01HD055154, U01HD045935, U01HD055155, None. D. Bonneau: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. M. U01HD045991, and U01AA016501 Doco-Fenzy: None. B. Isidor: None. A. Goldenberg: M.F. Urban: None. L.T. Brink: None. C. Lombard: None. C. Vincent-Delorme: None. O. Boute-Benejean: None. H. Bezuidenhout: None. G. de Jong: None. H.J. None. L. lambert: None. M. Asensio: None. P. Callier: Odendaal: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 335 N. Domniz1, L. Ries Levavi2, M. Berkenstadt2, E. Pras2, Y.  P08
.035.B Cohen1, H. Raanani1, S. Ben-Shachar3, D. Brabbing Floating-Harbor Syndrome: iPSCs with atypical mor- Goldstein3, S. Elizur1 phology from patient-derived cells with mutation in the SRCAP gene 1IVF Unit, Ramat Gan, Israel, 2The Genetic Institute, Ramat Gan, Israel, 3The Genetic Institute, Tel-Aviv, L. Hagenau1, M. Franz1, R. Koch1, S. Neubauer2, B. Israel Nowack2, L. R. Jensen1, A. W. Kuss1 Design: A cohort population-based study. 1Department of Functional Genomics, Interfaculty Institute Materials and Methods: All Jewish FMR1 premutation for Genetics and Functional Genomics, University Medi- carrierswhounderwentchorionicvillussampling(CVS)or cine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 2SensID GmbH, amniocentesis (AC) at Sheba Medical Center and the Tel Rostock, Germany Aviv Medical center during the period of 2011-2018 were included in this study. Ethnicity was determined by self- Introduction: Floating-Harbor syndrome (FLHS) is a rare reportasappeared inthemedical records.Longrange PCR genetic disease characterized by growth deﬁciency, facial forFMR1(Asuragen,TX,USA) wasperformed inorderto dismorphism, language delays and often mild to severe determine the number of CGG repeats and AGG interrup- intellectual disability. It is caused by mutations in the tions in all women and fetuses. General distribution and SRCAP gene, which encodes a core component of the data analysis were calculated using SPSS 18.0 and chromatin-remodeling complex and also acts as a tran- Microsoft Excel. scriptional activator. We identiﬁed a de novo truncating Results:766FMR1premutationcarriersunderwentCVS mutation in the SRCAP gene of a patient diagnosed with or AC. Of them, 592 carriers had parents’ concordance for FLHS and aimed to establish an induced pluripotent stem ethnic background. The number of CGG repeats was cell (iPSC) line that can serve as a model for FLHS. signiﬁcantlyhigheramongtheAshkenazicarrierscompared Material and methods: Gingival ﬁbroblasts from the to Non-Ashkenazi women (median 69 vs. 64; p < 0.0001). patient and skin ﬁbroblasts from the unaffected father were The number of AGG interruptions was lower in Ashkenazi reprogrammed into iPSCs using a virus-free episomal (35% with no AGG’s) compared to the Non-Ashkenazi vector system. iPSCs were tested for pluripotency marker carriers (20% with 0 AGG’s); p < 0.0001. expression (immunoﬂuorescence and qPCR) and differen- Multivariate analysis using CGG repeats, AGG interrup- tiation capability (embryoid bodies). Two and three iPSC tions andethnicity, revealedthat women’s ethnicity was an clones were generated for the patient and the control, independent risk factor for a full mutation expansion respectively. (p=0.01). Results: We were able to create iPSCs from primary Conclusions: Carrier’s ethnicity may be an independent ﬁbroblasts of a FLHS patient and his father. However, the risk factor for a full mutation expansion among FMR1 patient iPSCs displayed an atypical colony morphology premutation carriers, suggesting the existence of further with fuzzy borders and loose cell grouping. Despite the components affecting the mother-to-offspring transmission atypicalappearance,thepatientiPSCswerepluripotentand process.Furtherresearchisneededinordertoidentifyother able to differentiate into the 3 germ-layers. ethnicgroupsatriskandtobetterunderstandtheprocessof Conclusions: The patient derived iPSCs we describe can CGG inter-generation expansion and the different variables be instrumental in furthering our knowledge about the thataffectit.Inaddition,theseﬁndingsmaycontributefora molecular mechanisms involving SRCAP and contribute to precise genetic counselling. a better understanding of the aetiology of FLHS. N. Domniz: None. L. Ries Levavi: None. M. Berken- L.Hagenau:None.M.Franz:None.R.Koch:None.S. stadt: None. E. Pras: None. Y. Cohen: None. H. Neubauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Raanani: None. S. Ben-Shachar: None. D. Brabbing SensID GmbH. B. Nowack: A. Employment (full or part- Goldstein: None. S. Elizur: None. time); Signiﬁcant; SensID GmbH. E. Ownership Interest  P08
.038.B (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Heterozygous variants disturbing the transcriptional Signiﬁcant; SensID GmbH. L.R. Jensen: None. A.W. repressor activity of FOX P4
 cause a disorder with Kuss: None. expressive language deﬁcits, congenital abnormalities and divergent growth parameters  P08
.036.C Ethnicity is an independent Risk Factor for Full Mutation Expansion in FMR1 Premutation Carriers336 J.delPicchia L. Snijders Blok1,2,3, A. Vino2, H. Underhill4, D. Monteil5, L. Snijders Blok: None. A. Vino: None. H. Underhill: H. Li6, F. Reynoso Santos7, W. K. Chung8, M. Amaral9, R. None.D.Monteil:None.H.Li:None.F.ReynosoSantos: E. Schnur10, T. Sim10, Y. Si10, H. G. Brunner1,3,11, T. None. W.K. Chung: None. M. Amaral: None. R.E. Kleefstra1,3, S. E. Fisher2,3 Schnur:None.T.Sim:None.Y.Si:None.H.G.Brunner: None. T. Kleefstra: None. S.E. Fisher: None. 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether- lands, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijme-  P08
.040.A gen, Netherlands, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition Altered mitochondrial function in cells carrying a and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4University of premutation or unmethylated full mutation of the Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 5Naval Medical FMR1 gene Center, Portsmouth, VA, United States, 6Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States, 7Joe DiMaggio Children’s V. Nobile1, F. Palumbo1, S. Lanni2, V. Ghisio1, A. Vitali1, Hospital, Hollywood, FL, United States, 8Columbia Uni- V. Marzano3, M. Castagnola1, G. Maulucci1, C. De versityIrvingMedicalCenter,NewYork,NY,UnitedStates, Angelis1, M. De Spirito1, L. Pacini4, L. D’Andrea5, R. 9HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, Ragno6, G. Stazi6, S. Valente6, A. Mai6, P. Chiurazzi1, M. UnitedStates,10GeneDx,Gaithersburg,MD,UnitedStates, Genuardi1, G. Neri1, E. Tabolacci1 11Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Neth- erlands 1Catholic University, Roma, Italy, 2The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Bambino Gesù Chil- Introduction: Germline variants in FOX P4
 have not yet dren’s Hospital IRCCS, Roma, Italy, 4Saint Camillus been deﬁnitively linked to a Mendelian disorder. Although International University of Health and Medical Sciences, asingleindividualhasbeenreportedintheliteraturewitha Roma,Italy,5UniversityofRomeTorVergata,Roma,Italy, homozygous possibly pathogenic variant, suggesting a 6Sapienza University, Roma, Italy recessiveinheritancepattern,itiscurrentlyunclearwhether heterozygous FOX P4
 variants can also cause a phenotype. FragileXrelated-disordersareduetoadynamicmutationof Methods:Weassembledacohortofeightindividualswith theCGGrepeatatthe5’UTRoftheFMR1gene,codingfor heterozygous and mostly de novo variants in FOX P4
: seven the RNA-binding protein FMRP. As the CGG sequence individuals with six different missense variants and one expands from premutation (PM, 56-200 CGGs) to full individual with a frameshift variant. We used functional mutation (>200 CGGs), FMRP synthesis decreases until it assays to assess pathogenicity of the variants, and collected is practically abolished in fragile X syndrome (FXS) clinicaldata to delineatethe associated phenotypic spectrum. patients, mainly due to FMR1 methylation. Cells from rare Results: Four missense variants clustered in the DNA- individuals with no intellectual disability and carriers of an binding forkhead-box (FOX) domain of the encoded unmethylated full mutation (UFM) produce slightly ele- transcription factor. Luciferase assays showed loss-of- vated levels of FMR1-mRNA and relatively low levels of function effects for these four missense variants, and FMRP, like in PM carriers. With the aim of clarifying how aberrant subcellular localization was seen for three out of UFMcellsdifferfromCTRLandFXScells,acomparative four. The two missense variants located outside the proteomic approach was undertaken, from which emerged functional domains of FOX P4
 showed transcriptional anoverexpressionofSOD2inUFMcells,alsoconﬁrmedin repressor capacities similar to wild-type FOX P4
, as well PM but not in FXS. The SOD2-mRNA bound to FMRP in as normal subcellular localization patterns. Clinical data UFM more than in the other cell types. The high SOD2 were collected for the six individuals with variants likely levelsinUFMandPMcellscorrelated withlowerlevelsof affecting FOX P4
 functions. Recurrent features included superoxide and Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), and with growth abnormalities, language deﬁcits, congenital dia- morphological anomalies and depolarization of the mito- phragmatic hernia, cervical spine abnormalities and ptosis. chondrialmembranedetectedthroughconfocalmicroscopy. Conclusions: Although a dominant-negative effect can- The same effect was observed in CTRL and FXS after notbeexcludedforthemissensevariants,itseemsthatloss- treatment with M C2791
, causing SOD2 overexpression. of-function of FOX P4
 can already be sufﬁcient to cause a Thesemitochondrialphenotypesrevertedafterknock-down phenotype.Ourﬁndingsshowthatheterozygousvariantsin with siRNA against SOD2-mRNA and FMR1-mRNA in FOX P4
 can cause an autosomal dominant disorder that is UFM and PM. Overall, these data suggest that in PM and characterized by growth defects, congenital abnormalities UFM carriers, which have high levels of FMR1 transcrip- and mild developmental delays, mainly affecting speech tionandmaydevelopFXTAS,SOD2overexpressionhelps and language. to maintain low levels of both superoxide and ROS with signs of mitochondrial degradation.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 337 V.Nobile:None.F.Palumbo:None.S.Lanni:None.V. A. A. Dolskiy1, L. V. Krainikova1, A. V. Pindyurin2, L. V. Ghisio: None. A. Vitali: None. V. Marzano: None. M. Boldyreva2, D. V. Yudkin1 Castagnola: None. G. Maulucci: None. C. De Angelis: None. M. De Spirito: None. L. Pacini: None. L. 1FBRI SRC VB “Vector”, Rospotrebnadzor, Novosibirsk D’Andrea: None. R. Ragno: None. G. Stazi: None. S. Region, Russian Federation, 2IMCB SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Valente: None. A. Mai: None. P. Chiurazzi: None. M. Russian Federation Genuardi: None. G. Neri: None. E. Tabolacci: None. Introduction: FRAXopathies are widespread pathologies  P08
.041.B due to CGG repeat expansion in the 5’-UTR of the FMR1 A frameshift mutation in ZFHX4, located on chromo- gene.ChangesintherepeatlengthleadtoFMR1expression som 8q21, phenocopies the 8q21.11 microdeletion alteration. Previously, microRNA involvement in FMR1 syndrome. gene expression regulation was demonstrated in an animal model. We described nine microRNAs complementary to M. Wenzel1, A. Schneider2, M. Feigl2, T. Richter1, F. the3’-UTRofFMR1withexpressionalterationsdependent Oeffner1, B. Zirn3 on the FMR1 gene allele. Here, we present a study on the identiﬁedmicroRNAinteractionswiththe3’-UTRofFMR1 1genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 2Casa Elisa Sozialpädia- in a plasmid model system. trisches Zentrum, Ravensburg, Germany, 3genetikum, Materials and methods: A plasmid expressing two Stuttgart, Germany reportergeneswasdesigned.Bothreportersweredrivenby constitutive promoters. One reporterwas fused with the3’- Introduction:Patientswith8q21.11microdeletionsyndrome UTR of the FMR1 gene, while microRNA expression was including the ZHFX4 gene present with a recognizable phe- driven by an inducible promoter. Measuring the protein notype of variable intellectual disability, behavioral abnorm- expression of the reporter in the control and after alities, ptosis, a round face, down-turned corners of the microRNA expression induction allowed us to quantify mouth, low-set ears, and sensorineural hearing loss. the interaction between the microRNA and the 3’-UTR. MaterialsandMethods:Wereport afemale patient and Results: The model plasmid was conﬁrmed by sequen- her son with the following clinical features: macrocephaly, cing. The activity of reporter genes was detected after ptosis, prominent low-set ears, a round face, down-turned transfection of HEK293 cells. The genes of nine micro- cornersofthemouth,developmentaldelay,hearinglossand RNAswereclonedintoaplasmidandseparatelytransfected behavioral abnormalities. After exclusion of the 8q21.11 into the cells. The expression of reporter proteins was microdeletion syndrome and other relevant chromosomal measured, and the interaction of every microRNA and the anomalies by chromosome and microarray analysis and FMR1 gene was quantiﬁed. after exclusion of fragile-X-syndrome, we applied clinical Conclusions: Screening of microRNA expression exome sequencing on an Illumina System followed by allowed us to study its involvement in the regulation of a phenotype-based evaluation strategies. speciﬁc gene. The use of a molecular model helped us to Results: A heterozygous point mutation in ZFHX4 show the interaction of microRNAs and the regulatory (c.5850_5851delAT, p.(Cys1951fs)), was identiﬁed and region of the gene. The study is supported by Russian conﬁrmed by sanger sequencing in both mother and son, Science Foundation grant 18-15-00099. and excluded in further unaffected family members. A.A. Dolskiy: None. L.V. Krainikova: None. A.V. Conclusions:Thisistheﬁrstreportofapointmutationin Pindyurin: None. L.V. Boldyreva: None. D.V. Yudkin: ZFHX4 leading to the same phenotypic features as the None. known8q21.11microdeletionsyndromeincludingZFHX4. M.Wenzel:None.A.Schneider:None.M.Feigl:None.  P08
.044.B T. Richter: None. F. Oeffner: None. B. Zirn: None. Protein abundance proﬁling in murine model for intellectual disability induced by FTSJ1 deﬁciency  P08
.043.A HumanFMR1geneexpressionregulationbymicroRNA L. R. Jensen1, V. Dhople1, M. Depke1, U. Völker1, F. in a cellular model Schmidt2, A. W. Kuss1 1Department of Functional Genomics, Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, University338 J.delPicchia Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 2Proteomics United Kingdom, 7University of Exeter Medical School, Core, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar RoyalDevon&ExeterHospital,Exeter,UnitedKingdom Congenital forms of intellectual disability (IQ < 50) are Trio exome sequencing to proﬁle protein-coding regions in genetically heterogeneous but affect up to 0.5% of the patients from the Deciphering Developmental Disorders population. Mutations in most known intellectual disability (DDD)studyidentiﬁesageneticdiagnosisinonly~35%of genesoftenonlyaccountforacomparativelysmallnumber patients. We searched 9,858 patients for de novo variants of cases, as exempliﬁed by mutations in the X-linked gene directly upstream of genes known to cause developmental FTSJ1, which are a rare cause for non-syndromic intellec- disorders and identiﬁed six likely disease-causing variants tual disability in affected males. FTSJ1 encodes a tRNA upstreamofMEF2C.Allsixprobandshavephenotypesthat methyl-transferase that methylates tRNA phenylalanine at areconsistent with disruptionsinMEF2C, including global position32and34(wobbleposition)inyeastandman.We developmental delay (6/6) and seizures (4/6), and no other have recently established a mouse model for Ftsj1 deﬁ- likely diagnostic variants. ciency and found that in male Ftsj1-deﬁcient mice the These variants are predicted to cause loss-of-function phenotype is not restricted to cognitive functions. In order through three distinct mechanisms. (1) Two 5’UTR single to investigate the effects of Ftsj1 deﬁciency in different nucleotide variants (SNVs) create upstream open reading mammalian tissues, we generated protein extracts frames (uORFs) that overlap with the MEF2C coding from brain, liver, kidney and heart from ﬁve wild type and sequenceout-of-frame,negativelyregulatingtranslation.(2) Ftsj1−/y littermate pairs, generated protein abundance pro- Twofurther5’UTRSNVscreateupstreamstartcodonsthat ﬁles and compared the normalized label-free quantitation extend the coding sequence by three and nine amino acids, values (LFQ). The fold changes between control and respectively. These variants are also observed de novo in Ftsj1−/ytissuesweregenerallyatorbelowfactor3,butstill four additional patients (two with each variant) sequenced between 54 and 131 proteins from each tissue showed a by Genomics England and GeneDx. Protein structure signiﬁcantly different abundance (p < 0.01). Among these modellingsuggeststhatthesevariantsdisruptDNAbinding we found enrichment of proteins involved in protein of MEF2C protein, impairing its function as a transcription synthesis, energy metabolism and actin dynamics. Our factor.(3)Theﬁnaltwovariantsarelargedeletions(294Kb results suggest that a common pathway is affected in all and 97Kb) that remove the N-terminal exon of the 5’UTR four different tissues but that the evolutionarily compara- and the entire promoter sequence, completely ablating tively young cognitive aspects of brain function are more transcription of one allele. We will present ongoing sensitivetochangesinthisfunctionalcontext.Italsoraises functional assays to prove the mechanism through which thequestionwhetheradditionalcharacteristicfeaturesmight these variants cause disease. not also be detectable in patients with FTSJ1 deﬁciency at Our analyses show that non-coding variants upstream of cellular or tissue levels. known disease-causing genes are an important cause of L.R.Jensen:None.V.Dhople:None.M.Depke:None. severe disease and demonstrates that sequencing 5’UTRs U. Völker: None. F. Schmidt: None. A.W. Kuss: None. can increase diagnostic yield. N. Whifﬁn: None. P. Danecek: None. N.M. Quaife:  P08
.048.C None.J.Kaplanis:None.K.Samocha:None.J.Juusola: De novo noncoding variants upstream of MEF2C cause A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx, severe developmental disorders Inc. K. Retterer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, N. Whifﬁn1,2,3, P. Danecek3, N. M. Quaife1,4, J. Kaplanis3, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); K. Samocha3, Genomics England Research Consortium, J. Signiﬁcant; OPKO Health, Inc.. P.J.R. Barton: None. H. Juusola5,K.Retterer5,P.J.R.Barton1,2,4,H.V.Firth3,6,M. V.Firth:None.M.E.Hurles:E.OwnershipInterest(stock, E. Hurles3, C. F. Wright7 stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; 1National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. C.F. Wright: None. London, London, United Kingdom, 2Royal Brompton and Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, London, United King-  P08
.049.A dom, 3Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United King- Exploringthetranscriptionallandscapeofhippocampus dom, 4MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, London, cells in homozygous Pigv c.1022C>A knock-in mice by United Kingdom, 5GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United single-cell RNA-sequencing States, 6Clinical Genetic Department, Addenbrooke’s Hospital Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 339 F. S. David1,2, M. Rodríguez de los Santos2,3,4, A. Knaus2,  P08
.051.C D. Mattei5, B. Timmermann6, P. M. Krawitz2 Expanding the clinical phenotype of X-linked mental retardation 103: new patient with deleterious mutation 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof in KLH L15
 gene Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Uni- M. Ballesta-Martinez1,2,3, M. Sanchez Soler1,2, A. Serrano versity of Bonn, School of Medicine & University Hospital Anton1,2, V. López-Gonzalez1,2,3, L. Rodriguez Peña1, L. Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute for Medical Genetics and Armengol Dulcet4, E. Guillen Navarro1,2,3 Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 4Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular 1Hospital Clinico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Genetics, FG Development and Disease, Berlin, Germany, Murcia, Spain, 2Insituto Murciano de Investigación Bio- 5Insitute of Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, medica(IMIB),Murcia,Spain,3CIBER-ER,Murcia,Spain, University of Zurich, UZH, Zürich, Switzerland, 6Sequen- 4QuantitativeGenomicMedicineLaboratory,qGenomicsS. cing Core Facility, Max Planck Institute for Molecular L., Barcelona, Spain Genetics, Berlin, Germany Introduction:X-linkedmentalretardation103iscausedby Introduction: Biallelic hypomorphic mutations in PIGV loss of function mutations in KLH L15
 gene. Only 2 are a known cause of congenital glycosylpho- families have been reported. First reported patient had sphatidylinositol biosynthesis defects (GPIBD), a group of intellectual disability (ID), epilepsy, brain anomalies and recessive syndromes with shared phenotypic features such coarse features. Array-CGH: 22kb deletion Xp22.11 as intellectual disability. In particular, the c.1022C>A involvingtheﬁrstthreeofthefourexonsofKLH L15
gene; transversion is frequently reported in European patients mothercarriedthedeletionwithskewedXCIinlymphocyte with GPIBD. DNA. Second report includes a large family with several Materials and Methods: Togainfurther insight into the affected members with mild to moderate ID in which a pathophysiology of neurological features observed in protein-truncating variant in KLH L15
 which segregated patients with GPIBD, we performed a single-cell RNA withthephenotypewasdetectedbyexomesequencing.We sequencing analysis of hippocampus samples from a reportonanewcase withanewcausal variant inKLH L15
 recently established Pigv c.1022C>A knock-in (Pigv341E) which further supports its implication in ID, and delineate mouse model. the phenotype. Clinical description: 5 year-old boy, second Results:Basedonthegeneexpressionproﬁlesofaround child of healthy non-consanguineous parents. Mother had 8,800 Pigv341E and 7,100 wild type cells, we identiﬁed 17 deceased twin brothers with ID and brain atrophy. Patient cellular subgroups.Cells ofbothgenotypeswerepresentin had global developmental delay, OFC 3rd centile, coarse all subgroups, but the distribution was skewed in Pigv341E facial features, braquidactyly, thyroglosal cyst and ocular mice, e.g. with an increased fraction of subicular neurons malformation (posterior polar cataract and choroidal colo- and decreased fractions of granule cells and oligodendro- boma of left eye). Brain MRI, abdominal and cardiac cytes.Themostextensivechangesintranscriptionalproﬁles sonogram were normal. No epilepsy. Array-CGH was due toglycosylphosphatidylinositolanchor deﬁciency were normal, and clinical exome sequencing detected a pre- observed in a microglia subgroup as well as in subicular viously not reported variant c.417_418delGA; P. neurons.Amongtheaffectedgenes,severalsynapse-related Leu139ArgfsTer2inKLH L15
gene,ofmaternalorigin;she GeneOntologytermswerefoundtobeenriched.Acrossall presented skewed XCI in lymphocyte DNA (100:0). cellular subgroups, expression of Abl1 was decreased and Conclusions: 1- We report on a new case of X-linked expressionofHdc,Cyp4x1,andGm14216wasincreasedin MRduetolossoffunctionmutationinKLH L15
supporting Pigv341E cells. its implication in ID. 2- This case expands clinical Conclusions: This single-cell RNA sequencing study of phenotype of patients with KLH L15
 mutations with ocular hippocampus cellsin thePigv341E mousemodel allowed us involvement. 4-Achieving molecular diagnosis with NGS to generate new hypotheses regarding the pathophysiology permits adequate genetic counseling in families. of cognitive impairment in GPIBDs. In particular, differ- M. Ballesta-Martinez: None. M. Sanchez Soler: None. ential expression of Abl1 suggests an involvement of the A. Serrano Anton: None. V. López-Gonzalez: None. L. Eph/ephrin signaling pathway, which is known to play a Rodriguez Peña: None. L. Armengol Dulcet: None. E. major role in synapse formation and function. Guillen Navarro: None. F.S. David: None. M. Rodríguez de los Santos: None. A. Knaus: None. D. Mattei: None. B. Timmermann: None. P.M. Krawitz: None.340 J.delPicchia  P08
.053.B relevant tissues cannot be used as strong evidence for Functional predictors of causative cisregulatory muta- Mendelian disease association. tions in mendelian disease H. Bengani: None. D. Grozeva: None. L. Moyon: None. S. Bhatia: None. S. Ribeiro dos Louros: None. J. H. Bengani1, D. Grozeva2, L. Moyon3, S. Bhatia1, S. Hope:None.A.Jackson:None.J.Prendergast:None.M. Ribeiro dos Louros4, J. Hope5, A. Jackson4, J. Naville: None. O. Spasic-Boskovic: None. V.V. Heynin- Prendergast6, M. Naville3, O. Spasic-Boskovic7, V. v. gen: None. P. Kind: None. C.M. Abbott: None. E. Heyningen1, P. Kind4, C. M. Abbott5, E. Osterweil4, L. Osterweil: None. L. Raymond: None. H.R. Crollius: Raymond7, H. R. Crollius3, D. R. FitzPatrick1 None. D.R. FitzPatrick: None. 1MRC Institute of Genetics & Molecular Medicine,  P08
.054.C Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Cambridge Institute for Detectionrateandre-analysisofexomesequencingdata Medical Research, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3Institut in a cohort of 207 individuals with neurodevelopmental de biologie de l’Ecole normale supérieure, Paris, France, disorders 4Centre for Integrative Physiology, Patrick Wild Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, M. Hebebrand, C. T. Thiel, C. Kraus, A. Ekici, A. Reis, C. 5Centre for Genomics and Experimental Medicine, IGMM, Zweier University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 6Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Univer- United Kingdom, 7Cambridge Institute for Medical sität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom Exome sequencing is the most efﬁcient test to diagnose Rarevariantsalteringcis-regulatoryelements(CRE)appear patients with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD). Given enriched in undiagnosed neurodevelopmental disease but the constantly growing number of NDD associated genes, few highly penetrant variants have been identiﬁed. We improvementsinanalysistoolsandinformationonvariants, present a pipeline which aims to discriminate likely diag- regular re-analysis of negative or unclear cases is recom- nostic CRE variants from those of neutral/low-penetrant mended. In a long-term study aiming at identifying the effect. Six rare testable CRE variants were identiﬁed using genetic basis of NDDs we performed exome sequencing targeted and whole genome sequencing in 48 unrelated (SureSelect_v.6; HiSeq2500) in 205 individuals from 197 males with apparent X-linkedintellectual disability (XLID) families presenting with NDDs who had negative test butwithoutdetectablecodingregionvariants.Thesevariant resultsincludingCMA.FilteringagainstknownNDDgenes segregated appropriately in families and altered conserved (SysID database) followed by identiﬁcation of de novo bases in CREs targeting known XLID genes. Three were variantsinallgenesresultedinadiagnosticrateof45%(89/ unique andthree wererarebuttoocommontobeplausibly 197). Interestingly, the diagnostic yield in singletons was causative for XLID. Cis-regulatory activity was initially higher than in trios (52% vs. 42%). We now re-analysed tested by comparing wild-type and mutant alleles in zeb- 105 unsolved sporadic cases regarding homozygous, com- raﬁsh embryos using dual-color ﬂuorescent enhancer pound-heterozygous, X-linked, de novo and autosomal reporters. Two variants showed striking changes: one dominantvariants in all genes, considering also an updated plausiblycausative(FMR1CRE)andtheother likely neutral/ list of 1,164 NDD genes and 1,127 candidate genes. One low-penetrant (TENM1CRE).These regulatory variants were additional case could be diagnosed: an affected boy inher- then “knocked-in” to mice and both caused abnormal ited a stop mutation in SETD5 from his healthy mother, embryonicneuralexpressionoftheirtargetgene.Onlymice which previously was missed due to ﬁltering for de novo carrying the plausible FMR1CRE showed disease-relevant variants in a trio setting, highlighting the relevance of behavioral defects. We consider FMR1CRE to be plausibly reduced penetrance. Furthermore, we identiﬁed 20 candi- disease-associated and resulting in complex misregulation date variants in 17 genes compatible with the clinical pre- of FMR1/FMRP rather than loss-of-function. This is con- sentationbutaﬁrmdiagnosiscouldnotbemadeduetolack sistentwithabsenceoftypicalphysicalfeaturesofFragileX of functional validation, including a de novo missense in affected individuals and electrophysiological anomalies variantinthecandidategeneNEUROD2.Therelativelylow in the brains of post-natal FMR1CRE mice. Thus, extreme re-analysis detection rate is probably due to the high initial rarity and the presence of relevant phenotypic features in detection rate based on a combination of diagnostic and knock-in mice were the only discriminative factors for research analysis strategy. causative CRE variants. Importantly, disruption of the M. Hebebrand: None. C.T. Thiel: None. C. Kraus: normalinvivopatternoftargetgeneexpressionindisease- None. A. Ekici: None. A. Reis: None. C. Zweier: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 341  P08
.055.A Introduction:Microdeletion 1q41-q42hasbeenassociated Exome-based gene panel analysis in patients with with a distinctive neurodevelopmental syndrome. The intellectual disability and epilepsy reported clinical features include: intellectual disability, seizures, dysmorphia and brain anomalies among others. E.D’haenens,E.Pouillie,S.Vergult,M.DeSmet,T.Sante, Haploinsufﬁciency of different genes has been proposed as B. Callewaert, O. Vanakker, B. Menten, A. Dheedene thecausalmechanism.Sincemostofthereported1q41-q42 microdeletions encompass both FBXO28 and WDR26 Center for Medical Genetics Ghent (CMGG), Ghent, genes, their causal role has been debated in recent years. Belgium Materials and Methods: Sequencing was carried out on an Illumina platform (MiSeq) considering a panel of 460 The implementation of whole exome sequencing (WES) in genes related to neurodevelopmental disorders. Raw reads the clinic has led to a steep increase in diagnostic yield in were mapped to the human genome using BWA. PCR patients with (syndromic) intellectual disability (ID) and/or duplicates were removed using Picard Tools; GATK was epilepsy.Since2017theCenterforMedicalGeneticsGhent used for base quality score recalibration and variant (UZ Ghent) offers a WES-based gene panel analysis for discovery. Variants were annotated using Annovar and genes related to ID and epilepsy. Here we present an ﬁltered according to their frequency in gnomAD database. overview our ﬁndings. WES was performed in ~1000 pro- Results: We identify a de novo c.1043 G>T substitution bands and both parents (if available) using the SureSelect not reported in gnomAD and causing a p.Arg348Leu AllExonkit(Agilenttechnologies)enrichmentfollowedby change in FBXO28. The patient is affected by severe 2x150bp sequencing on a HiSeq3000 or NovaSeq 6000 intellectual disability, epilepsy, brain alterations and absent platform (Illumina). Data analysis was done with a com- speech, with a global phenotype resembling that of the munitydevelopedpipelinebasedontheBroadInstituteBest 1q41-q42microdeletionsyndrome.Todate,onlyasinglede Practices (bcbio-nextgen). Virtual panel analysis was per- novo loss of function mutation in FBXO28 gene has been formed for 1175 genes and variant classiﬁcation was based reported for a patient having similar clinical features. on ACMG-AMG guidelines. In 21% of cases a deﬁnitive Conclusions:Thissecondcaseevidencesthecriticalrole genetic causal defect (class 4 or 5 variant) could be iden- of FBXO28 gene in 1q41-q42 microdeletion syndrome tiﬁed:in60%ofthesepatientsadenovovariantwasfound phenotype. FBXO28 protein is a component of the Skp- while in 40% the causal variant was inherited. From the Cullin-F-Box complex, which mediates proteasomal degra- latter 12,5% are variants in genes related to an X-linked dation. Dysfunctions of the ubiquitin proteasome system disorder, 41,5% to an autosomal dominant and 46% to an have been associated to several neurodevelopmental autosomal recessive disorder. In addition, in 25% of the disorders, such as: X-linked spinal muscular atrophy, patients an interesting variant of unknown signiﬁcance Angelman syndrome and Opitz BBB/G. (class 3) was reported. Currently, follow-up studies are N. Spataro: None. E. Gabau: None. N. Baena: None. ongoing to evaluate these class 3 variants, e.g. collecting M. Guitart: None. A. Ruiz: None. additional phenotypic data, performing segregation and transcriptome analysis. With a diagnostic yield between  P08
.058.A 21% and 46%, we can conclude that WES is a game- Next generation sequencing of a cohort of individuals changer in the diagnostic workup of patients with ID/ with syndromic intellectual disability epilepsy. E. D’haenens: None. E. Pouillie: None. S. Vergult: F. Santos-Simarro1,2, M. Pacio-Miguez1, S. García- None.M.DeSmet:None.T.Sante:None.B.Callewaert: Miñaúr1,2, V. Rufo-Rabadán1, M. Solís1,2, R. Mena1,2, C. None. O. Vanakker: None. B. Menten: None. A. Rodríguez-Jiménez1,2, V. E. Fdez-Montaño1,2, R. Martín- Dheedene: None. Arenas1, H. González-Pecellín1, Á. del Pozo1,2, E. Vallespín1,2, M. Palomares-Bralo1,2  P08
.056.B A de novo missense mutation highlights the role of 1INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, FBXO28 gene in 1q41-q42 microdeletion syndrome 2U753, CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain phenotype Introduction:Global developmental delay (GDD) / intel- N. Spataro, E. Gabau, N. Baena, M. Guitart, A. Ruiz lectual disability (ID) has an estimated prevalence in the generalpopulationof1-3%.ThegeneticcausesofGDD/ID Corporació Sanitaria Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain are highly heterogeneous, traditionally limiting the possi- bilitytoreachaspeciﬁcdiagnosis.Inrecentyears,withthe342 J.delPicchia advent of next generation sequencing (NGS), the genetic Northeastern Brazil, which has 28 consanguineous mar- diagnosis of GDD/ID has greatly improved and expanded riages and 59 genotyped family members. IMPA1 is with currently more than a 1000 genes involved. responsibleforthegenerationoffreeinositolfromdenovo Methods: We present the results of NGS testing in a biosynthesis and recycling from inositol polyphosphates cohortof456individualswithsyndromicGDD/ID(deﬁned and participates in the phosphatidylinositol signaling path- as GDD/ID plus additional manifestations such as con- way.TounderstandtheroleofIMPA1deﬁciencyinID,we genitalmalformations,growthabnormalitiesordysmorphic generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from features) evaluated in our clinical genetics department over patients and neurotypical controls and differentiated these a 42-month period (Jul2016-Dec2019). All had a previous intohippocampaldentategyrus-likeneuronsandastrocytes. normal 60K array-CGH (KaryoArray v3.0, Agilent). NGS IMPA1-deﬁcientneuronalprogenitorcells(NPCs)revealed trioanalysiswasperformedeitherusingacustomizedNGS substantialdeﬁcitsinproliferationandneurogenicpotential. panel containing 1253-1663 genes associated with neuro- At low passage NPCs ( P1
 to  P3
), we observed cell cycle developmental disorders (RD-Seq© v1.0-v6.0) and/or by arrest, apoptosis, progressive change to a glial morphology whole exome sequencing (WES). and reduction in neuronal differentiation. These observa- Results:Causal variants were identiﬁed in 131 different tions were validated by transcriptome proﬁling. Tran- genes in a total of 207 probands (45%), the majority scriptome analysis showed that NPCs and neurons derived autosomal dominant de novo variants (66%). Two novel from ID patients have extensive deregulation of gene GDD/ID causing genes have been identiﬁed and conﬁrmed expression affecting pathways necessary for neurogenesis withfurthercasesidentiﬁedthroughinternationalcollabora- andupregulationofgliogenic genes. IMPA1deﬁciencydid tion. Detailed results of the cohort will be presented. not affect cell cycle progression or survival in iPSCs and Conclusions:This study reﬂects the vast genetic hetero- glial progenitorcellsorastrocyte differentiation. Therefore, geneity associated to GDD/ID. Comprehensive clinical and this study shows that the IMPA1 mutation speciﬁcally molecular evaluation are key to a successful etiological affects NPC survival and neuronal differentiation. diagnosis, increasing our genomic understanding of GDD/ This study was ﬁnancially supported by the CEPID- ID and ultimately allowing improved medical management FAPESP (2013/08028-1), INCT/FAPESP (2014/50931-3) andgeneticcounsellingforthesepatientsandtheirfamilies. and FAPESP (Process Number: 2017/19877-0 and 2016/ F. Santos-Simarro: None. M. Pacio-Miguez: None. S. 09618-5). García-Miñaúr: None. V. Rufo-Rabadán: None. M. T.Figueiredo:None.A.Mendes:None.G.Kobayashi: Solís: None. R. Mena: None. C. Rodríguez-Jiménez: None. D. Moreira: None. D. Oliveira: None. E. Goulart: None. V.E. Fdez-Montaño: None. R. Martín-Arenas: None. S. Stern: None. F. Kok: None. M. Marchetto: None.H.González-Pecellín:None.Á.delPozo:None.E. None. R. Santos: None. F. Gage: None. M. Zatz: None. Vallespín: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None.  P08
.060.C  P08
.059.B Early diagnosis ofNPH P1
-associated developmental Inositol monophosphatase 1 (IMPA1) mutation in delay intellectual disability patients impairs neurogenesis but not gliogenesis K. Komlosi1, A. Tzschach1, K. Prückner-Engesser2, E. Komini2, N. Hirt1, J. Fischer1, B. Gläser1 T. Figueiredo1,2,3, A. Mendes2, G. Kobayashi3, D. Moreira3, D. Oliveira3, E. Goulart3, S. Stern2, F. Kok3, M. 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,MedicalCenter-Universityof Marchetto2, R. Santos4,2, F. Gage2, M. Zatz3 Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, 1Federal University of Alagoas, Faculty of Medicine, Schwarzwald-Baar Klinikum, Villingen-Schwenningen, Maceio, Brazil, 2The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Germany La Jolla, CA, United States, 3Human Genome and Stem Cell Research Center, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Introduction: Homozygosity for a recurrent 290 kb dele- Brazil, 4Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris, tion of NPH P1
 is the most frequent cause of isolated Paris, France nephronophthisis. It has also been detected in patients with Joubert syndrome (JS). JS is a rare autosomal recessive Ahomozygousmutationintheinositolmonophosphatase1 disorder characterized by a distinctive malformation of the (IMPA1) gene was recently identiﬁed in nine individuals cerebellumandbrainstem,hypotonia,ataxia,developmental with severe intellectual disability (ID) and disruptive delay and variable additional features. behavior.TheseindividualsbelongtothesamefamilyfromAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 343 Clinical report: We report on a 3-year-old girl born of Materials and Methods: We report on an 11-year old consanguineousparentswithsigniﬁcantpsychomotordelay, female presenting with moderate ID, no active speech expressive language disorder, muscular hypotonia, gait development, muscular hypotonia, one febrile seizure ataxia and increased reﬂexes in the lower extremities. during childhood and suspected autism. Family history Cranial MRI at age 8 and 33 months did not show any includes the father with learning difﬁculties and a paternal structural abnormality apart from a pineal cyst and lipoma aunt and cousin with learning difﬁculties, epilepsy and of the ﬁlum terminale in spinal MRI. A detailed examina- autism. tion revealed bitemporal narrowing, a depressed nasal Results: SNP-Array revealed a heterozygous 0.27 Mb bridge, hypertelorism, convergent strabismus, long, curly deletion disrupting the exons 8-19 of NRXN1. As the eyelashes,ahigh-arched palate,pointedteethandalow-set phenotype of our patient was more severe than would be hairline. expected, we additionally performed NGS-panel-diagnos- MethodsandResults:Chromosomalmicroarrayanalysis tics, which revealed unremarkable ﬁndings in the index (CMA)showedahomozygousdeletionof88.97kbat2q13 individual.Segregationanalysisintheparentsunexpectedly (110879075-110968043) encompassing the entire NPH P1
 revealed a heterozygous deletion of exons 10-19 in the gene.Bothparentscarrythedeletioninheterozygousform. father and a heterozygous deletion of exons 8-9 in the Conclusions: Homozygous NPH P1
 deletion represents mother. The mother is unaffected. theﬁrstmoleculardefectassociatedwithJS(JBT S4
,OMIM Conclusions: The initial diagnosis of NRXN1-associated #609583) in a subset of mildly affected patients. Reports developmental delay due to a seemingly heterozygous without the pathognomic molar tooth sign are very rare, deletion turned into a Pitt-Hopkins-like syndrome 2 caused though, subtle ﬁndings that may be missed have been by a compound-heterozygous deletion in NRXN1. Further reported. In our patient many features may evolve only genetic testing including segregation analysis are therefore later; there is a high risk for nephronophthisis and key for patients not phenotypically matching the initial ophthalmologic abnormalities. Our case adds to the diagnosis, especially in genes where multiple modes of spectrum of JS and emphasizes the clinical utility of inheritance are known. CMAintheelucidationofsyndromicdevelopmentaldelay. A.C. Teichmann:None.M.Stiller: None.S. Schubert: K. Komlosi: None. A. Tzschach: None. K. Prückner- None. S. Redler: None. R. Jamra: None. K. Platzer: Engesser: None. E. Komini: None. N. Hirt: None. J. None. N. Rahner: None. Fischer: None. B. Gläser: None.  P08
.062.B  P08
.061.A Comprehensive genetic analysis of intellectual disability When a seemingly heterozygous CNV turns out to be patients from the Kashubian population using homo- compound-heterozygous - from NRXN1-associated neu- zygosity mapping and exome sequencing rodevelopmental disorder to Pitt-Hopkins-like syn- drome 2 A. Charzewska1, T. Gambin1, J. Wierzba2, E. Kaczorowska2, E. Obersztyn1, B. Wojtaś3, B. Gielniewski3, A. C. Teichmann1, M. Stiller1, S. Schubert1, S. Redler2, R. R. Szlendak1,P. Górka-Skoczylas1,R. Tataj1,K. Kanabus1, Jamra1, K. Platzer1, N. Rahner3 S. Rzońca-Niewczas1, J. Bal1, D. Hoffman-Zacharska1 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofLeipzigMedical 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany, 2Heinrich-Heine-University, University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland, 3Nencki Institute of Medical Faculty, Institute of Human Genetics, Düsseldorf, Experimental Biology, Warsaw, Poland Germany,3InstituteofClinicalGenetics,Bonn,Germany Introduction: Autosomal recessive intellectual disability Introduction: Heterozygous CNVs and SNVs of NRXN1 (ARID) is the most common form of intellectual disability have been associated with a wide spectrum of neurodeve- (ID) in populations with frequent parental consanguinity. lopmentalandneuropsychiatricdisorders,includingmildto However, ARID is extremely heterogeneous, and the vast moderate intellectual disability (ID), autism spectrum dis- majority of ARID genes are still unknown. The main orders (ASD) and schizophrenia with reduced penetrance. research hypothesis of the study was the assumption that Furthermore homozygous and compound-heterozygous patients with ID belonging to the isolated Kashubian variants of NRXN1 are associated with the autosomal population have, because of parental consanguinity, recessive Pitt-Hopkins-like syndrome 2, including severe homozygous regions in the genome where pathogenic, ID and a spectrum of ASD, epilepsy and breathing recessive mutations are present. anomalies.344 J.delPicchia Materials and Methods: The project included 45 trafﬁcking in neuronal cilia. In order to investigate TUB families of Kashubian origin. There were 64 patients role in the etiology of ID and identify dysregulated mole- diagnosed with ID in this group. To identify regions where cular pathways in patients, we conducted whole blood pathogenic, homozygous mutations may be present, an transcriptome proﬁling of patients and their age and sex innovative, computational method combining homozygos- matched healthy individuals, using RNA-seq technique. ity mapping and exome sequencing was used. In this Thetranscriptionproﬁledemonstratesderegulationof1045 method homozygous regions were indicated by coverage genes (p-value < 0.01, fold change > 1.5), of these 155 analysis involving biallele frequency calculation, transfor- geneswereupregulatedand890genesweredownregulated. mation and segmentation. Upregulated genes show enrichment in Insulin synthesis Results: No evident homozygous regions were identiﬁed and processing, diabetes and metabolism pathways and the in patients of Kashubian origin. Mutations responsible for molecular function of downregulated genes mainly include ARIDwererare.Ithasbeenshownthatthemolecularbasis constituent of ribosome, transcription regulator and DNA ofIDinthisgroupisnotARID,butautosomaldominantID binding. Signaling pathways involved in the regulation of and X-linked ID. Overall, clearly pathogenic variants have translation and insulin synthesis and processing were been identiﬁed in 29% of examined families. amongst the most signiﬁcant dysregulated pathways in Conclusions:ThisprojectwastheﬁrstinPoland,andone patients.Here,weputanemphasisontheroleofinsulinand of the ﬁrst in Europe aiming to identify recessive risk translation pathways in the molecular pathophysiology of factors involved in the pathogenesis of ID based on ID. This study was funded by National Institute For Med- genomic data obtained by testing an isolated European ical Research Development (NIMAD). population. The molecular basis of ID in the group of F. Peymani: None. K. InanlooRahtloo: None. Kashubian patients proved to be not autosomal recessive, but autosomal dominant and X-linked ID.  P08
.064.A Grant Number: NCN 014/15/D/NZ5/03426 Identiﬁcation and functional characterization of a novel A. Charzewska: None. T. Gambin: None. J. Wierzba: homozygous mutation in KCNMA1 encoding voltage None. E. Kaczorowska: None. E. Obersztyn: None. B. and calcium sensitive potassium channel is associated Wojtaś:None.B.Gielniewski:None.R.Szlendak:None. with dyskinesia, epilepsy, intellectual disability, cerebel- P.Górka-Skoczylas:None.R.Tataj:None.K.Kanabus: lar and corticospinal tract atrophy None. S. Rzońca-Niewczas: None. J. Bal: None. D. Hoffman-Zacharska: None. E. Yucesan1, B. Goncu2, A. Aslanger3, C. Ozgul4, S. Hasanoglu2, G. Yesil3  P08
.063.C Identiﬁcation the role of TUB in Intellectual Disability 1Bezmialem Vakif University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- using RNA-seq ment of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Bezmialem Vakif University, Experimental Research Center, Istanbul, F. Peymani1, K. InanlooRahtloo2 Turkey, 3Bezmialem Vakif University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Medi- 1Genetic Research Center, Universityofsocialwelfareand pol University, Regenerative and Restorative Medical Rehabilitation,Sciences,Tehran, Iran,IslamicRepublicof, Research Center, Istanbul, Turkey 2School of Biology, University College of Science, Uni- versity of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Introduction: KCNMA1 encodes, alpha subunit of the voltage, and calcium-sensitive potassium channel, pre- Intellectual disability (ID) is a genetically and phenotypi- dominantly expressed in the central nervous system. callyheterogeneousdisorderwithmorethan1000candidate Therefore abnormal function in this gene may occur neu- genes to date. Despite the accelerating rate of gene dis- rological conditions. covery for ID, the molecular mechanisms underlying the Materials and Methods: We report 15 year-old patient disease remain elusive. In a previous study, whole exome who was born at term with healthy conditions. Motor sequencing in a consanguineous family with ﬁve affected signalsweredelayed,andalsoseizuresstartedattheageof individuals representing ID led to the identiﬁcation of a 18months.EEGrevealedgeneralizedspike-waveactivities. splice site variant (NM_003320:c.1281+1G>A) in TUB, a Brain MRI performed, atrophy of the cerebellum was novel ID candidate gene, whose mutations have already detected. Recent clinical examination;contractures on the been associated with Retinal dystrophy and obesity. TUB large joints, and dyskinetic tremor. Whole exome sequen- acts both as a membrane bound transcription regulator and cing (WES) was performed and in-slico analyses were an adaptor molecule in insulin signaling and GPCR conducted. MCF7 and 293T cells transfected with eitherAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 345 wild-typeormutantexpressionvectors.Cellulardistribution Combined with the CNV detection algorithm in the was determined by immunoﬂuorescence. Functional analy- software, both intragenic and large ‘backbone’ CNVs can sis was performed using electrophysiological approach be conﬁdently detected. based on whole-cell patch-clamp. We implemented a web-based data analysis solution that Results: WES revealed homozygous variation runsOGT’sNGSanalysispipeline,comprisingmanystate- (NM_001161352.1:c.1372C>T, p.Arg458Ter). The variant of-the-art open-source NGS software tools. These tools was not observed in publicly available or in-house were carefully chosen and deployed using containers to databases. Immunoﬂuorescent staining revealed that novel ensure cross-platform compatibility and reproducibility. variant is not interfering with synthesis of KCNMA1 Pipeline optimisation and performance was assessed using however mutation exhibit dominant-negative effect on cell equivalent array data and reference materials. viability when compared to wild-type. 293T and MCF7 We will outline the results from over 200 intellectual cells transfected with homozygous p.Arg458Ter mutation disability and developmental research samples to demon- showed markedly increased KCNMA1 currents compared strate the efﬁciency of the CNV, SNV and LOH detection. tocontrolsonpatchclamprecording,andthesedatasupport The study demonstrated that the assay automatically called loss-of-function effect of all KCNMA1 mutants. 97% of CNVs (including small intragenic CNVs), 99% of Conclusions: Herein we report a 15-year old boy who LOHsover5Mband100%ofSNVs.Theassaywasableto hasneurologicalconditions.Anovelhomozygousstop-gain call CNV deletions as small as 1.42 kb and CNVs in mutation detected by WES and conﬁrmed by conventional sampleswithmosaicismaslowas10%.Wehavedescribed sequencing. Afterwards, functional characterization was an improved method to investigate ID/DD, providing conducted using two step-approach, immunostaining to criticalinformationonnotjustCNVs,butSNVsandIndels detectsubcellulareffectofthevariationandpatch-clampto as well. detect difference between mutant vs. wild-type of the J. Reid: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; protein.Homozygousmutationwasconsideredascausative Oxford Gene Technology. S. Kachhia: None. P. Dougall: for this clinical condition. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Oxford This study was supported by Bezmialem Vakif Uni- GeneTechnology.J.Shovelton:None.D.Molha:None.J. versity, Scientiﬁc Research Projects Unit, Project No: Kasturiarachchi: None. J. Holdstock: None. E. Marek: 2.2019/7 None. V. Pullabhatla: None. L. Parkes: None. D. Hurd: E. Yucesan: None. B. Goncu: None. A. Aslanger: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Oxford None. C. Ozgul: None. S. Hasanoglu: None. G. Gene Technology. Yesil: None.  P08
.066.C  P08
.065.B Clinical and genetic aspects in 26 patients with KBG A next generation sequencing solution to detect copy syndrome caused by mutation of ANKRD11. number variants, single nucleotide variants and loss of heterozygosityinintellectualdisabilityanddevelopmen- M.Rio1,S.Rondeau1,G.Barcia1,V.Benoit2,A.Munnich1, tal delay samples C. Ormières1, A. Guimier1, S. Marlin1, J. Amiel1, S. Lyonnet1, G. Baujat1, N. Garcelon2, V. Cormier-Daire1 J.Reid,S. Kachhia, P.Dougall,J.Shovelton,D.Molha,J. Kasturiarachchi,J.Holdstock,E.Marek,V.Pullabhatla,L. 1Department of genetics, Necker Hospital, Assistance Parkes, D. Hurd Publique-HôpitauxdeParis,Paris,France,2DataScience plateform, IMAGINE Institut, Université Paris Descartes, Oxford Gene Technology, Oxford, United Kingdom Sorbonne Paris Cité,, Paris, France The detection of copy number variants (CNVs) in intel- Normal 0 21 false false false FR X-NONE X-NONE /* lectual disability (ID) and developmental delay (DD) sam- Style Deﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style- ples is crucial in elucidating the genetic cause of name:"Tableau Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso- abnormality.WehavedevelopedatargetedNGSpaneland tstyle-colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style- analytical software to accurately detect CNVs, as well as priority:99;mso-style-parent:"";mso-padding-alt:0cm5.4pt SNVs, indels and LOH. 0cm 5.4pt; mso-para-margin-top:0cm; mso-para-margin- The assay uses a bait capture approach, which is able to right:0cm; mso-para-margin-bottom:10.0pt; mso-para-mar- capture the exons and untranslated regions (UTRs) from gin-left:0cm; line-height:115%; mso-pagination:widow- over 700 genes, chosen for their relevance in ID/DD, as orphan; font-size:11.0pt; font-family:"Calibri","sans-serif"; well as a range of backbone regions across the genome. mso-ascii-font-family:Calibri; mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-346 J.delPicchia latin; mso-hansi-font-family:Calibri; mso-hansi-theme-font: Hôpital Femme Mere Enfant, Centre Hospitalier Universi- minor-latin; mso-fareast-language:EN-US;} KBG syn- taire de Lyon, Lyon, France, 8Service de Génétique, drome (OMIM 148050), ﬁrst described in 1975, is a rare Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Hôpital de la Pitié- autosomal dominant disorder characterized by distinctive Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 9Université Pierre et Marie facial features, developmental delay, short stature, and Curie(UniversitéParis06),UMR S1127
,INSERMU1127, skeletal anomalies. In 2011, heterozygous mutations in the CNRS UMR 7225, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle ANKRD11 gene were identiﬁed in patients with KBG Épinière, Paris, France, 10Unité de Génétique Clinique, syndrome. Since then, 200 cases have been described Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Groupe Hospitalier Universi- expanding the clinical phenotype. Here we present 26 taire de l’Est Parisien, Paris, France, 11Service de unrelatedpatientswithpathogenicmutationsinANKRD11. Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Groupe Hos- Wecomparethesepatientswithpreviouslyreportedcasesto pitalier Universitaire de l’Est Parisien, Paris, France, further expand and update the phenotypic and mutational 12Laboratoire Cerba, Saint-Ouen-l’Aumône, France, spectrum of this condition. The mutation occurred de novo 13Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France, 14Institut de in the 22 families where parental DNA was available and Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS was inherited from a parent in two patients. Age at diag- UMR-7104, Inserm U964, Université de Strasbourg, nosis ranged from 7 to 58 years. Developmental delay was Strasbourg, France reported in 94% of the patients. Intellectual disability was not a constant ﬁnding. Three patients attended regular High-throughput sequencing improved the molecular diag- school.68%ofpatientshavebehavioraldisorders,and30% nosis in individuals with intellectual deﬁciency (ID) and, of patients have methylphenidate therapy for attention through its unbiased approach, to broaden the clinical deﬁcithyperactivitydisorder.Gastrointestinalﬁndingswere spectra associated with each gene involved. We report common.56%ofpatientshaddeafness.Thisstudyallowed herein 6 patients with isolated intellectual disability (ID), us to conﬁrm clinical features already reported in the lit- carriers of a likely pathogenic variant in KCNQ2, a gene erature(deafness,feedingdifﬁculties,cerebellaratrophy).In usually implicated in benign familial neonatal seizures addition, agenesis of the olfactory bulbs, a sign not (BFNS) or early-onset epileptic encephalopathy (EOEE). described in the literature to our knowledge, was identiﬁed Patients were diagnosed either by targeted HTS (panel of in 3 patients. 450-556 epilepsy- and/or ID-related genes) or exome M. Rio: None. S. Rondeau: None. G. Barcia: None. V. sequencing.Pathogenicityofthevariantsandpredictionsof Benoit:None.A.Munnich:None.C.Ormières:None.A. proteic structural changes were assessed by multiple in Guimier: None. S. Marlin: None. J. Amiel: None. S. silicotools.Allpatientswerechildrenatdiagnosis.Patients’ Lyonnet: None. G. Baujat: None. N.Garcelon: None. V. IDrangedfrommildtoseverewithpredominanceofspeech Cormier-Daire: None. disturbance and autistic features. All patients carried a  P08
.067.A heterozygouslikelypathogenicmissensevariantinKCNQ2, Pathogenic variants in KCNQ2 cause intellectual deﬁ- 4 of them disrupted the same amino-acid (Arg144, pre- ciency without epilepsy: broadening the phenotypic viouslyreportedinEOEE).Wecompiledallthepathogenic spectrum of a potassium channelopathy. variants previously reported (>130). We observed that missense variants in the voltage-sensing domain and the E. Schaefer1, L. Mary2, E. Nourrisson2, C. Feger2, B. pore are signiﬁcantly more associated toEOEEthan BFNS Isidor3,G.Lesca4,5,6,D.Ville7,B.Keren8,9,A.Afenjar10,T. (p<0.01,Fishertest).However,therewasastrongoverlap Billette11, D. Trost12, C. Cieuta-Walti13, J. Mandel14,2, B. betweenvariantscausingEOEE,isolatedIDandBFNSand Gérard2, A. Piton2,14 an important intra-familial phenotypic variability. To con- clude, pathogenic variants in KCNQ2 can be associated 1Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires with isolated ID. We did not highlight strong correlations de Strasbourg, Institut de Génétique Médicale d’Alsace, between KCNQ2-related phenotypes and the associated Strasbourg,France,2LaboratoiredeDiagnosticGénétique, variants’localization.Asecondgenetichit,aburdenofrare Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, variants or other extrinsic factors may explain such a phe- France,3Servicedegénétiquemédicale,UnitédeGénétique notypic variability. However, it is of interest to study clinique, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 4Service de encephalopathy genes in non-epileptic ID patients. Génétique,HôpitauxUniversitairesdeLyon,Lyon,France, E. Schaefer: None. L. Mary: None. E. Nourrisson: 5UniversitéClaude Bernard Lyon1,Lyon,France,6Centre None. C. Feger: None. B. Isidor: None. G. Lesca: None. de recherche en Neuoscience, CNRS UMR S5292
, INSERM D. Ville: None. B. Keren: None. A. Afenjar: None. T. U1028, Lyon, France, 7Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 347 Billette:None.D.Trost:None.C.Cieuta-Walti:None.J. S. Riedel, M. Linné, B. Eichhorn Mandel: None. B. Gérard: None. A. Piton: None. MVZMitteldeutscherPraxisverbundHumangenetikGmbH,  P08
.068.B Dresden, Germany Brain-on-a-chip:alteredneuronalnetworkdevelopment in neural cells derived from patients with intellectual Introduction: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare congenital disability disorder characterized by typical facial features, postnatal growthdeﬁciency,intellectualdisability,skeletalanomalies N. Nadif Kasri, M. Frega, B. Mossink, K. Linda, H. van andcardiacdefectswithvariableexpressivity.Mutationsin Bokhoven theKMT2Dgene(lysine-speciﬁcmethyltransferase2D)and the KDM6A gene (lysine-speciﬁc demethylase 6A) have Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands been identiﬁed as the main cause of KS. Both genes are involved in cellular differentiation processes during Greatprogresshasbeenmadeoverrecentyearstowardsthe embryonic development. Here, we report a 4 10/12-year old identiﬁcation of intellectual disability (ID)-related genes, girl with the clinical diagnosis of KS due to typical facial resulting in hundreds of genes. A remaining challenge, dysmorphism, slightly reduced head circumference and however,istoconnectthegeneticcausesofIDtoprocesses speech delay. that establish and/or modify neuronal circuit function. The MaterialsandMethods:Weperformedmulti-genepanel recent developments in induced pluripotent stem cells testing via sequencing by synthesis, which includes among (iPSCs) have provided us with the ability to model patient- others the two core genes KMT2D and KDM6A associated speciﬁcneuronalnetworks. Westudiedthedevelopment of with KS. neuronal networks of iNeurons derived from patients with Results: We revealed a novel missense variation Kleefstra Syndrome, Koolen-de Vries Syndrome, and c.15869G>A / p.(Gly5290Asp) in exon 49 of the KMT2D Kabuki Syndrome. These are three well-described intellec- gene in the index patient. This mutation occurred de novo, tual disability syndromes caused by mutations in different since it was absent in the clinically unaffected parents. histone modiﬁers, respectively in EHMT1, KANS L1
and Conclusions: The majority of mutations (about 87 %) KMT2D.Littleisknownastohowdisruptioninthesegenes causing KS produce premature termination codons. How- lead to altered neuronal network development. Here, we ever, the role of missense mutations remains weakly monitored the electrophysiological activity of neuronal explored,althoughtheymaybedisease-relevantdependings networks coupled to multi-electrode arrays (MEAs) over on the localization in the gene. The detected missense time and compared their activity to healthy controls and variant is situated in the functional "FY-rich" domain C- between syndromes. Interestingly, independent clustering terminal (FYRC) of the protein, suggesting that it may analysis revealed that all tested patient lines deviated from affect function. It has previously not been annotated in healthycontrollines,whichfunctionally clustered together. GnomAD or Ensembl and is classiﬁed as “probably Whereas Koolen-de Vries patient lines showed a general damaging” by several prediction data bases like reduced level of activity, Kleefstra syndrome and Kabuki PolyPhen-2. There is also a strong evidence for the syndrome patient lines were mainly characterized by disease-causing effect due to de novo occurrence and the changesinneuronalnetworkburstactivityandorganisation. patient´s phenotype. Interestingly, patient lines from the same syndrome phe- S. Riedel: None. M. Linné: None. B. Eichhorn: None. notypically clustered together, but separately between syn- dromes. These data indicate that neuronal network  P08
.070.A measurement of iNeurons on MEAs is a robust and sensi- Reﬁning the phenotypic & mutational spectrum in a tive method to perform genotype-phenotype analyses for multinational cohort of O’Donnell-Luria-Rodan NDDs and can be a powerful platform for drug Syndrome screening assays N. Nadif Kasri: None. M. Frega: None. B. Mossink: C. Velmans1, A. O’Donnell-Luria2,3, E. Argilli4, F. Tran- None. K. Linda: None. H. van Bokhoven: None. Mau-Them5,A.Vitobello5,M.Rech6,A.Abicht7,M.Aubert- Mucca8, J. Carmichael9, N. Chassaing8, R. Clark10, C.  P08
.069.C Coubes11, K. de Dios12, B. Funalot13, M. Joseph9, C. Novel missense mutation of the KMT2D gene in a girl Kenendy9, I. van de Laar14, D. Lehalle13, K. Leppig15, L. with Kabuki syndrome348 J.delPicchia Leßmeier1, L. Pais2,3, H. Paterson2, S. Ramanathan10, E. intellectual disability and macrocephaly with subtle facial Sherr4, C. Netzer1, C. Schaaf6,16, F. Erger1 features in most patients. In contrast to the study of O’Donnell-Luria et al.21, the rate of autism in our cohort 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, was higher with ~40%, whereas seizures were reported in Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, only a single patient with recurring febrile seizures. Cologne, Germany, 2Manton Center for Orphan Disease Furthermore, we describe additional anomalies and symp- Research, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical toms reported only in one or two patients, for which a School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Program in Medical potential causal relation to the disruption of KMT2E and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and remains to be investigated. Our study, bringing the total Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Brain Develop- ofknownpatientstomorethan50withinayearoftheﬁrst ment Research Program, Department of Neurology, Uni- publication, also illustrates a surprisingly high relative versity Hospital California San Francisco, San Francisco, frequency of ODLURO worldwide. CA, United States, 5Inserm UMR 1231 Genetics of Footnotes1 O‘Donnell-Luria et al., Am J Hum Genet. Developmental Disorders, FHU-TRANSLAD, University 2019 Jun 6; 104(6): 1210–1222 Hospital Dijon-Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 6Molecular C. Velmans: None. A. O’Donnell-Luria: None. E. and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Argilli: None. F. Tran-Mau-Them: None. A. Vitobello: Houston, TX, United States, 7Medical Genetics Center None. M. Rech: None. A. Abicht: None. M. Aubert- (MGZ), Munich, Germany, 8Department of Medical Genet- Mucca:None.J.Carmichael:None.N.Chassaing:None. ics, University Hospital Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 9Val- R. Clark: None. C. Coubes: None. K. de Dios: None. B. ley Children`s Hospital, Madera, CA, United States, Funalot: None. M. Joseph: None. C. Kenendy: None. I. 10Pediatrics Specialty Clinics, Loma Linda University van de Laar: None. D. Lehalle: None. K. Leppig: None. Medical Center, San Bernardino, CA, United States, L.Leßmeier:None.L.Pais:None.H.Paterson:None.S. 11Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ramanathan:None.E.Sherr:None.C.Netzer:None.C. Montpellier,Montpellier,France, 12DepartmentofMedical Schaaf: None. F. Erger: None. Genetics,DaytonChildren`sHospital,Dayton, OH,United States, 13Department of Clinical Genetics, University  P08
.071.B Hospital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 14Department of Minimal 239-kb microdeletion spanning KMT2E in a Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, boy with neurodevelopmental disorder. Rotterdam,Netherlands,15GeneticServices,KaiserPerma- nente ofWashington, Seattle, WA,United States, 16Institute K. Varvagiannis1,2, K. Kosma2, A. Mitrakos2, J. Traeger- of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Faculty of Synodinos2, M. Tzetis2 Medicine and University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany 1Biomedical Research Foundation Academy Of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Medical Introduction: The KMT2E-associated neurodevelopmental School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, disorder named O’Donnell-Luria-Rodan Syndrome Athens, Greece (ODLURO)wasﬁrstdescribedbyO’Donnell-Luriaetal.in 20191. This previous study included 38 patients with het- Background: Disruptive KMT2E variants have been erozygous,mostlytruncatingdenovovariantsinKMT2Eor recently reported to cause a neurodevelopmental disorder microdeletions disrupting the gene. We present the second characterized by developmental delay (DD), intellectual case series of patients with ODLURO, reﬁning the muta- disability (ID) and subtle dysmorphism. Epilepsy, autism tional and phenotypic spectrum of this not-so-rare and macrocephaly are part of the phenotype in a subset of syndrome. the affected individuals. Results:Wereport13additionalpatientswithODLURO The occurrence of truncating variants in most of these fromclinicalcentersinEuropeandtheUS.Wedetectedten subjectsandtheoverlappingfeaturesobservedincaseswith heterozygous nonsense or frameshifting variants, two with microdeletions spanning this gene suggest haploinsufﬁ- predicted deleterious effects on splicing, and one micro- ciency as the mechanism underlying this type of variants. deletionencompassing>90%ofKMT2E’scodingsequence Clinical description and molecular ﬁndings: A male (eleven changes conﬁrmed de novo). Eleven variants and wasreferredforgeneticevaluationattheageof2monthsin the microdeletion are novel, one has been previously the context of prenatal-onset hydronephrosis, DD and observed1. We conﬁrm and reﬁne the phenotypic spectrum dysmorphic features. Investigation with chromosomal of the KMT2E-related neurodevelopmental disorder, espe- microarray (CMA) revealed a 239-kb microdeletion of cially concerning developmental delay with rather mild 7q22-q23spanning2proteincodinggenes,namelyKMT2EAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 349 and LHFP L3
. The deletion was classiﬁed as VUS at the KdVS patients compared to controls. Gene set enrichment time of initial reporting. analysis (GSEA) revealed cell type-speciﬁc enrichment of Re-evaluationoftheCMAresultuponlastexaminationof up- and down-regulated genes in gene sets involved in thechildatthe ageof 3years and 3 months, resultedinre- processes such as cell cycle regulation, cellular respiration classiﬁcationofthevarianttolikelypathogenic.Similarlyto and early development. These results show that MEA-seq other individuals harboring variants affecting KMT2E, our allowsforcharacterizationofiPSC-derivedneuronsbothon proband presented DD, dysmorphic features albeit without a functional and transcriptional level, and therefore is a occurrenceofautisticfeatures,epilepsyorabnormalgrowth powerful tool to study mechanisms underlying neurodeve- parameters. Review of his medical records revealed lopmental disorders. persistenceofhydronephrosiswithoutassociatedanomalies A.H.A. Verboven: None. K. Linda: None. M. Hoge- of the urogenital tract. The boy had extensive work-up for weg:None.C.A.Albers:None.B.B.A.deVries:None.P. severe constipation, raising suspicion of possible Hirsch- A.C. ‘t Hoen: None. N. Nadif Kasri: None. sprung disease. Conclusions: We provide a detailed clinical description  P08
.073.A of our proband, focusing on ill-deﬁned previously reported Mutations in KPTN, a rare cause of macrocephaly and issues such as bowel dysmotility while extending the intellectual disability phenotypicspectrumofthedisorderwithadditionalfeatures such as hydronephrosis. M. Pacio Miguez1, F. Santos Simarro1,2, S. García- K.Varvagiannis:None.K.Kosma:None.A.Mitrakos: Miñaúr1, C. Rodríguez Jiménez1, Á. del Pozo1,2, M. Solís1, None. J. Traeger-Synodinos: None. M. Tzetis: None. R. Velázquez Fragua3, V. Rufo-Rabadán1, V. Fdez Montaño1, I. Rueda Arenas1, M. Gomez del Pozo1, N.  P08
.072.C Gallego Onís1, M. Palomares Bralo1,2 MEA-seq for combined gene expression and neuronal network measurements in iPSC-derived neurons from 1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, INGEMM, Koolen-de Vries patients Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación BiomédicaenReddeEnfermedadesRaras,ISCIII,Madrid, A.H.A.Verboven,K.Linda,M.Hogeweg,C.A.Albers,B. Spain, Spain, 33 Servicio de Neurología Infantil. Hospital B. A. de Vries, P. A. C. ‘t Hoen, N. Nadif Kasri Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands Introduction: Pathogenic homozygous or compound het- erozygous variants in KPTN have emerged as a novel Koolen-de Vries Syndrome (KdVS) is an intellectual dis- autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder asso- ability syndrome caused by haploinsufﬁciency of KANS L1
, ciated to developmental delay, intellectual disability, mac- due to a loss-of-function mutation in KANS L1
 or a micro- rocephaly and language deﬁcit with only 13 individuals deletion in region 17q21.31. To study KdVS in vitro, we described in the medical literature so far. We report two generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from additionalsiblingswithahomozygouspathogenicvariantin ﬁbroblasts of three KdVs patients and three healthy con- the KPTN gene. trols. Additionally, we introduced a loss-of-function muta- MaterialsandMethods:Variantswereidentiﬁedusinga tion in KANS L1
 in one control line using the CRISPR/ NGS custom panel containing 1663 genes involved in Cas9 system. For all cell lines, iPSCs were differentiated neurodevelopmental disorders (RD-Seq © V6.0). into neurons (iNeurons) by forced expression of Results: A homozygous dinucleotide duplication Chr19 neurogenin-2 (Ngn2) resulting in a homogeneous popula- (GRCh37):g.47984018_47984019dup; NM_007059.3: tionofmatureexcitatoryneuronswithin30days.MEA-seq c.597_598dup; p.(Ser200Ilefs*55) in KPTN was found in was performed to measure neuronal activity of iNeurons a 7-year-old girl and her 3-year-old sister born to non- using micro-electrode arrays (MEAs), followed by RNA consanguineous healthy parents with no family history of sequencing (RNA-seq). The RNA-seq method used allows note. Both presented with developmental delay, macro- us to screen many samples at low cost by barcoding and cephaly, frontal bossing, language deﬁcit and delayed pooling samples during the library preparation. MEA anterior fontanel closure. Brain MRI revealed anatomical measurements revealed a decreased network burst rate and changes in one. None of them had seizures or behavioral more irregular ﬁring pattern in KdVS iNeurons. RNA-seq problems. A clinical description our cases and a review of wasperformedontheseiNeuronsaswellasoniPSCsfrom the previously reported individuals will be provided. the same individuals. Differential expression (DE) analysis Conclusions: Cardinal features of KPTN-related disease was performed to identify changes in gene expression in observed in all 15 cases are developmental delay350 J.delPicchia /intellectual disability, language deﬁcit, macrocephaly (of Results: A boy with MCSZ has a homozygous prenatal or postnatal origin) and frontal bossing. Variable c.1253_1269dup17 pathogenic variant in the PNKP gene, clinical features include seizures, behavioral problems, the older sister has homozygous c.542C>T pathogenic craniosynostosis, brain MRI changes and endocrine variant in ALPL gene and the younger sister has abnormalities. In summary, homozygous or compound homozygous pathogenic variants in both genes. heterozygous variants in KPTN may be a hitherto under- Conclusions: The simultaneous presence of infantile recognized cause of macrocephaly, developmental delay, hypophosphatasia and MCSZ has never been reported intellectual disability and language deﬁcit. We suggest before. The overlapping clinical features of infantile including KPTN in gene panels for the study of patients hypophosphatasia and MCSZ (hypotonia, craniosynostosis, with these features. seizures,shortstature,failuretothrive)aswellasthemilder M. Pacio Miguez: None. F. Santos Simarro: None. S. clinical course of MCSZ, resulted in delayed diagnosis of García-Miñaúr: None. C. Rodríguez Jiménez: None. Á. MCSZ in the female patient. del Pozo: None. M. Solís: None. R. Velázquez Fragua: Acknowledgement: supported by CERRM and EU None.V.Rufo-Rabadán:None.V.FdezMontaño:None. through the European Regional Development Fund by I. Rueda Arenas: None. M. Gomez del Pozo: None. N. grant No. KK.01.1.1.01.0008. Gallego Onís: None. M. Palomares Bralo: None. I.Sansovic:None.A.Bobinec:None.A.Measic:None. M. Kero: None. I. Barisic: None.  P08
.074.B The simultaneous presence of microcephaly, seizures,  P08
.075.C and developmental delay due to PNKP gene mutation Updated insight into the mutational and phenotypic and infantile hypophosphatasia caused by mutation in spectrum of MED13L-related intellectual disability ALPL gene R. Asadollahi1, P. Boonsawat1, B. Popp2,3, E. Torti4, I. I. Sansovic, A. Bobinec, A. Measic, M. Kero, I. Barisic Bader5,A.Vitobello6,S.Moutton6,L.Pinson6,L.Lambert6, A. C. Thuresson7, M. Sobol7, C. Soussi Zander7, K. Department of Medical Genetics and Reproductive Health, Platzer8,V.Strehlow8,F.Hornemann8,P.Zacher9,F.Tran Children’sHospitalZagreb,ScientiﬁcCentreofExcellence Mau-Them6, A. L. Bruel6, M. J. Hajianpour10, R. Kovacs- for Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine (CERRM), Nagy11, G. Lay-Son12, L. Amlie-Wolf13, J. Kaplan14, A. University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croa- Chassevent15, C. Smith-Hicks16, A. Slavotinek17, M. K. tia Kukolich18, K. Nugent19, E. Roeder19, Y. A. Zarate20, Y. Toshiyuki21,C.Jackel-Cram22,I.Maystadt23,S.G.Mehta24, Introduction: Microcephaly, seizures, and developmental T. A. Briggs25, K. Chandler25, A. van Haeringen26, C. delay (MCSZ; MIM #613402) is neurodevelopmental dis- Kraus2, C. Zweier2, A. Reis2, A. Rauch1 order with onset in infancy caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the PNKP gene. 1University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Friedrich- Thereisarangeofphenotypicseverity:somepatientshave Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Ger- early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE), whereas many,3UniversityofLeipzigHospitalsandClinics,Leipzig, others have more well-controlled seizures and a protracted Germany, 4GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, course. Infantile hypophosphatasia (MIM #241500) is 5Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria, caused by a pathogenic mutation in the ALPL gene char- 6Inserm-Université Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, acterized by defective bone mineralization, a combination France, 7Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 8Univer- of typical radiological signs, hypercalcemia, hyperpho- sity of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany, 9Saxon sphatemia, and low alkaline phosphatase activity. We Epilepsy Center Kleinwachau, Radeberg, Germany, 10East describe a family with three affected children born of Tennessee State University, Tennessee, TN, United States, allegedly nonconsanguineous parents: a twelve-year-old 11Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 12Pontiﬁcia boy with microcephaly, craniosynostosis, EIEE, patchy/ UniversidadCatolicadeChile,Santiago,Chile,13Nemours polymicrogyria, polyneuropathy and global developmental A.I. Dupont Hospital for Children, DE, USA, Wilmington, delay (MCSZ), his eleven-year-old sister with infantile DE, United States, 14Nemours A.I. Dupont Hospital for hypophosphatasia and nine-year-old sister with infantile Children, Wilmington, DE, United States, 15Kennedy hypophosphatasia, microcephaly, global developmental Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States, 16Johns delay and paroxysmal seizures with vomiting. Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD, United Method:Clinicalexomesequencingwasperformedinall States, 17University of California, San Francisco, CA, family members using Illumina TruSight One Kit. United States, 18Cook Children’s Medical Center, FortAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 351 Worth, TX, United States, 19Baylor College of Medicine, None. I. Maystadt: None. S.G. Mehta: None. T.A. Houston, TX, United States, 20University of Arkansas for Briggs: None. K. Chandler: None. A. van Haeringen: Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States, 21Tokyo None. C. Kraus: None. C. Zweier: None. A. Reis: None. Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan, 22Royal A. Rauch: None. University Hospital, Saskatoon, SK, Canada, 23Centre de Génétique Humaine, Gosselies, Belgium, 24Cambridge  P08
.076.A University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, InvestigationoftheMM P2
haplotypeasariskfactorfor United Kingdom, 25University of Manchester, Manchester, the development of cerebral palsy United Kingdom, 26Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands A. S. Djuranovic1, N. Cerovac2, D. Perovic1, M. Grk1, M. Pesic1, T. Damnjanovic1 MED13L-related intellectual disability (MIM #616789) is anautosomaldominantneurodevelopmentalsyndromewith 1Institute of Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Clinic of ~80casesreportedsofar.Tofurtherdelineateitsspectrum, Neurology and Psychiatry for Children and Youth, we have studied 28 clinically well-characterized new Belgrade, Serbia patients (age 7 months to 31 years) harbouring pathogenic or likely pathogenic (P/LP) MED13L sequence or copy Introduction: Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy (HIE) is number variants. We found 21 likely gene-disrupting the most important cause of cerebral palsy (CP). Perinatal (LGD) de novo variants distributed throughout the gene brain damage activates the immune system and inﬂamma- and7deleteriousmissensevariants(5denovo,2unknown tion mediators. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are inheritance). We observed clustering of our new and pre- necessary in inﬂammation and might be involved in neu- viously reported P/LP missense variants between the two rodegeneration. Aim of this study was to examine possible LxxLLmotifs,betweenLeu-ZipperandSer-richmotifs,and association between MM P2
 promoter polymorphisms and within the C-terminus of the MED13L protein, which are CP onset in children with perinatal asphyxia. deprived of missense variants in gnomAD. Clinically, we Material and methods: Study included 96 patients aged have been able to ascertain details of developmental mile- 1to16yearswithanamnesisofperinatalasphyxia.Detailed stones and growth parameters, and to ﬁnd multiple novel neurological evaluation and neuroimaging (ultrasound, features. Remarkably, we noticed previously unreported computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging) were mildglobaldevelopmentaldelayin3/28(~11%)andverbal performed for all subjects. TaqMan assays were used for dyspraxia in 6/28 (~21%) patients harbouring LGD var- genotyping rs243864 and rs243866 MM P2
 gene poly- iants. Moreover, we observed a higher frequency of epi- morphisms. Haplotypes were calculated with Haploview lepsy (~86% vs. ~29%) and severe congenital heart defects software. requiring surgery (~29% vs. 0%) in our patients with mis- Results: Frequencies of rs243866 and rs243864 haplo- sense compared to LGD variants. We also report the ﬁrst types in patients who developed CP were: 72.2% GT, MED13L patient with no obvious congenital heart defect 22.3% AG, 2.8% GG and 2.7% AT, while in the group of who passed away at the age of ~10 years possibly due to thosewhodidnotdevelopCPwere89.0%GT,10.0%AG, respiratory insufﬁciency and right-heart failure. Altogether, and 1.0% GG. AG haplotype was signiﬁcantly more our ﬁndings highlight new aspects of the syndrome and frequent in patients with CP (p=0.018). Also, in patients suggest a critical role for the MED13L C-terminus, mis- with AG haplotype, HIE and pathological neuroimaging sense defects of which may even cause a more severe ﬁndingweremorefrequentlyobserved(p=0.012,p=0.048, phenotype than MED13L haploinsufﬁciency. respectively) R. Asadollahi: None. P. Boonsawat: None. B. Popp: Conclusions: MM P2
 promoter haplotype could be a risk None.E.Torti:None.I.Bader:None.A.Vitobello:None. factor for CP in patients with perinatal asphyxia. S. Moutton: None. L. Pinson: None. L. Lambert: None. A.S.Djuranovic:None.N.Cerovac:None.D.Perovic: A.C. Thuresson: None. M. Sobol: None. C. Soussi None. M. Grk: None. M. Pesic: None. T. Zander: None. K. Platzer: None. V. Strehlow: None. F. Damnjanovic: None. Hornemann: None. P. Zacher: None. F. Tran Mau- Them:None.A.L.Bruel:None.M.J.Hajianpour:None.  P08
.077.B R. Kovacs-Nagy: None. G. Lay-Son: None. L. Amlie- Uncovering molecular mechanisms and neuronal path- Wolf: None. J. Kaplan: None. A. Chassevent: None. C. ways involved in SETB P1
 disorder using human stem Smith-Hicks: None. A. Slavotinek: None. M.K. Kuko- cell models lich: None. K. Nugent: None. E. Roeder: None. Y.A. Zarate: None. Y. Toshiyuki: None. C. Jackel-Cram:352 J.delPicchia M.M.K.Wong1,J.denHoed1,M.Heide2,W.B.Huttner2, D. J. Josifova1, R. Marcinkute1, C. Deshapnde2, T. B. W. van Bon3, S. E. Fisher1,4 Seraﬁmova3, S. Byrne4, M. Lim4, A. Siddiqui5 1Max Plank Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, 1Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Manchester Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Centre for Genomic Medicine, St. Mary’s Hospital, Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany, 3Radboud Manchester, United Kingdom, 3University Hospital Bristol University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Nether- NHS Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Evelina Children’s lands, 4Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5St. Thomas Hospital, Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands London, United Kingdom Introduction: Haploinsufﬁciency of the SETB P1
 gene Smith-Kingsmore Syndrome (SKS) [MIM#616638] is a causesaneurodevelopmentalsyndrome(SETB P1
 disorder) rare multisystem disorder characterised by macrocephaly, involvingexpressivespeechimpairmentandmild-moderate dysmorphic features, malformations of cortical develop- developmental delay. The precise functions of SETB P1
, ment (MCD) and intellectual disability, caused by hetero- encoding the SET-binding protein 1, are yet to be dis- zygous, germline variants in the mammalian target of covered. Therefore, the molecular mechanisms or neuronal rapamycin (MTOR). At 31 months old, our patient was pathwaysbywhichrareloss-offunctionSETB P1
mutations referred with signiﬁcant global developmental delay, dys- cause a neurodevelopmental disorder remain largely morphic features and large head circumference (HC). unknown. Antenatally, moderate bi-ventricular dilatation and macro- Materials and Methods: By employing induced plur- cephaly were observed. Ventricular dilatation was rapidly ipotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived brain organoids and progressed in the ﬁrst 6 months and stabilised by one year transcriptomicapproaches,weaimtodissecttheunderlying old. There was no history of seizures. Clinical examination neuronal pathways. We will differentiate patient-derived revealedHC>4SDabovethemean,curlyhair,dysmorphic iPSCs carrying de novo heterozygous SETB P1
 mutations facial features, ﬂeshy hands and feet with prominent fetal andSETB P1
knockoutiPSCsgeneratedwithCRISPR/Cas9 ﬁnger pads. She had peripheral and, more marked, core gene-editing into brain organoids. Their transcriptomic hypotonia, and was not independently mobile. Neurometa- proﬁles will be analysed at both whole organoid and bolic investigations were unremarkable. Serial MRI ima- single-cell levels. Morphological examination, clustering, ging demonstrated moderate, stable ventriculomegaly, thin cell-type speciﬁc differential gene expression analysis and corpus callosum, subtle bilateral anterior/opercular poly- cell lineage tracing will be performed. microgyria and subepemdymal nodular heterotopia. Array Results: We have identiﬁed six truncating mutations in CGH was normal. Whole exome sequencing revealed a de the SETB P1
 gene in a Dutch cohort. We have generated novo,likelypathogenicMTORc.7217T>Gp.(Val2406Gly) homozygous and heterozygous SETB P1
 knockout iPSC variant located in a highly conserved nucleotide and amino linesusingCRISPR/Cas9gene-editing.Moreover,wehave acid position in the Kinase domain. The gene encodes characterized a robust protocol for generating cerebral serine/threonine-protein kinase mTOR, member of the organoidsusingtheisogeniccontroliPSClinethatweused phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) family. The mTOR to generate SETB P1
 knockout iPSCs. engagesintwocomplexes,mTOR C1
andmTOR C2
,andis Conclusions: These iPSC lines are ready for cerebral a potent regulator of cell growth, energy metabolism, organoid differentiation and subsequent downstream ana- autophagy and cytoskeletal organisation. Deregulation of lyses.Inthelong-term,wehopethatcell-culturemodelscan the mTOR pathway has been implicated in cancer, cardio- provideaplatformfortestingdrugpanelswiththepotential vascular, autoimmune and neurodegenerative diseases, to rescue aberrant molecular/cellular phenotypes that we often referred to as mTORopathies. We present a new case observe.Together,thisworkpromisestooffer insights into of SKS and review the literature to further delineate the fundamentalneuronalmechanismsthatgoawryinSETB P1
 phenotype. disorder and, ultimately, to accelerate development of D.J. Josifova: None. R. Marcinkute: None. C. therapeutic applications. Deshapnde:None.T.Seraﬁmova:None.S.Byrne:None. M.M.K. Wong: None. J. den Hoed: None. M. Heide: M. Lim: None. A. Siddiqui: None. None. W.B. Huttner: None. B.W. van Bon: None. S.E. Fisher: None.  P08
.081.C Things you might miss in your sequencing study -  P08
.080.B Reanalyzing 152 cases with neurodevelopmental Smith-Kingsmore Syndrome: a case report and delinea- disorders tion of phenotypeAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 353 T. Bartolomaeus, R. Abou Jamra, B. Popp Norway,3CenterforIndividualizedMedicine,MayoClinic, Rochester,MN,UnitedStates,4ServicedeGénétique,CHU Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical de Tours, Tours, France, 5Dept of Clinical Genetics, Center, Leipzig, Germany Temple Street Children’s Hospital Dublin 1, Dublin, Ireland, 6Praxis für Kinderneurologie, Hamburg Altona, Clinical guidelines recommend iterative re-analysis in Hamburg, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Uni- undiagnosedcases.Re-interpretationandreportingresearch versity ofLeipzigHospitalsandClinics, Leipzig,Germany, in light of novel data is not well investigated. Of 152 8Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, consanguineousfamilieswithNDDswepreviouslyfounda University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 9Wessex diagnosis in 56 and identiﬁed VUS or candidate genes in Clinical Genetics Services, University Hospital South- 53. In total 116 variants were reported in 109 families. We ampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 10Institut für re-evaluated all reported variants according to updated Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Ger- classiﬁcation guidelines or our internal candidate gene many, 11Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, scoring system. Variants in candidate genes were uploaded University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Nether- to GeneMatcher and collaborations were joined/initiated. lands, 12Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics, We re-processed all data using up-to-date tools, references University Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain and databases for case-level re-analysis. In 26/116 (22%) variants the clinical relevance changed through variant Recently, we identiﬁed de novo FBXO11 variants as cau- classiﬁcation or increased signiﬁcance of candidate genes. sative for a variable neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD). In4 (9%) ofthe 43undiagnosed cases apossiblediagnosis We now assembled clinical and mutational information on wasfound.Ofthe53originallyidentiﬁedcandidategenes8 13 additional cases. The phenotypic spectrum remains were in the meantime associated with NDDs, 2 are in highly variable, and the mutational spectrum includes submission and 3 collaborations were entered in the course intragenic deletions, likely gene disrupting and missense of this project. Two reported variants were missed by the variants distributed across the protein, in line with hap- updated computational pipeline due to alignment (old data) loinsufﬁency of FBXO11 as the most likely disease or reference (ambiguous region in hg38) issues. We sub- mechanism. mitted all relevant variants to public databases and revised Weanalyzedtheeffectsoftendifferentmissensevariants theirpreviousclassiﬁcation.Ourresultssupporttheneedto onproteinexpressionandlocalizationbyoverexpressionof re-evaluate research screening studies. We highlight mutant constructs in HEK293 and Hela cells. Variants potential beneﬁts and pitfalls of computational re-analysis. located close to the N-terminal F-Box domain lead to Its complexity for old data should be weighed against the altered subcellular localization and exclusion from the decreasingre-testingcosts.Publishedvariantsinestablished nucleus, and to reduced protein levels in western blot. In and candidate disease genes are not assessable unless contrast,variantslocalizedintheC-terminalZn-ﬁngerUBR reported in databanks. Future studies should incorporate domain lead to an accumulation in cytoplasmatic granules post-publication variant management and bio-banking of and to increased protein levels in the cell. Together, these patient cells for upcoming methods. resultsindicatethatsomemissensevariantsimpairfunction T. Bartolomaeus: None. R. Abou Jamra: None. B. through mislocalization or reduced expression. Popp: None. UsingDrosophilamelanogasterasamodelorganism,we investigated the effects of Fbxo11 deﬁciency on neuronal  P08
.082.A development. We found a mild impairment of basic MissensevariantsinNDD-associatedFBXO11impairits locomotor function in the climbing assay upon neuronal localization and Fbxo11 deﬁciency leads to neuronal knockdown and a stronger impairment upon glial knock- impairment in Drosophila melanogaster down. We also found decreased dendrite branching and total dendrite length upon Fbxo11 knockdown in multiple A. Gregor1, T. Meerbrei1, L. Distel1, T. Gerstner2, A. dendrite neurons of the larval body wall. Gupta3, A. Toutain4, S. A. Lynch5, C. Maxton6, J. R. Our study further characterizes the FBXO11 associated Lemke7, J. A. Bernat8, H. M. Bombei8, N. Foulds9, A. NDD and the underlying pathomechanism and highlights Kuechler10,A.Bouman11,M.PalomaresBralo12,F.Santos the importance of Drosophila Fbxo11 for neuronal devel- Simarro12, S. Garcia-Minaur12, C. Zweier1 opment and basic neuronal functioning. A. Gregor: None. T. Meerbrei: None. L. Distel: None. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander- T.Gerstner:None.A.Gupta:None.A.Toutain:None.S. University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, A.Lynch:None.C.Maxton:None.J.R.Lemke:None.J. 2Department of Pediatrics, Sørlandet Hospital, Arendal, A. Bernat: None. H.M. Bombei: None. N. Foulds: None.354 J.delPicchia A. Kuechler: None. A. Bouman: None. M. Palomares Pippucci8,P.Dimartino8,S.DeRubeis9,G.B.Ferrero10,A. Bralo: None. F. Santos Simarro: None. S. Garcia- Brusco5, D. F. Giachino2,1 Minaur: None. C. Zweier: None. 1University of Torino, Department of Clinical and Biolo-  P08
.083.B gical Sciences, Orbassano (TO), Italy, 2Service of Genetic Using RNA-sequencing to expand the diagnostic toolset Counseling, Department of Medicine and Oncology, AOU for neurodevelopmental disorders: a pilot study San Luigi Gonzaga, Orbassano (TO), Italy, 3Microcitemia, AOU San Luigi Gonzaga, Orbassano (TO), Italy, 4SC M. Radtke, D. Le Duc, R. Jamra MedicalGenetics,AOUCittàdellasaluteedellascienzadi Torino, Molinette, Torino (TO), Italy, 5Department of Medical University Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Torino (TO), Italy, 6Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Introduction: Despite the inclusion of next generation PediatricoBambinoGesùIRCSS,Roma,Italy,7Department sequencing in routine genetic diagnostics, around 50 % of of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di casesremainunsolved.Onecauseforthisisthedifﬁcultyof Sanità, Roma, Italy, 8Department of Medical and Surgical assessing synonymous and non-coding SNVs. RNA- Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 9Seaver sequencing is one way to unravel their potential causality AutismCenterforResearchandTreatment,IcahnSchoolof and gain ﬁrst insights in potential pathomechanisms. Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, MaterialsandMethods:WeextractedRNAfromPAX- 10Department of Pediatrics and Public Health and blood of a ﬁrst cohort of 26 individuals with syndromic Pediatric Sciences, University of Torino, Torino (TO), neurodevelopmental disorders that remained unsolved after Italy exome sequencing. The RNA-sequencing data was ana- lyzed with respect to gene expression and splicing Neurodevelopmentaldisorders(NDDs)areaheterogeneous alterations. category of neuropsychiatric disorders, with onset during Results:Aﬁrstevaluationofthesequencingdatashowsa childhood/adolescence and a worldwide prevalence of 0,5- strong inter-individual ﬂuctuation, stressing the importance 2%.TheetiologyofNDDsincludebothenvironmentaland of selecting appropriate control groups. Differentially genetic causes. In this study we evaluated the genotype- expressedgeneswerethenanalyzedwithregardtofunction, phenotype correlation of 201 patients with NDDs con- interaction and disease association. In at least two secutively admitted to our Unit for a clinical genetic eva- individuals, we identiﬁed disruptive splicing events in luationfrom2006to2019.Basedontheclinicalevaluation, genes with a known disease association. In one individual the appropriate genetic testing was performed for each we found a signiﬁcant enrichment in differentially patient: array-CGH and FMR1 analysis were used as ﬁrst- expressed genes involved in synaptic signaling and tier tests and speciﬁc genetic testing/WES as second-tier neuronal processes. This implies a possible disturbance of analysis. Array-CGH was performed in 158 cases and neuronal pathways and offers a set of potential candidate positive in 13 (DR 8.2%). Two patients were carriers of a genes for further investigations. We are still in the process complex chromosomal rearrangements (one due to chro- of interrogating the sequencing data and will present a full mothripsis),afamilyhadarecurrent4p15.31p15.2deletion. report of our ﬁndings at the conference. Speciﬁcgenetictestsrevealedapathogenicvariantin7.5%. Conclusions: The blending of exome and transcriptomic WESwasperformedin52patientsandrevealedamutation sequencing data allows for more in depth exploration and in HNRNPH2, DLG4, IQSE C2
, AT P1
A3 genes (DR 16%). offers the potential to identify disruptive variants which Overall,16differentgeneticconditionswerediagnosedand remain unnoticed by exome sequencing. Fragile-X syndrome was the most frequent (3 cases). M. Radtke: None. D. Le Duc: None. R. Jamra: None. Detection rate of array-CGH in our cohort was roughly in line with the 10% estimated by in literature. In our cohort,  P08
.084.C the results of WES are encouraging but certainly under- Diagnostic array-CGH and exome sequencing in a estimated: DR of this test would be higher if WES was cohort of patients with neurodevelopmental disorders: employed also instead of other second-tier speciﬁc gene genetic heterogeneity and phenotypic variability analysis (DR estimated: 23%). The new knowledge and technologies would probably change the multi-step genetic A.Pelle1,2,G.Mandrile3,2,E.DiGregorio4,P.Dentelli4,E. testing approach, indicating WES or WGS as ﬁrst step Giorgio5, L. Pavinato5, M. Tartaglia6, A. Brusselles7, T. analysis after FMR1 test as routine diagnostic test in all patients with NDDs.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 355 A. Pelle: None. G. Mandrile: None. E. Di Gregorio:  P08
.087.C None. P. Dentelli: None. E. Giorgio: None. L. Pavinato: Loss-of-function truncating and missense variants in None. M. Tartaglia: None. A. Brusselles: None. T. NSD2 cause decreased methylation activity and are Pippucci: None. P. Dimartino: None. S. De Rubeis: associated with a distinct neurodevelopmental None. G.B. Ferrero: None. A. Brusco: None. D.F. phenotype Giachino: None. P.Zanoni1,K.Steindl1,D.Sengupta2,H.Sticht3,P.Joset1,  P08
.086.B A. Baar1, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts4, M. Shinawi5, I. Exome sequencing of Slovenian children with neurode- Maystadt6, N. Belnap7, V. Benoit6, B. B. A. de Vries8, D. velopmental disorders Lacombe9,A.Larson10,R.Pfundt8,K.Ramsey7,L.Snijders Blok8, P. G. Wheeler11, M. R. Wevers8, O. Gozani2, A. D. Krgovic, S. Stangler Herodez, A. Golub, N. Kokalj Rauch1 Vokac 1University of Zurich, Schlieren, Switzerland, 2Stanford Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Maribor, Slovenia University, Stanford, CA, United States, 3Friedrich- Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Ger- Introduction: Since the implementation of molecular kar- many, 4University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, yotyping in diagnostics of neurodevelopmental disorders Netherlands, 5Washington University School of Medicine, (NDDs), the understanding of the genetic causes of these St. Louis, MO, United States, 6Institut de Pathologie et de diseases has signiﬁcantly improved. However, with the Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium, 7Translational Genomics introduction of the NGS, the setting of the genotype- Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 8Radboud phenotype correlations has become even more straightfor- University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, ward. By determining causative mutations in individual 9Hôpital Pellegrin CHU, Bordeaux, France, 10University genes, it enabled us to understand the role of individual of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Denver, CO, genes in the etiology of the disease, and signiﬁcantly United States, 11Arnold Palmer Hospital, Orlando Health, increased the diagnostic yield for genetic diagnostic of Orlando, FL, United States NDDs in Slovenian children. Methods: Clinical exome sequencing was performed by Introduction: NSD2 (alias WHS C1
) has been suspected to using the TruSight One Illumina Kit (4813 genes) and be critical for the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) phe- focusing on phenotype driven analysis on a small serie (N notypefordecades.Recently,fewcasereportsdescribedthe 45) of pediatric patients with various NDDs. ﬁrst patients harbouring heterozygous truncating NSD2 Results:WithNGSanalysis,wewereabletoidentifythe variants. In order to understand the full clinical spectrum geneticoriginofthedisorder(pathogenicSingleNucleotide and molecular mechanism, we investigated 15 new indivi- Variant - pSNV) in 29% of screened patients. In 24% of duals carrying truncating or missense NSD2 variants. patients, a SNV classiﬁed as variant of unknown signiﬁ- Materials and Methods: Detailed phenotypic informa- cance (VOUS) has been determined within the disease- tionwascollectedfor15newsporadicandfamilialaffected associated genes. individuals. Clinical data were compared to the available Discussion: With phenotype-genotype driven analysis, information of 10 previously described carriers of NSD2 we were able to identify rare and clinically poorly deﬁned truncating variants or small deletions. The structural effect syndromes in previously undiagnosed patients. Among of missensevariants was modelled insilico. Each missense them, disorders such as Kabuki and Noonan syndrome, variantwastestedinvitroformethyltransferaseactivityand Menkes disease, mutations in IQSE C2
 gene causing the for the ability to reconstitute H3K36me2 in knockout Rett-like phenotype etc. were identiﬁed. A high percent of cell lines. pSNVarealsopartlyduetotheselectionofsuitablepatients Results: the core phenotype associated with NSD2 for NGS testing based on their good clinical characteriza- pathogenic variants overlaps only partially with WHS and tion. Our study conﬁrmed a high efﬁciency of NGS in includes mild to moderate DD, prenatal-onset growth diagnostic of NDDs and enabled the diagnosis of rarely retardation,failuretothriveandcharacteristicfacialfeatures described cases which will be presented. distinct from WHS. Carriers of missense variants were D. Krgovic: None. S. Stangler Herodez: None. A. signiﬁcantly taller and had more frequent behavioural/ Golub: None. N. Kokalj Vokac: None. psychological issues compared to carriers of truncating variants.BMIwassigniﬁcantlyhigherinolderpatients.All missense variants in known structures are supposed to interferewithNSD2’sfoldingandfunctioninsilico.Invitro356 J.delPicchia data showed that missense variants lead to a reduction of for the function. In summary, a review of the clinical and methylation activity. molecular data of all the reported patients so far, inclusive Conclusions: We present the ﬁrst comprehensive patient the present patient, suggests that the TB L1
XR1 variants series with NSD2 pathogenic variants, providing a sig- causing PS affect most likely protein structures with com- niﬁcant reﬁnement of the clinical spectrum. Furthermore, parable gene function. we report the ﬁrst missense variants and provide evidence M. Stefanova: None. H. Klang Åstrand: None. M. for pathogenicity through decreased methylation activity. Frid: None. I. Hüning: None. Funding: SNF, NIH, Stanford-MCHRI P.Zanoni:None.K.Steindl:None.D.Sengupta:None.  P08
.092.B H. Sticht: None. P. Joset: None. A. Baar: None. C.M.A. PP P2
R5D variants in patients with variable neurodeve- van Ravenswaaij-Arts: None. M. Shinawi: None. I. lopmental phenotypes Maystadt: None. N. Belnap: None. V. Benoit: None. B. B.A. de Vries: None. D. Lacombe: None. A. Larson: M.Aspromonte1,2,E.Leonardi1,2,R.Polli1,2,E. Bettella1,2, None. R. Pfundt: None. K. Ramsey: None. L. Snijders F. Cesca1,2, S. Sartori3, L. Turolla4, I. Donati5, R. Blok: None. P.G. Wheeler: None. M.R. Wevers: None. Guerrini6, A. Murgia1,2 O. Gozani: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; EpiCy- 1Dept. of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of pher, Inc., Athelas Therapeutics. A. Rauch: None. Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica (IRP), Città della Speranza, Padova, Italy,  P08
.089.B 3Dept.ofWoman’sandChild’sHealth,UniversityHospital A novel TB L1
XR1 variant in Pierpont syndrome ofPadova,Padova,Italy,4U.O.S.GeneticaMedicaAzienda ULS S9
, Treviso, Italy, 5UO Genetica Medica AUSL M. Stefanova1, H. Klang Åstrand1, M. Frid2, I. Hüning3 Romagna, Ravenna, Italy, 6Neuroscience Department, Children’s Hospital A. Meyer-University of Florence, 1UniversityHospitalLinköping,Linköping,Sweden,2Ryhov Firenze, Italy County Hospital, Jönköping, Sweden, 3University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany PP P2
R5D is the B regulatory subunit of protein phospha- tase 2A (P P2
A) and has been recently associated with a Pierpontsyndrome(PS)(OMIM#602342)isararedisorder neurodevelopmentaldisorder(NDD),characterizedbymild characterized by intellectual impairment, characteristic to severe Intellectual Disability (ID), Autism Spectrum facial gestalt, microcephaly, fetal ﬁnger/toes pads and Disorder (ASD), pronounced hypotonia, macrocephaly and anteromedial fat pads of the heels (Pierpont et al, 1998). A speech impairment. To date, only 23 individuals with de recurrent de novo TB L1
XR1 variant [c.1337A>G; p. novo PP P2
R5D mutations have been described. Here we (Tyr446Cys)] is known to be disease-causing for the syn- report ﬁve PP P2
R5D variants in ﬁve unrelated individuals drome (Heinen et al, 2016). Additionally, other TB L1
XR1 with NDD: two novel missense, one rare intronic variants variants [c.974G > A;p.(Cys325Tyr) and c.1336 T > C;p. and two recurrent missense pathogenic mutations, (Tyr446His)] have been reported in patients with a typical Glu198Lys and Glu200Lys. The Glu198Lys mutations, PS (Lemattre et al, 2018). The authors suggest compar- locatedintheP P2
Acatalyticsubunitinteractioninterface,is ability between the functional consequences of all these associated with a more severe phenotype due to its severe variants. TB L1
XR1 haploinsufﬁciency, though, is reported effectsonthebindingpropertiesoftheBregulatorysubunit tocauseadifferententity,MRD41(OMIM#616944).Here P P2
A. All but one the mutations were detected by targeted we report on a four-year-old girl with a typical PS pheno- NGS analysis of a ID/ASD multigenic panel in 600 NDDs type and a novel de novo heterozygous TB L1
XR1 variant, subjects. Among these cases we report for the ﬁrst time a c.1184A>G;p.(Tyr395Cys). We studied the three- dual diagnosis. A girl carrying a de novo Glu198Lys dimensional structure of TBLR1 protein and noted that mutation,identiﬁedbywhole-exomesequencing,exhibiting the amino acid affected by this variant is located in the a very severe NDD with ID, ASD, absent speech, marked WD6 repeat of the WD40 domain and lies in the close hypotonia, and typical dysmorphisms, also carry a full vicinityoftheaminoacidsaffectedbytheotherPScausing FMR1 gene mutation. The fragile X phenotype seemed to variants (Tyr446 and Cys325). The WD40 domain has a beovershadowedbytheseverePP P2
R5Dclinicalfeatures. β-propeller-like-structure where hotspot residues at the The other individuals carrying PP P2
R5D mutations (seg- domain’s top as identiﬁed by WDSPdb (Wang et al, 2015) regation analysis is currently underway) showed a rather arelikelytointeractwithβ-catenin.Tyr395andTyr446are mild ID phenotype, very variable dysmorphic features, no hotspotresiduesandthereforepredictedtobeofimportance hypotonia and, only in case of the Glu200Lys mutation,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 357 absence of ASD features. These new cases conﬁrm the S.Gürsoy:None.F.Hazan:None.G.Akıncı:None.A. phenotype correlations in recurring mutations and con- Ünalp: None. tribute to highlighting the variability of PPP-related NDDs. M. Aspromonte: None. E. Leonardi: None. R. Polli:  P08
.094.A None. E. Bettella: None. F. Cesca: None. S. Sartori: Biallelic variants in PSMB1 encoding the proteasome None. L. Turolla: None. I. Donati: None. R. Guerrini: subunit b6 cause impairment of proteasome function, None. A. Murgia: None. microcephaly, intellectual disability, developmental delay and short stature  P08
.093.C A novel mutation in WDR62 gene in a patient who had S. A. Paracha1, M. Ansar2, F. Ebstein3, H. Özkoç4, J. autosomal recessive primary microcephaly with con- Iwaszkiewicz5, M. Gesemann6, V. Zoete5,7, E. Ranza2,8,9, F. comitant sarcoglycanopathy A. Santoni2,10, M. T. Sarwar1, J. Ahmed1, E. Krüger3, R. Bachmann-Gagescu4,6, S. E. Antonarakis2,8,11 S. Gürsoy1, F. Hazan2, G. Akıncı3, A. Ünalp3 1IInstitute of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical 1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Dr. Behcet Uz Chil- University, Peshawar, Pakistan, 2Department of Genetic dren’s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey, 2Department of Medical MedicineandDevelopment,UniversityofGeneva,Geneva, Genetics,Dr.BehcetUzChildren’sHospital,Izmir,Turkey, Switzerland, 3Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Institut für 3Department of Pediatric Neurology, Dr. Behcet Uz Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Greifs- Children’s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey wald, Germany, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Swiss Institute of Bioinfor- Introduction: Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly matics,MolecularModelingGroup,Lausanne,Switzerland, is a rare form of primary microcephaly, characterized by a 6Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of marked reduction in brain size and intellectual disability. Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 7Department of Fundamental WDR62,whichisthesecondmostfrequentlymutatedgene, Oncology, Lausanne University, Ludwig Institute for plays a signiﬁcant role in neuronal progenitor cell pro- Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland, 8Service of liferation and spindle formation. GeneticMedicine,UniversityHospitalsofGeneva,Geneva, Materials and Methods: Herein, we present a novel Switzerland, 9Medigenome, The Swiss Institute of Genomic WDR62 gene mutation in a 11 year-old girl. The index girl Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 10Department of Endocri- patient was referred to our genetic clinic for microcephaly, nology Diabetes and Metabolism, University Hospital of epilepsy and developmental delay. Her parents had a Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 11iG E3
 Institute of consanguineous marriage and the patient had a 2 year-old Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland brother who had microcephaly and developmental delay anda10year-oldhealthybrother.Shehadincreasedserum The molecular cause of the majority of rare autosomal CKlevelsandmusclebiopsyﬁndingswerecompatiblewith recessivedisordersremainsunknown.Consanguinitydueto sarcoglycanopathy. An autosomal recessive microcephaly extensive homozygosity unravels many recessive pheno- panel (including 9 gene) and limb-girdle muscular dystro- types and facilitates the detection of novel gene-disease phy panel (including 31 gene) with MiSeq® NGS system, links. Here, we report two siblings with phenotypic signs wereperformedinthepatient.Sangerseguencingwasused including intellectual disability, developmental delay, and for family segregation analysis. microcephaly from a Pakistani consanguineous family in Results: We detected a novel homozygous frameshift whichwehaveidentiﬁedhomozygosityforp(Tyr103His)in mutation (c.621_622delAG; p.Glu208GlyfsTer23) in the PSMB1 gene (Genbank NM_002793) that segregated WDR62 gene. The 2 year-old brother was homozygous, with the disease phenotype. PSMB1 encodes a β-type pro- whereas the healthy parents were heterozygous for this teasome subunit (i.e. β6). Modeling of the p(Tyr103His) mutation. No pathogenic mutation was detected in limb- variant indicates that this variant presumably weakens the girdle muscular dystrophy panel. interactions between PSMB1/β6 and PSMA5/α5 protea- Conclusions: We have identiﬁed a novel frameshift some subunits and thus destabilizes the 20S proteasome mutation in WDR62 gene and to our knowledge, this is the complex. Biochemical experiments in human SHSY5Y ﬁrst case who had autosomal recessive primary micro- cellsrevealedthatthep(Tyr103His)variantaffectsboththe cephaly with concomitant sarcoglycanopathy. Further processing of PSMB1/β6 and its incorporation into protea- molecular studies for sarcoglycanopathies will allow us to some, thus impairing proteasome activity. CRISPR/Cas9 better understand the genetic etiology in this patient. mutagenesis or morpholino knock-down of the single psmb1 zebraﬁsh orthologue resulted in microcephaly,358 J.delPicchia microphthalmiaandreducedbrainsize.Geneticevidencein additional PTEN-associated phenotype. Children who are the family and functional experiments in human cells and suspectedofhavingalysosomalstoragediseasethatcannot zebraﬁsh indicate that PSMB1/β6 pathogenic variants are be conﬁrmed should be considered for an extended genetic the cause of a recessive disease with intellectual disability, analysis including PTEN. microcephaly and developmental delay due to abnormal T. Scholz: None. T. Bierhals: None. J. Johannsen: proteasome assembly. None. N. Muschol: None. M. Hempel: None. S.A. Paracha: None. M. Ansar: None. F. Ebstein: None. H. Özkoç: None. J. Iwaszkiewicz: None. M.  P08
.097.A Gesemann: None. V. Zoete: None. E. Ranza: None. F. Biallelic loss-of-function variants in RB L2
 in siblings A.Santoni: None.M.T.Sarwar:None.J.Ahmed: None. with a neurodevelopmental disorder E. Krüger: None. R. Bachmann-Gagescu: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. T. Brunet1,2, M. Radivojkov-Blagojevic2, P. Lichtner2, V. Kraus3, T. Meitinger1,2, M. Wagner1,2,4  P08
.095.B Expanding the PTEN-associated phenotype: two 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,TechnicalUniversityMunich, patients with de novo PTEN mutations and MPS-like Munich, Germany, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Human phenotype Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Ger- many, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, T. Scholz1, T. Bierhals1, J. Johannsen2, N. Muschol2, M. Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, München Klinik Hempel1 Schwabing und Harlaching, Klinikum Rechts der Isar der Technischen Universität Munich, Germany, Munich, Ger- 1UKE, Institute of Human Genetics, Hamburg, Germany, many, 4Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum 2UKE, Department of Pediatrics, Hamburg, Germany München, Neuherberg, Germany, Neuherberg, Germany Introduction: Heterozygote PTEN variants are associated Introduction: The RB L2
 locus has been associated with with different but overlapping diseases, such as PTEN intelligence but not with a monogenic disorder to date. hamartoma tumor syndrome, Cowden syndrome, RB L2
 encodes p130, a member of the retinoblastoma pro- Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome and macrocephaly tein family. Previous studies on p130 knockout mice dis- autism syndrome. We report on two patients with de novo playing embryonic death and impaired neurogenesis PTEN mutations who presented with an MPS-like highlight the importance of RB L2
 in brain development. phenotype. Material&Methods:WeperformedExomesequencing Casereports:Patient1:A3-year-oldboy,whoistheﬁrst (ES)intwosiblingswithaneurodevelopmentaldiseaseand child of healthy parents, was referred to hospital due to their parents. Subsequent segregation analysis was done developmental delay, macrocephaly, splenomegaly and with haplotype analysis by GSA-Array in all four (two facial dysmorphism leading to suspicion of a metabolic affected and two unaffected) siblings and their parents. disease. Results after extended metabolic work up were Results: The two siblings share a phenotype character- normal. The brain MRT revealed occipital white matter ized by severe intellectual disability (no ability to stand/ anomalies and enlarged perivascular spaces. Trio whole walk, noexpressive language),stereotypies, autoaggressive exome sequencing (WES) identiﬁed the de novo missense behavior, dysmorphic features and supra- and infratentorial variant c.80A>T [p.(Tyr27Phe)] in PTEN. Patient 2: A 4- atrophy in cMRI. ES identiﬁed compound-heterozygous year-old girl, who is the second child of healthy parents, variants in RB L2
 as the sole candidate (NM_005611.3) in was referred to hospital due to macrocephaly, mild motor both patients: A heterozygous nonsense variant c.556C>T, developmental delay and dysmorphic features resembling a p.(Arg186Ter) and heterozygous in-frame deletion of exon storage disorder. Extended metabolic work up was normal. 13-17. Subsequent haplotype analysis showed that the two Brain MRT showed some enlarged perivascular spaces. disease haplotypes segregate in the family. TrioWESdetectedadenovomissensemutationc.103A>G Discussion: RB L2
, that has not been linked to a [p.(Met35Val)] in PTEN. monogenicdisorderyet,isthekeyregulatorofmaintaining Discussion: Both patients were initially referred to neuron survival among the Rb family members. The hospital due to suspicion of a metabolic disease, most hypothesis of RB L2
 as a disease gene is underscored by likely MPS, which could not be veriﬁed. Instead, de novo thegnomADgeneconstraintmetricsshowingadepletionof PTEN mutations were found. The phenotype does not lossoffunctionvariantsandp130knockoutmiceexhibiting match the currently described PTEN-associated diseases. impaired neurogenesis and embryonic lethality. Our data This leads to the assumption that there might be anAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 359 establish RB L2
 as a candidate gene for an autosomal I.V. Grishchenko: None. Y.V. Purvinsh: None. I.R. recessive neurodevelopmental delay. Imatdinov: None. S.V. Kulemzin: None. D.V. 231 words Yudkin: None. T. Brunet: None. M. Radivojkov-Blagojevic: None. P. Lichtner:None.V.Kraus:None.T.Meitinger:None.M.  P08
.099.C Wagner: None. Next Generation Sequencing for the characterization of Rett-like spectrum disorders  P08
.098.B Cellsystemwithinducibletranscription forthestudyof E. Leonardi1,2, M. Bellini1,2, M. C. Aspromonte1,2, M. CGG repeat instability Necci3, E. Bettella1,2, R. Polli1,2, S. Bigoni4, S. Negrin5, A. Danieli5,I.Mammi6,F.Soli7,S.D’Arrigo8,A.Simonati9,L. I.V.Grishchenko1,Y.V.Purvinsh1,I.R.Imatdinov1,S.V. Turolla10,R.Vittorini11,S.Sartori12,S.C.E.Tosatto3,13,A. Kulemzin2, D. V. Yudkin1 Murgia1 1FBRI SRC VB “Vector”, Rospotrebnadzor, Koltsovo, 1Dept. Woman and Child Health, University of Padua, Russian Federation, 2IMCB SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Padova, Italy, 2Pediatric Research Institute - Città della Federation Speranza, Padova, Italy, 3Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, UniversityofPadua,Padova,Italy,44.U.O.L.diGenetica Introduction: The molecular basis of certain hereditary Medica, Dip. Riproduzione e Accrescimento, Ospedale neurodegenerative diseases is trinucleotide repeat expan- Universitario S. Anna, Ferrara, Italy, 5Child Neuropsy- sion, which dramatically increases the number of triplet chiatry Unit, IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Conegliano, Italy, repeats. However, the expansion mechanism has yet to be 6Medical Genetics Unit, Dolo General Hospital, Venezia, deﬁned. A failure of the DNA repair system at sites with Italy, 7Dept of Medical Genetics, Santa Chiara Hospital, alternative DNA structures formed by repeats can lead to Trento,Italy,8Dept.DevelopmentalNeurology,Fondazione expansion. This work aimed todesign a cellular systemfor IRCCS,IstitutoNeurologicoC.Besta,,Milano,Italy,9Dept. studying the instability of CGG repeats involved in of Neuroscience, Biomedicine, Movement-Neurology, Uni- FRAXopathy development during transcription and TCR- versityofVerona,Verona,Italy,10U.O.S.GeneticaMedica, NER. Azienda ULSS 2, Treviso, Italy, 11NPI Dept. of pediatrics, MaterialsandMethods:CGGrepeatswereampliﬁedby Presidio OIRM, Torino, Italy, 12Paediatric Neurology and PCR from GC-rich templates. We transfected HEK293A Neurophysiology Unit, Dept. Woman and Child Health, cells with plasmids containing CGG repeats of different University of Padua, Padova, Italy, 13CNR Institute of lengths. Transfected cells were selected using ﬂow cyto- Neuroscience, Padova, Italy ﬂuorometry or puromycin. Changes in CGG repeats were evaluated by fragment analysis. Reporter gene expression The advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) allowed was measured by qPCR. identifying a number of genes responsible of RTT and Results: To control transcription levels, DNA fragments associatedphenotypes(RTT-like).However,theetiologyof of CGG repeats and the EGFP ORF were inserted into theconditioninasubsetofRTTandRTT-likepatientsstill plasmids under the inducible promoter TRE. Additionally, remains unknown. Using the Ion Torrent platform, we vectors encoded DsRedExpress or puromycin-N- developed a low-cost NGS gene panel and sequenced ca. acetyltransferase driven by a constitutive promoter. Several 630 samples for early ID/ASD diagnosis. The gene panel types of plasmids carrying CGG repeats of various lengths contains74IDandASDrelatedgenes,including18known were generated. HEK293A cells were transfected, and and candidate genes associated with RTT-like disorders. transformants were selected. In the obtained cell lines, We identiﬁed de novo causative mutations or likely plasmid integration sites, expression levels of ﬂuorescent pathogenic variants in 18 of the 90 (20%) sequenced indi- proteins and changes in (CGG)n repeat length upon viduals with RTT-like disorders. Among negative cases induction of TRE were determined. withclinicalfeaturesinthespectrumofRett-likedisorders, Conclusions: Cell lines with controlled transcription we performed whole exome sequencing in 31 family trios, across repeats were produced. This system allows tracking 1 singleton, and 2 multiplex families. Pathogenic or likely changes intherepeatregion.Theobtained celllinescanbe pathogenic mutations were identiﬁed in 24 cases (70%). used as a model to study the effect of transcription and Our ﬁndings bring additional supportive (SHANK3, TCR-NER on repeat instability. The study is supported by GRIN2A, SYNGA P1
, KCNQ2, KCNB1, PDHA1, WAC Russian Science Foundation Grant 18-15-00099. genes) or unsupportive (PTPN4) evidences for the impli- cation of previously reported candidate genes in RTT-like360 J.delPicchia disorders.Furthermore,weidentiﬁedcausativemutationsin provided signed consent under the IRB-approved human novel candidate genes and genes associated with deﬁned research protocol H-34578, Baylor College of Medicine. syndromes, e.g. KAT6A, that have never been associated Results: We identiﬁed common symptoms within our with RTT-like phenotypes. Funding: Italian Ministry of cohort, such as disturbed sleep, hypoactivity, social with- Health Young Investigator Grant GR-2011-02347754 to E. drawal, and anxiety, but noted considerable differences at L and S.C.E.T.; Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica - the level of personal autonomy and skills. Behavioral Città della Speranza, Grant 18-04 to E.L. problems were frequent, and a majority of individuals E. Leonardi: None. M. Bellini: None. M.C. Aspro- displayed weight gain, food-seeking behavior, and mild monte:None.M.Necci:None.E.Bettella:None.R.Polli: intellectual disability or borderline intellectual function. None. S. Bigoni: None. S. Negrin: None. A. Danieli: TypicalsymptomsofSHFYNGinchildhoodwerereported None.I.Mammi:None.F.Soli:None.S.D’Arrigo:None. for most individuals. A.Simonati:None.L.Turolla:None.R.Vittorini:None. Conclusions: Our ﬁndings indicate a high variability of S. Sartori: None. S.C.E. Tosatto: None. A. functional abilities and social participation of adults with Murgia: None. SHFYNG.The prevalence ofobesity washigh, andlackof satietywasofconcernforsomecaregivers.Thephenotypes  P08
.100.A of PWS and SHFYNG might be more difﬁcult to The adult phenotype of Schaaf-Yang syndrome distinguish in adults than in children. Molecular genetic testingforSHFYNGshouldbeconsideredinadultswiththe F. Marbach1, M. Elgizouli2,3, M. Rech4, J. Beygo3, F. suspected diagnosis of PWS, if testing for PWS has been Erger5, C. Velmans5, C. T. R. M. Stumpel6, A. P. A. negative. Stegmann6, S. Beck-Wödl7, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach8, B. F. Marbach: None. M. Elgizouli: None. M. Rech: Horsthemke3, C. P. Schaaf1,4, A. Kuechler3 None. J. Beygo: None. F. Erger: None. C. Velmans: None.C.T.R.M.Stumpel:None.A.P.A.Stegmann:None. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, S. Beck-Wödl: None. G. Gillessen-Kaesbach: None. B. Heidelberg, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Horsthemke: None. C.P. Schaaf: None. A. University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Institute of Kuechler: None. Human Genetics, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Ger- many, 4Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,  P08
.102.C Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, SETD5 gene haploinsufﬁciency in three patients with 5Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne; Institute of suspected KBG syndrome Human Genetics, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6Department of Clinical Genetics and GROW- M. Crippa1,2, I. Bestetti1,2, S. Maitz3, K. Weiss4, A. Spano3, School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maas- S. Smithson5, L. Larizza1, L. Cohen6, K. Low5, P. Finelli1,2 tricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, 1IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 8Institute of Italy, 2Department of Medical Biotechnology and Transla- HumanGenetics,UniversityofLübeck,Lübeck,Germany tionalMedicine,UniversityofMilan,Milan,Italy,3Clinical Pediatric Genetic Unit, Pediatric Clinic, Fondazione Introduction: MAGE L2
-associated Schaaf-Yang-Syn- MBBM,SanGerardoHospital,Monza,Italy,4TheGenetics drome/SHFYNG is a rare genetic disorder, which was Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, identiﬁed in 2013. The phenotype of SHFYNG in child- 5Clinical Genetics, St. Michael’s Hospital, University hood partially overlaps with that of the well-established Hospitals NHS Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 6Raphael Prader-Willi-Syndrome/PWS. While several studies of Recanati Genetic Institute, Schneider Children’s Medical younger individuals with SHFYNG have been recently Center of Israel, Petah Tiqva, Israel published, the phenotype in adulthood is not well estab- lished.Werecruited7adults(aged18-36)withmolecularly Mendelian disorders of the epigenetic machinery conﬁrmed SHFYNG and collected data regarding eating (MDEMs),alsocalledchromatinmodifyingdisorders,area habits, sleep, behavior, autonomy, psychiatric, and medical broad group of neurodevelopmental disorders, caused by conditions, as well as information about the respective mutationsinfunctionallyrelatedchromatingenes.KBGand phenotypes in childhood. the mental retardation autosomal dominant 23 (MRD23) Methods: Participating individuals with SHFYNG and syndromes, caused by ANKRD11 and SETD5 gene muta- their families received a questionnaire covering the tions respectively, belong to this broad group of disorders. aforementionedareas.Thelegalguardiansofallparticipants We performed high resolution array CGH and trio-basedAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 361 WES on three molecularly unsolved patients with an initial The relationship between abnormal sleep patterns and KBGS diagnosis, found to carry SETD5 gene hap- NDDsiscomplex andpotentially synergistic.Indeed, sleep loinsufﬁciency. A de novo deletion of 116 kb partially anomalies exacerbate an already compromised neurobeha- involving SETD5 and two de novo frameshift variants in vioral phenotype. Smith-Magenis Syndrome (SMS) SETD5 were identiﬁed in the patients. The clinical re- [MIM:182290],causedbyhaploinsufﬁciencyofRAI1gene, evaluationofthepatientswasconsistentwiththemolecular isaNDDcharacterizedbysleepdisturbances,whichin95% ﬁndings, however still compatible with KBGS. Phenotypic of the patients results from disruption of circadian rhythm features of KBGS and MRD23 overlap to some extent, but withaninvertedmelatoninsecretion.Basedontheassessed the presence of facial features not fully consistent with role of RAI1 in the regulation of circadian rhythm, we KBGS can suggest differential diagnosis. Our results pro- evaluated through RT-qPCR the expression of circadian vide further examples that loss-of-function pathogenic var- genes in peripheral blood of 18 clinically suspected SMS/ iants in genes encoding factors shaping the epigenetic SMS-like patients, three with conﬁrmed RAI1 mutation, landscape lead to a wide phenotypic range with signiﬁcant manifesting sleep disturbance except three. Out of the 6 clinical overlap. To conclude we recommend clinicians to tested genes CLOCK, BMA L2
, PER2, and NR1D1 were consider SETD5 gene haploinsufﬁciency in the differential found deregulated in at least one patient with sleep pro- diagnosis of KBGS, enhancing deep phenotyping and blems: gene expression alterations were observed in 9 out genotyping of KBGS overlapping conditions. 15patients,whereasnodysregulationwasidentiﬁedinthe3 M.Crippa:None.I.Bestetti:None.S.Maitz:None.K. patientswithoutsleepdisturbance.Ourdataconﬁrmsafew Weiss: None. A. Spano: None. S. Smithson: None. L. studies suggesting a correlation between sleep disturbance Larizza: None. L. Cohen: None. K. Low: None. P. in patients with molecularly deﬁned syndromes and Finelli: None. expands the correlation to patients with sleep disturbance who are molecularly unsolved. Our pivotal study needs to  P08
.104.B be validated on a larger cohort of patients and by testing Expression of circadian rhythm genes in patients with alsothemelatoninreceptorgeneswhichduetotheirlackof neurodevelopmental syndromes displaying sleep expression in blood, need alternative tissues, such as disturbance buccal smears A. Sironi: None. I. Bestetti: None. S. Cipri: None. M. A. Sironi1,2, I. Bestetti1,2, S. Cipri1,2, M. Bonati3, S. Bonati: None. S. D’Arrigo: None. D. Milani: None. A. D’Arrigo4, D. Milani5, A. Selicorni6, L. Spaccini7, M. Selicorni: None. L. Spaccini: None. M. Bedeschi: None. Bedeschi8, L. Larizza2, P. Finelli1,2 L. Larizza: None. P. Finelli: None. 1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational  P08
.105.C Medicine, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Lab. of Variants inSLITRK2in individuals with neurodevelop- Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS mental manifestations including intellectual disability, IstitutoAuxologicoItaliano,CusanoMilanino,Milan,Italy, behavioral troubles and possible dystonia 3Clinic of Medical Genetics, San Luca Hospital, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, Milan, Italy, S. EL CHEHADEH1,2, S. Bakhtiari3,4, J. Wynn5, W. K. 4Developmental Neurology Division, IRCCS Fondazione Chung5,6, G. Vitiello7, I. Cutcutache8, M. Page8, J. Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, Milan, Italy, Milan, Italy, Gecz9,10,11, K. Harper12,11, A. de Brouwer13, A. Vulto-van 5Medical Genetic Unit, Pediatric Highly Intensive Care, Silfhout13, M. Willems14, A. Fernández Jaén15, A. Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Selicorni16, S. Maitz17, E. K. Vanhoutte18, M. Armstrong19, Policlinico, Milan, Italy, Milan, Italy, 6Pediatric Unit, J. Symonds20, J. Muller21,22, M. Kruer3,4, A. Piton23,24 ASSTLariana,Como,Italy,Como,Italy,7ClinicalGenetics Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, V. Buzzi 1Service de génétique médicale, Institut de Génétique Children’s Hospital, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, Médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), Centre de Référence des Milan, Italy, 8Medical Genetic Unit, IRCCS Ca’Granda Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, STRAS- OspedaleMaggiorePoliclinico,Milan,Italy,Milan,Italy BOURG, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, INSERM U1112, Institut de Génétique Médicale d’Alsace Patientswithneurodevelopmentaldisorders(NDDs)showa (IGMA), Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, higherrateofsleepdisturbancesascomparedtothegeneral 3Pediatric Movement Disorders Program, Division of population. Sleep anomalies are a heterogeneous set of Pediatric Neurology, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoe- problems, including difﬁculties with initiating or maintain- nix Children’s Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, United States, ing sleep, excessive daytime sleepiness, and parasomnias. 4Departments of Child Health, Neurology, Cellular &362 J.delPicchia Molecular Medicine and Program in Genetics, University and three were maternally inherited. All patients had mod- ofArizonaCollegeofMedicine,Phoenix,AZ,UnitedStates, erate to severe intellectual disability and speech delay, 5Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia mostlysevere.Neurologicalregressionwasobservedinone University Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, patientaftersixyears-old.Patientspresentbehavioralissues 6Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, (anxiety,aggressivenessorautismspectrumdisorder)(5/6), NY, United States, 7Department of Translational Medicine, spasticityand/ordystonia(4/7),unsteadygait(4/7),seizures Federico II University, Naples, Italy, 8Translational (3/6), short stature (4/7), cyphoscoliosis (3/5), and variable Medicine, UCB Pharma, Slough, United Kingdom, 9Ade- nonspeciﬁc facial features. Nonspeciﬁc brain MRI anoma- laide Medical School, Faculty of Health and Medical lies (3/6) included white matter reduction, ventricles dila- Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, tion and thin corpus callosum. Based onthese observations 10Robinson Research Institute, The University of Adelaide, and the role of SLITRK2 in synapse development and Adelaide, Australia, 11Women and Kids, South Australian organization,webelievethatthesevariantscontributetothe HealthandMedicalResearchInstitute,Adelaide,Australia, neurodevelopmental phenotype of our patients. We aim to 12Robinson Research Institute, The University of Adelaide,, gathermorepatientswithpathogenicSLITRK2variantsand Adelaide, Australia, 13Department of Human Genetics, to continue with functional studies, to conﬁrm the impli- Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether- cation of this gene in neurodevelopmental disorder and to lands, 14Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Mon- better delineate the clinical manifestations associated to tpellier, Montpellier, France, 15Department of Pediatrics mutations in this gene, especially at the behavioral level. Neurology,QuirónHospitals,Madrid,Spain,16Department S. El chehadeh: None. S. Bakhtiari: None. J. Wynn: of Pediatrics, ASST Lariana Sant’Anna Hospital, San None. W.K. Chung: None. G. Vitiello: None. I. Fermo della Battaglia, Como, Italy, 17Fondazione MBBM, Cutcutache: None. M. Page: None. J. Gecz: None. K. Monza, Italy, 18Department of Clinical Genetics, Maas- Harper: None. A. de Brouwer: None. A. Vulto-van tricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, Silfhout: None. M. Willems: None. A. Fernández Jaén: 19Translational Medicine, UCB Pharma, Braine-l’Alleud, None. A. Selicorni: None. S. Maitz: None. E.K. Belgium, 20Paediatric Neurosciences Research Group, Vanhoutte: None. M. Armstrong: None. J. Symonds: Royal Hospital for Children, Queen Elizabeth University None.J.Muller:None.M.Kruer:None.A.Piton:None. Hospitals, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 21Laboratoire de GénétiqueMédicale,INSERMU1112,InstitutdeGénétique  P08
.106.A Médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), Université de Strasbourg, Do SMARC C2
 truncating and splicing variants cause STRASBOURG, France, 22Laboratoires de Diagnostic intellectual disability and developmental delay? Génétique, Institut de Génétique Médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Nouvel Ö. Baysal, R. Pfundt, C. L. M. Marcelis Hôpital Civil, Strasbourg, France, 23Laboratoires de Diagnostic Génétique, Institut de Génétique Médicale Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University d’Alsace (IGMA), Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands Nouvel Hôpital Civil, STRASBOURG, France, 24INSERM U964, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et BAFopathiesareaheterogeneousgroupofdisorderscaused Cellulaire, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France by variants in genes encoding the various subunits of the chromatin-remodelling complex BRG1-associated factor SLITRK2 is a member of the transmembrane SLITKR (BAF). De novo variants in SMARC C2
, one of core sub- protein family, known to regulate neurite outgrowth and to units of the BAF complex, have been described as a cause interact with proteins involvedin synapsearchitecturesuch of intellectual disability (ID) in 2019. Missense and splice as SHANK3. Two missense variants have been reported in variants affecting the highly conserved SMARC C2
 DNA- SLITRK2, located on the X chromosome, in patients with interacting domains (SANT and SWIRM) present with a schizophrenia (Piton et al., 2011). Through a collaborative more severe phenotype overlapping with the phenotype of study, we report on seven individuals (1 female and 6 other BAfopathies, like Cofﬁn-Siris and Baraitser-Winter males, including two siblings) carrying rare variants in syndrome. Truncating and splice variants affecting other SLITRK2 identiﬁed by WES. These variants include one regions show a much milder phenotype. According to data nonsense (p.Glu461*), and ﬁve missenses changes (p. from the gnomAD database the SMARC C2
 gene is highly Thr312Ala, p.Arg426Cys, p.Val511Met, p.Pro691Ser and intolerant to loss-of-function variants (pLI-score=1), sup- p.Val201Ile), that were never reported at the hemizygous porting pathogenicity of this type of variants. However,we state in gnomAD populations. Three variants were de novo have now identiﬁed four unrelated patients harbouring predicted loss of function variants in SMARC C2
 that areAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 363 inherited from healthy (grand)parents. Whole exome of Pediatrics, A.I. duPont Hospital for Children/Nemours, sequencing was performed on these patients because of Wilmington, DE, United States, 13Assistance Publique- developmental delay (DD)/ID. Twounrelated patients have Hôpitaux de Paris, Département de Génétique and Centre the same frameshift variant (c.3129del, p.Gly1044fs), de Référence Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, inherited from their healthy father. The brother of one of Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, these patients, who had a similar DD, did not have this 14Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Weill Institute variant.Athirdpatient(c.574C>T(p.(Arg192*))inheriteda of Neuroscience and Institute of Human Genetics, Uni- nonsensevariantfromhisunaffectedfatherandgrandfather. versity of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, The fourth patient has a predicted splice donor variant 15Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, (c.317+2T>A (r.spl.?)) inherited from her healthy mother. Italy, 16Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II The presence of these truncating variants in healthy indi- University, Naples, Italy, 17GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, viduals in four different families seems to contradict the United States, 18Center for Molecular and Biomolecular suspectedpathogenicityofthistypeofSMARC C2
variants. Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences We’ll discuss the possible relation between truncating (RIMLS), Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 19Depart- SMARC C2
 variants and ID. ment of Human Genetics, RIMLS, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Ö. Baysal: None. R. Pfundt: None. C.L.M. Netherlands Marcelis: None. Pathogenic variants in an increasing number of genes are  P08
.107.B associated with cancer, if somatic, and with neurodevelop- SPOP: One Gene, Two Distinct Neurodevelopmental mental disorders, if in the germline. SPOP (MIM: 602650) Phenotypes isrecurrentlysomaticallymutatedinendometrialcancerand prostatecancer,resultingingain-of-functionanddominant- M.J.NabaisSá1,G.ElTekle2,3,4,A.P.M.deBrouwer1,S. negative effects, respectively, towards ubiquitin ligase L. Sawyer5, D. del Gaudio6, M. J. Parker7, F. Kanani7, M. substrates, such as BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 proteins H.vandenBoogaard8,K.vanGassen8,M.I.VanAllen9,K. (BETs). Using clinical exome sequencing, we identiﬁed Wierenga10, G. Purcarin10, E. Roy Elias11, K. W. Gripp12, eleven patients with nine different germline de novo mis- R. Procopio12, C. Mignot13, E. Argilli14, E. Sherr14, G. sense SPOP variants, including two recurrent variants. Cappuccio15,16, N. Brunetti-Pierri15,16, A. Begtrup17, J. These patients presented with developmental delay/intel- Keller-Ramey17, E. Ryan17, T. Bernasocchi2,3,4, L. van de lectual disability, facial dysmorphisms and congenital Wiel18,19,H.Venselaar18,C.Gilissen19,R.Pfundt1,L.E.L. anomalies. Interestingly, three individuals shared craniofa- M. Vissers1, J. P. Theurillat2,3, B. B. A. de Vries1 cial dysmorphisms, including microcephaly, which were strikingly different from those observed in the other indi- 1Radboudumc/Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and viduals, which included (relative) macrocephaly and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Functional Cancer hypertelorism. Based on these ﬁndings, we hypothesized Genomics, Institute of Oncology Research, Oncology that two distinct molecular pathophysiological mechanisms Institute of Southern Switzerland, Bellinzona, Switzerland, underlie the phenotypic differences, similarly to the 3Faculty of Biomedical Science, Università della Svizzera observedeffectofsomaticSPOPvariantsincancer.Indeed, Italiana, Lugano, Switzerland, 4University of Lausanne, measurement of BETs levels in human Ishikawa endo- Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Department of Genetics, Chil- metrial cancer cells and patient-derived cell lines showed dren’sHospitalofEasternOntarioandChildren’sHospital that de novo variants identiﬁed in the microcephalic indi- of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of vidualsresultinagain-of-function,whiletheothervariants Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 6Department of Human lead to a dominant-negative effect. These results suggest Genetics, University of Chicago Genetic Services Labora- that divergent functional effects on BETs are related to tory,TheUniversityofChicago,Chicago,IL,UnitedStates, distinct and clinically recognizable syndromic forms of 7DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,ShefﬁeldChildren’sNHS intellectual disability with contrasting craniofacial Foundation Trust, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom, 8Department dysmorphisms. of Genetics, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 9Depart- M.J. Nabais Sá: None. G. El Tekle: None. A.P.M. de ment of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Brouwer: None. S.L. Sawyer: None. D. del Gaudio: Vancouver, BC, Canada, 10University of Oklahoma Health None. M.J. Parker: None. F. Kanani: None. M.H. van SciencesCenter,OklahomaCity,OK,UnitedStates, 11Spe- den Boogaard: None. K. van Gassen: None. M.I. Van cial Care Clinic, Children’s Hospital Colorado, and Allen: None. K. Wierenga: None. G. Purcarin: None. E. University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, RoyElias:None.K.W.Gripp:None.R.Procopio:None. United States, 12Division of Medical Genetics, Department C. Mignot: None. E. Argilli: None. E. Sherr: None. G.364 J.delPicchia Cappuccio: None. N. Brunetti-Pierri:None. A.Begtrup: inmanyCDGtypes,andchangesinserumtransferrinlevels A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. J. in CDG Iy patients are easily overlooked. Therefore ES is Keller-Ramey: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- indispensable in the deciphering of this rare disorder. Sup- niﬁcant; GeneDx. E. Ryan: A. Employment (full or part- ported by 17-29423A, LM2018132 and 00064203. time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. T. Bernasocchi:None. L. van M. Hančárová: None. M. Vlčková: None. Š. Bendová: deWiel:None.H.Venselaar:None.C.Gilissen:None.R. None. D. Prchalová: None. V. Stránecký: None. Z. Pfundt: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. J.P. Theurillat: Sedláček: None. None. B.B.A. de Vries: None.  P08
.109.A  P08
.108.C A novel SUZ12 nonsense mutation in patient with mild A new patient with a de novo SSR4 variant revealed Cornelia de Lange-syndrome using exome sequencing contributes to the deﬁnition of phenotype and genotype of the congenital disorder of B.Hanker1,Y.Hellenbroich1,M.Wagner2,F.J.Kaiser3,I. glycosylation type Iy Hüning1 M. Hančárová1, M. Vlčková1, Š. Bendová1, D. Prchalová1, 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, V. Stránecký2, Z. Sedláček1 Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technical Uni- versityMunich,Munich,Germany,3InstitutfürHumangen- 1Department Of Biology And Medical Genetics, 2nd etik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Polycomb-group proteins (PcGs) are evolutionarily con- Medicine,DiagnosticandResearchUnitforRareDiseases, served and are best known for their role in gene silencing. Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General SUZ12 codes for the polycomb repressive complex 2 sub- University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic unit protein. Variants in genes encoding other components of PR C2
 (EZH2 and EED) have been reported as causative Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are char- for Weaver syndrome and Cohen-Gibson syndrome. In acterizedbydeﬁciencyinprocessingofglycans.CDGtype 2017, Imagawa et al. reported ﬁrst of a patient with Iy(MIM300934)isarareX-linkeddisordercausedbyloss- Weaver-like syndrome due to a mutation in SUZ12. of-function variants in SSR4 encoding signal sequence We report on an eight year old girl, born at term after receptor 4. CDG Iy is associated with developmental delay uneventful pregnancy with body measurements within (DD), intellectual disability (ID), hypotonia, microcephaly, normal range. Postnatally a VSD and a persistent left vena facial dysmorphism, failure to thrive and epilepsy. Carrier cava were detected. Our patient has mild intellectual females are only mildly affected. SSR4 was linked with disability and facial features including synophrys, hyperte- CDG Iy in 2014, and since then only 10 patients with lorism, long and deep seated ears. She showed no sufﬁcient genotype and phenotype details have been overgrowth, had mild hearing impairment and reported. We describe a 5-year-old boy with hypotonia, hypermetropia. feeding problems, failure to thrive, DD, speech delay, In suspicion of mild Cornelia de Lange-syndrome microcephaly,abnormalEEG,historyofseizuresandfacial sequencing analysis of known CdLS genes on DNA dysmorphism (low-set dysplastic ears, preauricular pit, isolated from blood or ﬁbroblast were conducted but could enophthalmos, broad nasal bridge, telecanthus, midface not identify a causative variant. Karyotyping was normal hypoplasia, long smooth philtrum and thin upper lip ver- and array-CGH showed a paternally inherited microdupli- milion). Exome sequencing (ES) revealed a de novo cation16p11.2.Subsequenttrio-exomesequencingrevealed hemizygous frameshift SSR4 variant NM_006280.3: a de novo heterozygous nonsense variant in SUZ12 c.200_2001delA, p.Y67Cfs*2 which was absent from all (NM_015355.2: c.1657C>T, p.Gln553Ter). databases.OurpatientconﬁrmsthatmaleswithCDGdueto Systematic review of the literature showed only 13 SSR4 variants show consistent phenotype with DD/ID, patients with pathogenic variants in SUZ12 reported so far. hypotonia, microcephaly, facial dysmorphism, feeding Nine of them had overgrowth. Missense variants appear to problems, failure to thrive and gastrointestinal and eye bestrongerassociatedwithovergrowthratherthannonsense abnormalities.Seizureshavebeenreportedin6/10previous variants (Cyrus et al., 2020). Facial features suggestive for patients, and our patient supports their involvement in the CdLS were not reported. Our ﬁndings expand the syndrome. On the contrary, skeletal, coagulation, cardiac phenotypical spectrum of variants in SUZ12 and link the and renal abnormalities mentioned among minor features spectrum of CdLS-like phenotypes with another chromatin wereabsentinourpatient.Asimilarclinicalpictureisseen associated complex.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 365 B.Hanker:None.Y.Hellenbroich:None.M.Wagner: A. Alexandrou1, A. Theodosiou1,2, I. Papaevripidou1, A. None. F.J. Kaiser: None. I. Hüning: None. Chrysanthou1,2, N. Salameh1, P. Evangelidou1,2, V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou3, G. A. Tanteles4,2, C.  P08
.110.B Sismani1,2 Mild clinical features aid in the interpretation of syndromic gene variants in apparent non-syndromic 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus intellectual disability patients Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus H. Syryn, O. Vanakker Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Clinical Genetics Department, Archbishop Makarios III Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Clinical Genetics Gent, Belgium Department, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus Introduction: Before the common use of whole exome sequencing (WES) in routine diagnostics, hereditary syn- AngelmanandRettsyndromesarerareneurodevelopmental dromesweredeﬁnedbydistinct clinical features.However, disorders sharing a range of phenotypic characteristics with the increasing use of WES-based diagnostics, in par- between them but also with many disorders, making accu- ticular for indications with large numbers of causal genes rate diagnosis challenging. such as intellectual disability (ID), very mild or atypical Here, we present a targeted custom NGS panel (Agilent- phenotypic presentations of known syndromic causes can SureDesign), developed for patients in the Rett/Angelman be observed. phenotypic spectrum. The panel includes coding regions Methods: We present several patients with thorough andsplicesitejunctionsof25genes,causingdisorderswith clinical description, presenting with ID in whom no overlapping clinical phenotypes such as Pitt-Hopkins and syndromicdiagnosiswasmadepriortotesting.Aconﬁrmed Mowat Wilson. Bioinformatics analysis was performed for molecular diagnosis via whole exome sequencing of a detecting SNVs, indels and CNVs using Surecall (Agilent) targeted panel of ID genes was made with (likely) alongwithin-houseestablishedpipelines.Thepaneldesign pathogenic variants in genes such as WAC, CHD8, TBR1, proved successful with a mean target depth of 550X and and SOX5. We compare their phenotype to what has been mean uniformity of 99%. traditionally reported in the syndromes associated with Upon validation, 74 patients were referred for testing. these genes and delineate mild key features useful for Thirty patients had classic Rett or Angemann Syndrome evaluating causality of the sequencing results. features and were tested by Sanger sequencingandMLPA/ Results: A ﬁrst patient with a WAC mutation presents MS-MLPA analyses for MEC P2
 or UB E3
A as a ﬁrst tier withaduplicatedureterandaggressivebehavior.Inpatients test. Six were found positive for deletions or point with CHD8-related ID, early bone maturation is seen. mutations (one of which mosaic) and were included in the Furthermore, pathogenic variants in TBR1 can lead to panel only as blind positive samples. All positive blind exclusively developmental delay and absent speech. samples were successfully identiﬁed. Finally, lower limbs abnormalities such as seen in Lamb- Out of the 68 undiagnosed patients that were analysed Shaffer syndrome (SOX5) contribute to determining the with the panel, 9 (6 novel) were found to have de novo diagnosis. pathogenicvariantsinUB E3
A,EHMT1,CTNNB1,IQSE C2
, Conclusions: We deﬁne several mild but characteristic EHMT1, WDR45 and SCN1A genes and were conﬁrmed features in patients having a variant in syndromic genes, with Sanger sequencing.Additional 11patientswerefound evenifanovertsyndromicdiagnosisinthemwasnotclear. to have a VOUS, yielding a total detection rate of at Taking into account these mild symptoms in patients with least 13%. apparent non-syndromic ID is an important help in This custom designed panel will improve clinical interpreting sequencing results, particularly in case of detectionrateandprovideacomprehensiveaccuratetesting variants of unknown signiﬁcance. for individuals suggestive of a disorder in Rett/Angelman H. Syryn: None. O. Vanakker: None. spectrum. A. Alexandrou: None. A. Theodosiou: None. I.  P08
.111.C Papaevripidou: None. A. Chrysanthou: None. N. Sala- Combined comprehensive approach in patients within meh: None. P. Evangelidou: None. V. Christophidou- Rett/Angelman phenotypic spectrum Anastasiadou: None. G.A. Tanteles: None. C. Sismani: None.366 J.delPicchia  P08
.112.A  P08
.113.B Neurodevelopmental and neurologic spectrum in Thauvin-Robinet-Faivre Syndrome: Report of a new TECPR2-associated congenital disorder of autophagy patient S. Neuser1, I. Brösse2, L. O’Grady3, D. A. Sweetser3, S. A. Sezer1, A. Savaş1, G. Kayhan1, A. T. Aslan2, E. F. Schubert1, R. Jamra1, B. Popp1 Perçin1 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofLeipzigMedical 1Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Center, Leipzig, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Gazi University Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Heidelberg Uni- Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division versity Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of of Pediatric Pulmonology, Ankara, Turkey Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States Introduction: Biallelic mutations in the acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor intracellular-binding protein gene (FIBP) Autophagosomesaresubcellularcompartmentsnecessaryto cause Thauvin-Robinet-Faivre syndrome (OMIM #617107, degrade cytoplasmic content. Macro-autophagy is vital for TROFAS), which is characterized by overgrowth. To date, long-lived, non-regenerating and metabolically active neu- only four different patients have been reported from two rons.In2012atruncatingfoundervariantintheautophagy- unrelated families. related gene TECPR2 was identiﬁed in three Bukharian Patient and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) Jewish families. The ﬁve affected individuals were homo- analysis was performed in a 4-year-old male patient with zygous and showed spastic paraplegia complicated by tall stature, macrosomia, macrocephaly, dysmorphic facial syndromicintellectualdisability.Subsequentreportsofﬁve features, recurrent pulmonary infections, cryptorchidism, unrelatedindividualswiththisornoveltruncating/missense spontaneous erection, elbow joints laxity, prominent super- variants conﬁrmed autonomic involvement as a leading ﬁcialblood vessels, developmentaldelay andspeechdelay. feature of spastic paraplegia 49 (SPG49).By trio-based He had consanguineous parents. exome sequencing we now identiﬁed the homozygous fra- Result: A homozygous frameshift variant meshifting TECPR2-variant c.2829del, p.(Asn944Thrfs*7) c.415_416insCAGTTTG (Asp139AlafsTer3) in FIBP gene in male individual of Turkish descent with neurodevelop- (NM_004214.5) was detected and classiﬁed as pathogenic mentaldisorder(NDD)andepilepsy.RT-PCRonPAXgene variant. Additionally, in the Toll-Like receptor 5 gene stabilizedbloodshowednormalexpressionofthec.2829del (TLR5) (NM_003268.6), c.974A>G (p.Asn325Ser) homo- allele in the heterozygous parents and gel electrophoresis zygous missense variantwas detected and was classiﬁed as indicated no expression reduction in the index. Together uncertain signiﬁcance. theseresultssuggestescapefromnonsense-mediateddecay. Conclusions: Two variants in FIBP gene previously Through matchmaking we identiﬁed one additional unre- detected in patients with TROFAS have a loss-of-function lated individual with NDDs due to homozygosity for the effect putatively similar to the variant in our patient which known Ashkenazi TECPR2-variant (c.1319del, p. caused putatively a premature protein. The patient had a (Leu440Argfs*19)). Based on these cases and comparison history of recurrent pulmonary infections, cryptorchidism with the 10 literature cases, we now provide a Human and spontaneous erection, unlike reported patients. It is not Phenotype Ontology (HPO) standardized clinical synopsis. knownwhetherourpatient’shistoryofrecurrentpulmonary The neurologic spectrum comprises muscular hypotonia infections is a component of TROFAS because of with progression to spastic paraplegia in the ﬁrst decade, the limited number of patient reports. Primary immunode- abnormalreﬂexesandautonomicinvolvement.Thevariable ﬁciencies and polymorphisms in TLRs are associated with neurodevelopmental disorder present in 11/12 cases can be susceptibility to infections in humans and animal models complicated by structural brain abnormalities (7/8 cases and also TLR5 has protective effects against bacterial with brain MRI) and seizures (3/12). Because NDD is a infections.Owingtothelimitednumberofreportedpatients centralfeatureinadditiontotheneurologicpresentation,we with TROFAS, new patient reports and further studies are propose to classify this disease as TECPR2-associated needed to clarify the clinical properties of the disease. congenital disorder of autophagy. A. Sezer: None. A. Savaş: None. G. Kayhan: None. A. S. Neuser: None. I. Brösse: None. L. O’Grady: None. T. Aslan: None. E.F. Perçin: None. D.A. Sweetser: None. S. Schubert: None. R. Jamra: None. B. Popp: None.  P08
.115.A A new case of Kaufman Oculocerebrofacial Syndrome caused by two new splicing variants in UB E3
B.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 367 K. Uguen1,2,3, C. Ka1,3, M. Planes1,2, S. Audebert- K. Uguen: None. C. Ka: None. M. Planes: None. S. Bellanger1,2, S. Redon1,2,3, C. Benech1,3, S. Küry4,5, S. Audebert-Bellanger: None. S. Redon: None. C. Benech: Peudenier2, S. Autret1,3, I. Gourlaouen3, D. Bonneau6, S. None. S. Küry: None. S. Peudenier: None. S. Autret: Odent7,S.Bézieau4,5,B.Gilbert-Dussardier8,A.Boland9,J. None. I. Gourlaouen: None. D. Bonneau: None. S. Deleuze9, C. Le Maréchal1,2,3, G. Le Gac1,3, C. Ferec1,2,3 Odent: None. S. Bézieau: None. B. Gilbert-Dussardier: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze: None. C. Le 1Service de Génétique Médicale et Biologie de la Maréchal: None. G. Le Gac: None. C. Ferec: None. Reproduction, CHRU de Brest, Brest, France, 2Centre de RéférenceDéﬁciencesIntellectuellesdecausesrares,Brest,  P08
.116.B France, 3Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS, UMR 1078, GGB, F- A novel loss of function mutation of the WAC gene in a 29200, Brest, France, 4CHU de Nantes, Service de subject with intellectual disability and autistic features Génétique Médicale, 9 quai Moncousu, 44093 Nantes associated with encephalopathy related to status epilep- CEDEX 1, Nantes, France, 5Université de Nantes, CNRS, ticus during slow sleep INSERM, l’institut du thorax, F-44000, Nantes, France, 6Département de biochimie et génétique, CHU d’Angers, E. Leonardi1,2, M. Bellini1,2, M. C. Aspromonte1,2, R. Angers, France, 7Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU de Polli1,2, A. Mercante1, C. Ciaccio3, E. Granocchio3, E. Rennes, UMR6290 CNRS, Université Rennes, Rennes, Bettella1,2, S. Sartori1, I. Donati4, C. Pantaleoni3, C. France, 8Service de Génétique, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, Boniver1, A. Murgia1,2 France, 9Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), CEA, Evry, France 1Dept. Woman and Child Health, University of Padua, Padova, Italy, 2Pediatric Research Institute - Città della Introduction: UB E3
B encodes a member of the  E3
 Speranza, Padova, Italy, 3Developmental Neurology Unit, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme family. Biallelic variants Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, (missense, nonsense, splicing) are responsible of the Milano, Italy, 4AUSL Romagna Infermi Hospital, Rimini, KaufmanOculocerebralSyndrome(KOS),characterizedby Italy severe intellectual disability, distinctive facial features, shortstatureandmultiplecongenitalabnormalities.Herewe Alterations of the WAC gene have been recently associated report a patient presenting with KOS and harboring two with a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by intel- undescribed splicing variants in UB E3
B. We describe new lectual disability, neonatal hypotonia, behavioral problems, clinical features and in vitro characterization of the two and mildly dysmorphic features. To date only 20 indivi- variants. duals have been reported with WAC mutations, which, in Casepresentation:Thepropositusisan18-year-oldboy themajorityofthecases,aredenovolossoffunction(LoF). presenting with intellectual disability, microphtalmia, Using targeted deep sequencing, we screened a cohort of bilateral deafness, tetralogy of Fallot, scoliosis, hip 600 individuals with variable degrees of intellectual dis- malformation and facial dysmorphism consistent with ability and identiﬁed ﬁve WAC rare variants: two variants KOS. Other clinical features not described in KOS include were inherited from healthy parents; two previously repor- anal imperforation and cryptorchidism. ted de novo mutations, c.1661_1664del (p.Ser554*) and Results: Through a French collaborative study (HUGO- c.374C>A (p.Ser125*);and a novel c.381+2T>C variant DIMS), trio-based whole exome sequencing identiﬁed two causingtheskippingofexon4ofthegene,inheritedfroma variants in UB E3
B : c.1956+3G>C and c.1622+1G>C, reportedly asymptomatic father with somatic mosaicism. A each one inherited from a healthy parent. None of the phenotypic evaluation of this individual evidenced areas of variants was found in population databases. Minigene cognitiveandbehaviouraldeﬁcits.Thetwoindividualswith assays were performed to evaluate the effects of both previously reported WAC mutations presented phenotypic variants in transiently transfected HEK293T cells. The differences in comparison with reported cases. The patient c.1956+3G>C induced skipping of exon 18 with a shift in carryingthenovelsplicingmutationhadaclinicalhistoryof the reading frame. The c.1622+1G>C variant resulted in encephalopathy related to Status Epilepticus during slow the retention of the ﬁrst 61 bp of intron 15 and the Sleep (ESES), only recently reported in WAC individuals. immediateinsertionofastopcodon.Thetwovariantswere This ﬁrst report of a WAC somatic mosaic remarks the therefore predicted to be highly deleterious. contribution of mosaicism in the etiology of neurodeve- Conclusions: We expand the phenotype of KOS, further lopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders. We summarized highlighting the interest of in vitro assays to demonstrate the clinical data of reported individuals with WAC LoF causality of new splicing variants. variants, which together with our ﬁndings allowed368 J.delPicchia expanding the phenotypic spectrum of WAC-related clariﬁed versus unclariﬁed cases. Our study illustrates that disorders. West syndrome is an electro- clinical syndrome caused by E. Leonardi: None. M. Bellini: None. M.C. Aspro- various genetic disorders. Individuals without detectable monte: None. R. Polli: None. A. Mercante: None. C. genetic cause might have less encephalopathy leading to a Ciaccio: None. E. Granocchio: None. E. Bettella: None. less severe course. S. Sartori: None. I. Donati: None. C. Pantaleoni: None. © 2019 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Pub- C. Boniver: None. A. Murgia: None. lished by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. I. Krey: None. J. Krois-Neudenberger: None. J.  P08
.118.A Hentschel: None. S. Syrbe: None. T. Polster: None. B. Genotype-phenotype correlation on 45 individuals with Hanker: None. B. Fiedler: None. G. Kurlemann: None. West syndrome J.R. Lemke: None. I. Krey1, J. Krois-Neudenberger2, J. Hentschel1, S. Syrbe3,  P08
.120.C T. Polster4, B. Hanker5, B. Fiedler6, G. Kurlemann7, J. R. Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome: clinical and molecular Lemke1 characterization of 11 patients from four Portuguese hospital centers 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofLeipzigMedical Center, Leipzig, Germany, 2Department of General Pedia- S.Fernandes1,C.S.Rosas1,M.SoeiroeSá2,I.Carvalho3, trics, Division of Neuropediatrics, University Hospital, M.Rodrigues3,P.Louro4,5,J.deSá1,G.Soares6,P.Dias2, University Hospital Muenster, Germany, Germany, 3Divi- L. Ramos1,5, J. M. Saraiva1,7, S. B. Sousa1,8 sion of Child Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Center for Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Bethel Epi- HospitalareUniversitáriodeCoimbra,Coimbra,Portugal, lepsyCenter,MaraHospital,Bielefeld,Bielefeld,Germany, 2Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, 5InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofLübeck,Lübeck, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lübeck, Germany, 6Department of General Pediatrics, EPE, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisboa, Division of Neuropediatrics, University Hospital Muenster, Portugal, 3Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Dona Estefâ- Münster, Germany, 7Hospital for Children, Bonifatius nia, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisboa, Portugal, Hospital Lingen, Lingen, Germany 4IPO, Lisboa, Former worker at Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de West syndrome is an epilepsy syndrome characterized by Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Faculty of Health Sciences, repetitive epileptic spasms (ES) and hypsarrhythmia, typi- UniversidadedaBeiraInterior,Covilhã,Portugal,6Serviço cally leading to developmental delay/intellectual disability de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto Magalhães, Centro (DD/ID).Itisconsideredaclassicepilepticencephalopathy Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 7University Clinic (EE). We designed a diagnostic sequencing panel targeting of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade de 131genesassociatedwithepilepsy and/orEEandscreened Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 8University Clinic of Genet- a cohort of 45 individuals with clinical diagnosis of West ics, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade de Coimbra, syndrome. We identiﬁed disease-causing single nucleotide Coimbra, Portugal variants in 11 out of 45 individuals affecting genes com- monly associated with West syndrome (such as CDK L5
, Context: Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome (WSS) is an ARX) but also in genes pre- dominantly linked to other autosomal dominant condition comprising intellectual dis- epileptic disorders (such as DEPD C5
, SCN1A, WDR45, ability, short stature, typical facial features and hyper- AARS). Panel analysis revealed copy number variants in trichosis.Itiscausedbyloss-of-functionvariantsinKMT2A two additional cases, comprising a 6,7 Mb Duplication on gene, leading to chromatin remodelling defects. chromosome 2 including SCN2A and SCN3A and a Methods: Clinical and molecular characterization of all supernumerarymarkerchromosome15leadingtoanoverall cases with WSS diagnosis from 4 Portuguese hospital diagnostic yield of 29% (13/45). centres based on retrospective analysis of patient medical In our cohort, individuals with a disease-causing variant records.Clinicalexome(7/11)orKMT2AtargetedNGS(4/ had signiﬁcantly more severe phenotypes with respect to 11) was or is being performed in all cases. DD/ID, therapy resistant epilepsy and cerebral atrophy Results: We describe 8 male and 3 female unrelated compared to genetically unclariﬁed cases. patients. The age of diagnosis ranged between 2 and 18 In addition to investigating the genotypic spectrum of years. The main reasons for referral were intellectual West syndrome, we compared the phenotypic spectrum of disability (8/11) and dysmorphic features (7/11). MostAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 369 individuals had mild tomoderate intellectual disability (11/ Methods:SNPgenotypedatawereusedformappingthe 11), behavioural problems (9/9), narrow palpebral ﬁssures disease locus in Family I. Gene variants were identiﬁed by (10/11) and downslanted (8/10), long eyelashes (6/11), exome sequencing. thick eyebrows (5/10) and wide nasal bridge (10/11). Results:AllofthepatientswedescribehaveID,ranging Hypertrichosis cubiti was present in 10/10. Short stature from mild to profound, and reduced motor and cognitive was present in 3/11 individuals, recurrent infections in 4/7 skills plus variable features including short stature, micro- and sleep apnoea in 2/6 cases, one requiring non-invasive cephaly, developmental delay, hypotonia, dysarthria, deaf- ventilation. We identiﬁed 7 novel KMT2A heterozygous ness, visual problems, enuresis, encopresis, behavioural variants and 3 previously described pathogenic variants. anomalies, delayed pubertal onset and facial dysmorphism. One case is awaiting for results. We ﬁrst mapped the disease locus in the large family Discussion: Our data are in accordance with the (Family I) and identiﬁed homozygous ZNF407 literature, except for short stature which seems to have c.2814_2816dup (p.(Val939dup)) in the four patients of lower prevalence than expected. Clinical suspicion is often the family, and then added to the study two patients of challenging as the phenotypic variability is wide. In 6/10 different ethnic origins with biallelic ZNF407 variants: cases,thediagnosiswasnotinitiallyconsideredandin4of homozygous c.2405G>T (p.(Gly802Val)) in patient of those only achieved by reverse phenotyping. Detailed Family II and compound heterozygous variants description of national cohorts of WSS patients contributes c.2884C>G (p.(Arg962Gly)) and c.3642G>C (p. to awareness and better-informed counselling and (Lys1214Asn)) in patient of Family III. management. Conclusions: Our ﬁndings conﬁrm that ZNF407 is a S. Fernandes: None. C. S. Rosas: None. M. Soeiro e recessive neurodevelopmental disease gene, biallelic var- Sá: None. I. Carvalho: None. M. Rodrigues: None. P. iants of which can manifest with ID and wide phenotypic Louro: None. J. de Sá: None. G. Soares: None. P. Dias: variability. The observation that all four variants found in None. L. Ramos: None. J. M. Saraiva: None. S. B. ourpatientsarepredictedasbenignoncanonicaltranscripts Sousa: None. by computational algorithms indicates that many other variants may have escaped identiﬁcation as causal in this  P08
.122.B large gene with extreme loss-of-function intolerance. Biallelic ZNF407 mutation in a neurodevelopmental M. Koprulu: None. Q. Zahra: None. C. Cakmak: disorder with ID, short stature and variable micro- None. M. Shuaib: None. N. Sobreira: None. L. Kalsner: cephaly, hypotonia, ocular anomalies and facial None. J. Sobreira: None. M. Guillen Sajoto: A. Employ- dysmorphism ment(fullorpart-time);Modest;GeneDx.S.Malik:None. A. Tolun: None. M. Koprulu1, Q. Zahra2, C. Cakmak3, M. Shuaib2, N. Sobreira4, L. Kalsner5, J. Sobreira6, M. Guillen Sajoto7, S.  P09
 Neurogenetic and Psychiatric Disorders Malik2, A. Tolun1  P09
.002.C 1Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Quaid-i- Epilepsy, neuropsychogical phenotype, and neuroima- Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan, 3Bogazici Univer- ging ﬁndings in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: a case sity, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Johns Hopkins University School of series. Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5University of Connecticut School of Medicine and Connecticut Chil- A.M.Alhashem,N.Alsaleh,H.ElGhezal,H.AlKalaf,I.B. dren’s Medical Center, Farmington, CT, United States, Bouhjar, K. Tlili, B. T. Melaiki 6Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States Prince sultan military and medical city, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Background: We describe ﬁve members of a con- sanguineous Pakistani family (Family I) plus two unrelated Background: The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome affects patients of different ethnic origins presenting with neuro- multipleorgansystems,andtheneurologicalmanifestations developmental disorders with overlapping features and arean importantaspect ofthisdisorder.Many areawareof biallelic ZNF407 variants. Homozygous c.5054C>G (p. cardiac anomalies associated with this uncommon genetic (Ser1685Trp)) has been reported in two brothers with an disorder. However, the different types of seizures, neu- intellectual disability (ID) syndrome. ropsychologicalproﬁle,EEG,andMRIﬁndingsseeninthis condition are not well appreciated.370 J.delPicchia Methods: Through 2010 tell 2019, Medical records of Methods: At the Antwerp University Hospital, we patients with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome were retrospec- therefore perform genetic testing for CP using SNP-array tively reviewed for documentation of Neurological/neurop- and a targeted whole exome sequencing-based gene panel sychologicalevaluation,seizuretypes,EEG,andbrainMRI consisting of approximately 200 genes associated with CP ﬁndings. and CP-mimics. Results: 28 patients were collected. 6 (21.4%) patient Results: We report the ﬁndings on two siblings from a haveepilepsy,3havefocalepilepsyand3havegeneralized consanguineousfamilypresentingwithspasticCP,andmild epilepsy and all of them were controlled on AED. Brain to moderate ID. Brain MRI showed hypoplastic corpus MRIperformedin16patients:normalin6patients(37.5%), callosum and periventricular white matter abnormalities. abnormal in 10 patients: polymicrogyri and cortical WES demonstrated the homozygous pathogenic variant dysplasia: 2, thin corpus callosum: 3, vermis hypoplasia: c.1100G>A (p.Gly367Asp) in ADD3 in both cases. 1, biliateral pallidal calciﬁcations: 1, developmental cere- Conclusions: In literature, only one report describes a bellar veinous anomalies: 1, cervical pilocytic astrocytoma: homozygous ADD3 variant as a cause of CP in a 1, atrophic changes: 5 Neuropsychological assessment: 3 consanguineous family with similar clinical ﬁndings of with average intellectual ability, 9(30%) with intellectual spastic quadriplegia or diplegia, variable ID and cerebral disabilities of variable range. 3 patients suffered of white matter abnormalities. Interestingly, the same variant neuropsychiatric illness. was identiﬁed in our family, which suggests the possibility Conclusions: Patients with 22q11.2DS have a high risk of of a founder mutation. Our ﬁndings conﬁrm the role of epilepsy. Patients with brain malformations should have a ADD3 in CP. chromosomal microarray (CMA) performed to screen for the T. Beyltjens: None. C. Dielman: None. D. Beysen: 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. The speciﬁc genetic locus is None. E. Reyniers: None. K. Janssens: None. M. criticallylinkedtoseizuretype,andneurodevelopmentalstatus. Meuwissen: None. A.M. Alhashem: None. N. Alsaleh: None. H. El Ghezal: None. H. AlKalaf: None. I.B. Bouhjar: None.  P09
.005.C K. Tlili: None. B.T. Melaiki: None. Dissecting genetic factors involved in the relation between behavioural laterality and neurodevelopmental  P09
.004.B conditions Conﬁrmation of ADD3 pathogenic variants as a genetic cause of cerebral palsy J. Schmitz1, M. Zheng2, K. F. H. Lui2, C. S. H. Ho3, C. McBride2, S. Paracchini1 T. Beyltjens1, C. Dielman2, D. Beysen1, E. Reyniers3,4, K. Janssens3,4, M. Meuwissen4,3 1SchoolofMedicine,UniversityofStAndrews,StAndrews, United Kingdom, 2Department of Psychology, Chinese 1Department of Pediatric Neurology, Antwerp University University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 2Department of Pediatric 3Psychology Department, The University of Hong Kong, Neurology, Queen Paola Children’s Hospital, Antwerp, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Belgium, 3Center for Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, 4Center for Medical Genetics, Introduction: The cerebral hemispheres differ in structure Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium and function underpinning specialisation for cognition, perception, and motor control. Atypical brain asymmetries Introduction: Cerebral palsy (CP) is a clinical descriptive have been implicated in psychiatric and neurodevelop- termthatdeﬁnesaheterogeneousgroupofnon-progressive, mental conditions. Handedness is often used as a proxy for neurodevelopmental disorders of motor impairment, which brain asymmetries and recent genome-wide association co-occur with a wide range of medical conditions, such as studies (GWAS) suggest a genetic association with schi- intellectualdisability(ID),speech/languagedeﬁcits,autism, zophrenia,whileotherlateralitymeasuresarelessexplored. epilepsyandvisualand/orhearingimpairment.CPiscaused Here, we investigate shared genetic components between by a cerebral anomaly/dysfunction that develops during behavioural laterality phenotypes and their relevance to pregnancy, birth or infancy. CP is still the most common these conditions. cause of physical disability in childhood with an important Methods and Results: We performed GWAS on hand, impact on the quality of life of patients and, by its high foot,eyeandearpreferenceinalongitudinalBritishcohort prevalence of 1.5-2.5 per 1000 live births, even on society. (ALSPAC,n>=5770).Ourresultssuggestaninvolvement Recent studies demonstrate an important contribution of ofgenesassociatedwithimmuneresponse(footedness)and genetic factors.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 371 axonogenesis (eye, ear preference). In line with previous AAO in affected relatives was 66.3 [50-80]. One patient research, genes involved in body asymmetries were carried two LOF compound heterozygous variants. DNA associated with handedness. The relevance of neurodeve- was available in 18 relatives: 5/6 affected relatives carried lopmental conditions was tested using gene set enrichment the familial variant (AAO=[61-78]) while 3/12 unaffected analysesandpolygenicriskscores(PRS)forschizophrenia, were also carriers, aged 42, 71 and 95, respectively. ADHD, autism spectrum disorders and bipolar disorder. Strikingly, 57% affected carriers were APO E4
+, a strong PRS for ADHD were associated with left- and more ADriskvariant,includingonebeinghomozygous,whoalso strongly with non-right-handedness, but not with other carried a LOF ABCA7 risk variant. laterality phenotypes. Multivariate structural equation We introduced one LOF variant and one Mis3 variant models (SEM) (genome-wide genetic markers in ALSPAC usingCRISPR/Cas9iniPSCsandobservedincreasedlevels andclassicmultivariateSEMinaChinesetwincohort(n= of Aβ in the supernatant. The proband carrying this Mis3 486))revealedsharedgenetic factorsforhandandfoot,but variant was APO E4
+ and carried a LOF rare ABCA7 risk not eye preference, suggesting a dissociation of motor and variant.Wearenowassessingadditionalmissensevariants. sensory laterality. Conclusions:SOR L1
LOFvariantsarenotfullypenetrant Conclusions: These results give further support to a and can be observed in an oligogenic context. shared biology between laterality and neurodevelopment, G. Nicolas: None. C. Schramm: None. L. Miguel: whichispotentiallymediatedbybrainasymmetry.Funding: None. M. Lacour: None. S. Rousseau: None. D. Wallon: JS is a DFG fellow (SCHM 3530/1-1). This work was None. C. Charbonnier: None. A. Zaréa: None. T. funded by Royal Society grants (SP). Frebourg:None.D.Campion:None.A.Rovelet-Lecrux: J. Schmitz:None.M. Zheng:None.K.F.H. Lui: None. None. M. Lecourtois: None. C.S.H. Ho: None. C. McBride: None. S. Paracchini: None.  P09
.008.C AlbumindidnotincreasewithCoenzymeQ10treatment  P09
.006.A in AOA1 patients Assessment of SOR L1
 rare variants segregation in Alzheimer disease families and in vitro models show P. CHARLE S1
, V. LADEVEZ E2
, C. TRANCHANT3, M. reduced penetrance and oligogenic inheritance ANHEIM3,C.GOIZET4,T.KUNTZER5,F.OCHSNER5,F. ROELEN S6
,N.DECONINCK7,E.PETIT8,C.JAUFFRET8, G. Nicolas, C. Schramm, L. Miguel, M. Lacour, S. S. RIVAUD-PECHOUX9, I. LEBER10, A. BRIC E11
, S. Rousseau, D. Wallon, C. Charbonnier, A. Zaréa, T. TEZENAS DU MONTCE L12
, A. DURR11 Frebourg, D. Campion, A. Rovelet-Lecrux, M. Lecourtois 1APHP, Genetic Department, Medical Genetic UF, Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen Armand-Trousseau and Pitié Salpêtrière Hospitals, Centre University Hospital, Department of Genetics and CNR- de référence Déﬁciences intellectuelles de causes rares, MAJ, F 76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and Département de Neurologie, Hôpital de La Salpêtrière, 47 Personalized Medicine, ROUEN, France Bd de l’Hôpital 75651 Paris Cedex 13, Paris, France, 2Sorbonne University, INSERM, Institut Pierre Louis Introduction: SOR L1
 rare loss-of-function (LOF) and d’Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique IPLESP, 75013 missense predicted damaging (Mis3) variants have ﬁrst Paris, France, Paris, France, 3Service de Neurologie, been identiﬁed in early-onset Alzheimer Disease (EOAD, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, onset ≤65) probands with a pedigree suggesting autosomal France. Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire dominant inheritance. Then, increased burdens of rare et Cellulaire (IGBMC), INSERM-U964/CNRS-UMR7104/ SOR L1
 LOF and Mis3 variants were reported in AD Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France. Fédération de patients with odds ratios ranging from 1.9 to 29. Hence, Médecine Translati, Strasbourg, France, 4CHU Bordeaux, using SOR L1
 rare variants for genetic counseling appears Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre de Référence debatable. In addition, a functional effect of Mis3 variants Maladies Rares «Neurogénétique», Laboratoire MRGM, cannot be inferred from bioinformatics predictions only. INSERM U1211, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, Methods:WeincludedfamilieswitharareLOForMis3 Bordeaux, France, 5Unité Nerf-Muscle, Service de Neuro- variant, evaluated their segregation, and developed a logie, Département des neurosciences cliniques, CHU functional assay. Vaudois (CHUV) et université de Lausanne, 1011 Lau- Results: We studied 20 families with a LOF variant sanne, Suisse, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Pediatric Neurol- (mean age at onset (AAO) in probands, 55.4 years, range: ogy, AZ Delta, Roeselare, Belgium, Roeselare, Belgium, [48-65]).Seventeenshowedapositivefamilyhistory.Mean 7Neurologie pédiatrique, HUDERF av J.J. Crocq, 15 1020372 J.delPicchia Bruxelles, ULB, Belgique et NMRC Gent, UZ Gent, P. Charles: None. V. Ladeveze: None. C. Tranchant: Belgique, Bruxelles, Belgium, 8Groupe Hospitalier Pitié None. M. Anheim: None. C. Goizet: None. T. Kuntzer: Salpêtrière ICM - Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle None. F. Ochsner: None. F. Roelens: None. N. Deco- Epinière47,Boulevarddel’HôpitalC S2141475646
PARIS ninck: None. E. Petit: None. C. Jauffret: None. S. Cedex 13, Paris, France, 9INSERM U-1127 Institut du Rivaud-pechoux: None. I. Leber: None. A. Brice: None. cerveau et de la moelle épinière Hôpital de la Salpêtrière S. Tezenas du montcel: None. A. Durr: None. 47-91 boulevard de l’Hôpital 75651 Paris CEDEX 13 France, Paris, France, 10Sorbonne Universités, UPMC  P09
.010.B UnivParis06,InsermU1127,CNRSUMR7225,Institutdu A nonsense variant in the ARSD gene associated with Cerveau et la Moelle épinière (ICM), Centre de référence young-onset Parkinson’s disease des démences rares ou précoces, IM2A, Département de Neurologie, AP-HP - Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, S. MIURA1, T. Shimojo2, R. Fujioka3, Y. Uchiyama4, H. France, Paris, France, 11Sorbonne Université, Institut du Shibata2 Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), AP-HP, Inserm, CNRS,UniversityHospitalPitié-Salpêtrière,Paris,France, 1Department of Neurology & Geriatric Medicine, Ehime Paris, France, 12Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut University Graduate School of Medicine, Toon, Japan, PierreLouisd’EpidémiologieetdeSantéPubliqueIPLESP, 2Division of Genomics, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, AP-HP,HôpitauxUniversitairesPitiéSalpêtrière-Charles Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 3Department of Food Foix, F75013 Paris, France, Paris, France and Nutrition, Beppu University Junior College, Beppu, Japan, 4Department of Radiology, Kurume University Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1 (AOA1) is a rare School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia associated with ocu- lomotor apraxia, hypoalbuminaemia and hypercholester- Parkinson’s disease (PD) is one of the common neurode- olaemia linked to Aprataxin (APTX) gene mutations. generativedisorderdeﬁnedasbradykinesiaplusresttremor Aprataxin gene mutations are associated with decreased or rigidity. It has been reasonable that the younger age at Coenzyme Q10 levels in muscle and plasma. Disease onset is, the higher the risk of genetic condition gets. To duration and disability are negatively correlated with albu- identify the causative nucleotide variant for the disease, we minemia. We included 19 patients in a multicenter (six studied a Japanese pedigree consisting of a trio of a patient centers) controlled randomized double blind trial with with sporadic young-onset PD and unaffected parents. The Coenzyme Q10 with 2 phases, a controlled randomized patient was a 35-year-old male. He had noted involuntary phaseCoenzymeQ10versusplaceboduring1year,andan movementofslowtorsioninhisrightshoulderandforearm open-labelledphasewithallpatientstreatedwithCoenzyme attheageof31.Healsonoticedslowtorsioninhislefttoe Q10 during 1 year, to estimate longer term potential side and dragged his left foot in every evening at the age of 34. effects and tolerance. Inclusion criteria were AOA1 con- On neurological examination, he showed dystonic posture ﬁrmed by genetic molecular analysis; age older than 18, in his right wrist, mild hypertonus and bradykinesia in his hypoalbuminemia, informed consent signed. Primary end- right upper limb, hyperreﬂexia and mild spasticity in the point was hypoalbuminemia rate evolution. Secondary lower extremities. Brain MRI showed no abnormality. endpoints were cerebellar ataxia severity (SARA and Meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) myocardial scinti- quantitative evaluations), ocular movements evaluation, graphy showed no decrease of the heart/mediastinum ratio. quality of life (EQ5-D), depression and anxiety (PHQ-9), Dopamine transporter (DAT) SPECT imaging showed biologicalmeasurements(prealbuminemia,cholesterolemia, moderately reduced dopamine uptake in the bilateral stria- alphafoetoprotein), safety (blood counts and hepatic check) tum. L-dopa was effective for his bradykinesia. Whole- andcompliance(CoEnzymeQ10dosage).Evaluationswere exome sequencing of the trio combined with strict criteria performed each 6 months with a phone call between each revealed an X-linked nonsense variant (NM_001669: visit. Results: Albuminemia evolution was not signiﬁcantly c.1556C>T [p.Arg498X]) in the ARSD gene encoding different between the 2 groups (Phase1: coQ10: -1.2 [-3.0; arylsulfatase D. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis ver- 1.1], Placebo: +1.0 [+0.8; +2.0], p = 0.0511) and no iﬁed that the mRNA expression level of ARSD was sig- signiﬁcant difference on all other evaluation criteria. niﬁcantly reduced in the patient’s peripheral blood cells Treatment was well tolerated with minor side effects: 6 probably due to the nonsense mediated decay. This is the during phase 1 (3 in each group) and 2 during phase 2. ﬁrst record of a disease associated with a variant of the Conclusion: despite good tolerance, we failed to demon- ARSD gene. strate an increase of albuminemia under Coenzyme Q10 S. Miura: None. T. Shimojo: None. R. Fujioka: None. treatment in AOA1 patients. Y. Uchiyama: None. H. Shibata: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 373  P09
.011.C  P09
.013.B VariationsingenesofthemTOR-pathwaylinkASDand Novel MAG variant in autosomal recessive cerebellar ICV ataxia with oculomotor apraxia: molecular basis and expanded clinical phenotype M. Arenella1,2, N. R. Mota1, M. W. A. Teunissen3, H. G. Brunner1,4, J. Bralten1 M. Santos1, J. Damásio1,2,3, C. Kun-Rodrigues4, C. Barbot2, J. Sequeiros1,2, J. Brás4,5, I. Alonso1,2, R. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Guerreiro4,5 Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College 1UnIGENe, IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell London, London, United Kingdom, 3Academic Center for Biology, i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Epileptology Kempenhaeghe, Maastricht University Medi- Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2CGPP, cal Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Department of IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, i3S - Human Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universi- Maastricht, Netherlands dade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Neurology Department, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4Center for Introduction: Large brains are commonly observed in Neurodegenerative Science, Van Andel Institute, Grand autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but the underlying mole- Rapids, MI, United States, 5Division of Psychiatry and cular basis is unclear. Brain volume is highly heritable and BehavioralMedicine, Michigan StateUniversityCollegeof is partly regulated by variation in the mammalian target of Human Medicine, Grand Rapids, MI, United States rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. Rare mTOR-related variants associate with macrocephaly in syndromic intellectual dis- Hereditary cerebellar ataxias (HCAs) are a heterogeneous ability (ID), and common mTOR-related variants are asso- group of neurodegenerative disorders, characterized by ciated with intracranial volume (ICV) in the general motor incoordination and unsteady gait, often associated population. We hypothesized that variations in mTOR- with speech and eye movement disturbances. HCAs share related genes could mediate the occurrence of enlarged clinical features and disease mechanisms with hereditary brains in ASD. spastic paraplegias (HSPs), with several ataxia-related Materials and methods: Looking at rare de-novo genes found to cause HSPs and vice-versa. In this study, mTOR-relatedvariants,weestimatedenrichmentofmacro- we used homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing to cephaly and ASD using a local ID cohort (N=2,257) and unravel the disease-causing variant in a Portuguese family publicly available resources (n = 32,991). Looking at withearly-onset,autosomalrecessive,cerebellarataxiawith common variants in a unique set of mTOR-related genes, neuropathy and oculomotor apraxia. We identiﬁed a novel we estimated association with ASD (N=46,350) and ICV homozygous missense variant in MAG (c.124T>C; p. (N=25,974) using publicly available data. Using the same Cys42Arg), the gene encoding the myelin-associated gly- data, we estimated 1) genome-wide genetic correlation coprotein(MAG).Cellularstudiesconﬁrmeditsdetrimental between ASD and ICV and 2) mTOR-restricted ASD-ICV effect. Our results showed that this variant reduces protein genetic correlation. stability, impairs post-translational processing (N-linked Results:Wefoundasigniﬁcantenrichmentofsyndromic glycosylation) and subcellular localization of MAG. macrocephaly and ASD in de-novo mTOR-related variants Homozygous variants in MAG have been previously asso- carriers. Gene-set analyses for common mTOR-related ciated with complicated forms of HSP. Our ﬁndings newly variants revealed signiﬁcant independent associations with associate MAG variants with ataxia with oculomotor ASD (p=0.002) and ICV (p=0.021). While no signiﬁcant apraxia. The low expression and premature degradation of genome-wide ASD-ICV genetic correlation was present themutantproteinshowedthevarianttocauseproteinloss- (p=0.81), we show a signiﬁcant positive mTOR-stratiﬁed of-function. This work has also expanded the clinical phe- genetic correlation (p=0.027). notype associated with disease-causing variants in MAG. Conclusions: Our study shows that both rare and Genotyping MAG variants should, therefore, be considered common mTOR-related genetic variations contribute to in the diagnosis of HCAs, in addition to HSPs. ASDandbrainvolume.Theseresultsarecompatiblewitha M. Santos: None. J. Damásio: None. C. Kun-Rodri- model in which variable mTOR activation may drive both gues: None. C. Barbot: None. J. Sequeiros: None. J. larger brain volume and ASD risk. Brás: None. I. Alonso: None. R. Guerreiro: None. M. Arenella: None. N.R. Mota: None. M.W.A. Teunissen:None.H.G.Brunner:None.J.Bralten:None.374 J.delPicchia  P09
.014.C  P09
.015.A NPTX1 mutations cause a novel form of autosomal Novel dominantly inherited spinocerebellar ataxia sub- dominant cerebellar ataxia type caused by SAMD9L mutation triggering mitochon- drial and lysosomal dysregulation M. Coutelier1, M. Jacoupy1, A. Janer2, F. Renaud3, G. Saripella4, F. Ancien5, R. Larivière2, N. Sgarioto2, R. M. Corral-Juan1, P. Casquero2, N. Giraldo Restrepo2, S. Valter1,F.Pucci5,M.Rooman5,I.LeBer1,P.Charles1,D. Laurie3, A. Martinez-Piñeiro4, R. Mateo Montero2, L. A.Tregouet4,A.Brice1,E.Shoubridge2,D.Gilis5,A.Durr1, Ispierto5, V. Volpini6, D. Vilas5, R. Álvarez-Ramo5, I. G. Stevanin1 Sánchez1, A. Matilla-Dueñas1 1InstitutduCerveauetdelaMoelle,Paris,France,2McGill 1FunctionalandTranslationalNeurogeneticsUnit,Depart- university, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Institut Gustave ment of Neuroscience, Research Institute Germans Trias i Roussy, Villejuif, France, 4Institut ICAN, Paris, France, Pujol (IGTP), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona-Can 5Universite Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium Ruti Campus, Badalona, Spain, 2Neurology and neurophy- siology Section, Hospital Mateu Orﬁla, Mahón, Spain, Introduction: Autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias 3CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), (SCA)arecharacterizedbyamarkedgeneticheterogeneity, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), with more than forty causative genes identiﬁed so far, and Barcelona, Spain, 4Neuromuscular and functional studies half the patients lacking a molecular diagnosis. Unit, Neurology Service, University Hospital Germans MaterialandMethods:Inalargefamilywith9sympto- Trias i Pujol (HUGTiP), Universitat Autònoma de maticpatients,weaimedatidentifyinganewgeneticcause Barcelona-Can Ruti Campus, Badalona, Spain, 5Neurode- of SCA by performing exome sequencing combined to generation Unit, Neurology Service, Department of Neu- whole genome linkage analysis. roscience, University Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol Results: We identiﬁed a G389R missense mutation in (HUGTiP), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona-Can Ruti NPTX1,segregatinginallaffectedcases.Thismutationwas Campus, Badalona, Spain, 6IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de recurrent in 2 independent pedigrees without a common Llobregat, Spain founder effect and another missense mutation,  E327
G, was identiﬁed in a smaller pedigree with two affected patients. Introduction: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) consist of Thephenotypeinthese 4familiesisalate onset(range 34- rare movement disorders characterised by progressive cer- 71 years) slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia, nystagmus, ebellar ataxia variably associated with other neurological cognitiveimpairment,myoclonictremorandmildcerebellar signs. At least 43 different SCA subtypes have been atrophy on MRI. Both mutations affect conserved amino- described to date evidencing the high clinical and genetic acid residues in the N P1
 protein and are extremely rare or heterogeneity. missing from public databases. We show that both Materials and Methods: Whole-genome linkage and mutations alter the endoplasmic reticulum morphology exome studieswere performed inaSpanishﬁve-generation and induce ATF6-mediated stress, ultimately leading to family from the Balearic island of Menorca with seven increased cell cytotoxicity in CO S7
 cells. The  E327
G affected individuals variably presenting with ataxia, nys- change also abolishes the protein secretion, as well as the tagmus, dysarthria, polyneuropathy and pyramidal signs. formation of N P1
 complexes. In silico modeling of the Results: Here we present a novel spinocerebellar ataxia complex evidenced a destabilizing effect for the  E327
G with autosomal dominant inheritance with affected indivi- change, located at the interface between monomers. No duals presenting nystagmus as initial clinical sign and a phenotype-genotype correlation could be established. variableage at onset ranging from 15 to 50 years old. MRI Conclusions: We suggest that mutations in NPTX1 can revealed cerebellar atrophy with cerebral demyelination, lead to spinocerebellar ataxia via endoplasmic stress, and EMG showed nerve conduction deﬁcits. We identiﬁed following a dominant negative complex-destabilizing pro- the c.1877C>T (p.Ser626Leu) germline variant in the cess or a direct alteration of the protein function. SAMD9L gene as the disease causative genetic defect with M. Coutelier: None. M. Jacoupy: None. A. Janer: a signiﬁcant LOD score Z =3.43 (θ= 0.00; P < 3.5 E10
- max None. F. Renaud: None. G. Saripella: None. F. Ancien: 5). We demonstrate the mitochondrial location of human None. R. Larivière: None. N. Sgarioto: None. R. Valter: SAMD9Lproteinandfounditslevelsdecreasedinpatients’ None. F. Pucci: None. M. Rooman: None. I. Le Ber: ﬁbroblasts. The p.Ser626Leu variant is located on a None. P. Charles: None. D.A. Tregouet: None. A. Brice: predicted microtubule binding motif in SAMD9L leading None. E. Shoubridge: None. D. Gilis: None. A. Durr: to its subcellular mislocalization. Furthermore, we detected None. G. Stevanin: None. a high-copy number of the mitochondrial MT-D-LOOPAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 375 region along with increased AT P5
H, DR P1
 and LAM P1
 Dataintegrationwillbealsoperformedtoidentifypathways proteinlevelsevidencingbothmitochondrialandlysosomal and gene networks involved in the disorder to understand deﬁcits in patients’ ﬁbroblasts. disease mechanisms and design target-driven treatment. Conclusions: This study describes a new spinocerebellar Acknowledgements: EU project GEMMA (grant agree- ataxia subtype caused by SAMD9L, mitochondrial, and ment No 825033). lysosomal dysregulation. This work was funded by the F.A. Cupaioli: None. E. Mosca: None. N. Di Nanni: Spanish Health Institute Carlos III (FIS PI14/00136; PI14/ None.P.Pelucchi:None.L.Milanesi:None.M.E.Raggi: 01159; FIS PI17/00534). None. L. Villa: None. A. Mezzelani: None. M.Corral-Juan:None.P.Casquero:None.N.Giraldo Restrepo: None. S. Laurie: None. A. Martinez-Piñeiro:  P09
.018.A None. R. Mateo Montero: None. L. Ispierto: None. V. Changes in transcriptional activity of mitochondrial Volpini: None. D. Vilas: None. R. Álvarez-Ramo: None. genes in patients with autism spectrum disorder I. Sánchez: None. A. Matilla-Dueñas: None. Y. Chudakova1, G. Shmarina1,2,3, A. Poletkina1, M.  P09
.017.C Konkova1, E. Ershova1,2, N. Veiko1,2, S. Nikitina4, N. Linked-read whole genome sequencing reveals unde- Simashkova4, S. Kostyuk1,2 tected variants in autism spectrum disorder 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian F. A. Cupaioli1, E. Mosca1, N. Di Nanni1, P. Pelucchi1, L. Federation, 2N. I. Pirogov Russian National Research Milanesi1, M. E. Raggi2, L. Villa2, A. Mezzelani1 Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Gabri- chevsky Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, 1National Research Council, Institute of Biomedical Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Scientiﬁc Center for Mental Technologies, Segrate, Italy, 2Scientiﬁc Institute, IRCCS Health, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Italy Russian Federation Introduction: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neu- Introduction:Mitochondrialdysfunctionwithconcomitant rodevelopmental condition with complex etiology. oxidative stress is evidenced in the brains and periphery of Although genetics play a key role in ASD, causative or many patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This predisposing genetic variants have been detected only in study aimed to compare the level of mitochondrial DNA 30% of patients. Here, for the ﬁrst time, linked-read whole (mtDNA) and transcriptional activity of mitochondrial genome sequencing of ASD patients is used to access dis- genes in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of ASD ease associated regions unmappable by short-reads NGS. patients (ASDP) and healthy controls (HC). Materials and Methods: 10 children with ASD, Materials and Methods: The study included 20 ASDP including 3 couples of affected siblings, were enrolled and15HCaged4to10years.PBLDNAwasisolatedfrom and HMW DNA isolated from peripheral blood. DNA was plasma using phenol extraction. mtDNA content in PBL submitted to 10Xgenomics microﬂuidics partitioning and DNA samples was determined by non-radioactive quanti- barcoding,librarypreparationandIlluminaWG-NGS.Data tative dot-hybridization. PBL RNA was isolated with were analyzed through 10x Long Ranger pipelines to ﬁnd RNeasyPlusMiniKit(‘Qiagen’).Expressionof85mitochon- SNVs, in/dels and larger structural variants in comparison drial genes including those involved in regulating redox to 1000 genomes, genome aggregation database and metabolism, mitochondrial response to stress, mitophagy, NHLBI-ESP populations. Genes affected by variants were mitochondrial fusion, mitochondrial ﬁssion, mitochondrial compared with those already known to be associated with transports, and those that encode for proteins of I-V ASD (SFARI database, large-scale sequencing studies, respiratory complexes, was evaluated using real-time PCR. bioinformatics predictions). Results:TherewerenosigniﬁcantdifferencesinmtDNA Results: this approach successfully produced sequences levels between patient and control groups. Analysis of up to 9mln bp in length. Among the detected variants, 405 mitochondrial gene expression revealed 3-5 fold elevation were listed in SFARI, 43 conﬁrmed bioinformatics predic- of transcript levels for UQCRF S1
, S C01
, and MT-AT P6
 tions and 3,210 were new. Among the latter variants, 22 genes(complexIII,IV,andV,respectively)inPBLofASD were homozygous in all the 3 couples of siblings. patients compared to those of HC. Besides, PBL of ASDP Conclusions: this powerful approach deciphered under- werecharacterizedbyheightenedexpressionofPINK1gene lying genomic heterogeneity and missing variations in (tenfold) involved in mitophagy as well as FI S1
 (twofold) ASD.Furtherstudieswillbeperformedtovalidatethenew and MFN2 (fourfold) genes regulated mitochondrial ﬁssion ASD variants in a large size of samples and in public data. and fusion, respectively.376 J.delPicchia Conclusions: Increased transcriptional activity of fusion, SL C7
A5 is a blood-brain barrier (BBB) transporter. Sex ﬁssion and mitophagy genes in PBL of ASDP may be hormones and BBB are fundamental during early devel- associated with adaptive response maintaining functional opment. We highlight the need of considering genetics and mitochondria under disease-related metabolic or/and envir- environment as interacting entities. Efforts to collect early- onmentalstresses.ThestudywassupportedbyRFBRgrant lifeexposuredatafromgeneticallysusceptiblepatientsmay № 17-29-06017oﬁ_m. accelerate the implementation of health management stra- Y. Chudakova: B. Research Grant (principal investiga- tegies for ASD. tor,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellas J.X. Santos: None. H. Martiniano: None. A.R. grantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;RFBRgrant№17-29- Marques: None. C. Rasga: None. J. Vilela: None. A.M. 06017oﬁ_m..G.Shmarina:None.A.Poletkina:None.M. Vicente: None. Konkova: None. E. Ershova: None. N. Veiko: None. S. Nikitina:None.N.Simashkova:None.S.Kostyuk:None.  P09
.021.A Transcriptomicanalysisunveilsfunctionalconsequences  P09
.020.C of complex rearrangements associated to autism spec- Exploringmechanismsofgene-environmentinteractions trum disorder contributingtotheonsetofidiopathicAutismSpectrum Disorder M. Costa-Roger1, M. López-Sánchez1, T. Vendrell2, P. Muñoz-Cabello1,3,B.Gener4,E.Gabau5,N.Capdevila5,L. J. X. Santos1,2, H. Martiniano1,2, A. R. Marques1,2, C. Pérez-Jurado1,6, I. Cuscó2 Rasga1,2, J. Vilela1,2, A. M. Vicente1,2 1Genetics Unit, Departament de Ciències Experimentals i 1InstitutoNacionaldeSaúdeDoutorRicardoJorge,Lisbon, de la Salut, Pompeu Fabra University, Hospital del Mar Portugal, 2Faculdade de Ciências, BioISI - Biosystems & Research Institute (IMIM), Parc de Salut Mar and Centro Integrative Sciences Institute, Universidade de Lisboa, deInvestigaciónBiomédicaenReddeEnfermedadesRaras Lisbon, Portugal (CIBERER),Barcelona,Spain,2DepartmentofClinicaland Molecular Genetics and Medicine Genetics Group, VHIR, Sequencingstudieshaveyieldedseveralcandidategenesfor UniversityHospitalValld’Hebron,Barcelona,Spain,3Unit Autism SpectrumDisorder(ASD). However,thebiological of Clinical Genetics, Hospital del Mar, Parc de Salut Mar, mechanisms underlying its onset are still unclear. Envir- Barcelona, Spain, 4Osakidetza Basque Health Service, onmental factors may modulate ASD risk, with heritability Cruces University Hospital. Department of Genetics, estimatesof50-80%supportingaroleforgene-environment Biocruces Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Bizkaia, interactions in idiopathic cases. We hypothesize that ASD Spain, 5Service of Clinical Genetics and Genetics Labora- candidate genes interact with reported ubiquitous environ- tory of Paediatric Unit, Parc Taulí University Hospital, mental risk factors. Thus, we interrogated the Comparative Institut d’Investigació I Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT, Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) for interactions between Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Sabadell, Spain, 6SA 1144 ASD candidate genes and 59 ASD-risk chemicals. A ClinicalGenetics,Women’sandChildren’sHospital,South proportion analysis was performed to identify genes that Australian Health and Medical Research Institute selectively interact with ASD risk chemicals (and vice- (SAHMRI) and University of Adelaide, South Australian versa).GeneticdatafromASD-individualswasinspectedto Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, South identify SNVs (n = 2674) and CNVs (n = 3570). Eleven Australia, Australia genes, including genes encodingfor sexhormone receptors (AR, ESR1 and ESR2), signaling kinases (MAPK1 and Introduction:AutismSpectrumDisorder(ASD)isagroup MAPK3) and xenobiotics-responding molecules (GSTM1 of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by social- and SL C7
A5) were found to selectively interact with ASD- communication difﬁculties, restricted interests and repeti- chemicals. Meanwhile, heavy metals, endocrine disruptors tive behaviors. ASD has a complex multifactorial etiology (pesticides, benzo(a)pyrene and a phthalate) and valproic with high genetic involvement. Previous unpublished data acid were found to selectively target ASD-candidate genes. suggestedthatinversions17q21.31and8p23.1couldactas In ASD-cases, we found 22 loss-of-function or deleterious susceptibility variants. The purpose of this project is to missenseSNVsin8/11genes,ofwhich3(ESR1,ESR2,and elucidate the transcriptional consequences of these MAPK3) were also targeted by CNVs. External cues may rearrangements. dysregulate the MAPK signaling cascade, leading to neu- Materials and Methods: We performed RNAseq rodevelopmental problems. Hormone-mimicking toxins act analysis of peripheral blood in 13 idiopathic ASD patients as agonist/antagonist ligands to hormone receptors, while and 11 controls grouped by homozygous inversionAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 377 genotypes:non-inverted;inv8p23.1;inv17q21.31.Weused Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental HTSeq/DESeq2 to discover the differentially expressed disorder characterized by communication deﬁcits and genes (DEGs) with p.adj.value < 0.05. repetitive behavioral patterns. ASD has a strong genetic Results: We found that inversions affect the expression component and there is evidence supporting many putative of genes encompassed in each inverted region and genes risk genes. However, the genetics underlying the disease is elsewhere in the genome. Regarding inv17q21.31, we unclear. Our objective was to identify neurotransmission discovered 38 DEGs, 8 from the region and some of them and synaptic (NS) genes that play a role in ASD. For this associated to neuronal diseases (LRR C37
A,LRR C37
A2, purpose, we deﬁned 1216 NS candidate genes ﬁltering for KANS L1
-A S1
,I L1
B) or brain-related functions (ROBO1, the terms ‘neurotransmitter’ and ‘synapse’ in Gene Ontol- RIN1). When exploring the interaction of phenotype- ogy, Reactome and KEGG, and overlapping the gene list genotype, no regional genes were found deregulated. We obtained with the synaptic databases SynaptomeDB and discovered 27 DEGs for inv17q21.31 including some SynSysNet, and with literature review. We then searched related to neuronal function (ATOH8,MA P1
B,VSN L1
), the Whole Exome Sequencing dataset from the Autism whereas for inv8p23.1 we found 73 DEGs of which 4 Sequencing Consortium (3938 cases) for ultra-rare loss of have been previously related to ASD (ABCA13,SL C7
A8, function (LoF) Single Nucleotide Variants (MAF < 0,1%; STX1A,SL C24
A2). gnomAD 60146 controls) in these genes. We selected 434 Conclusions: Our data indicate that inversions have a LoF variants in 244 genes and identiﬁed the biological direct effect on gene expression patterns both in inverted pathways enriched in these genes using Reactome. Apply- regions and elsewhere in the genome. Moreover, we note ing the Louvain community detection algorithm to the thatASDcarriersofthesusceptibilityalleles(inv17q21.31/ network spanned by the selected genes and edges from the inv8p23.1) have differential expression of brain function- STRING database of protein-protein interactions, we iden- related genes. Further studies are needed to determine the tiﬁed several biological communities within the network: involvement of these deregulated genes to the ASD MAP Kinase, Calcium and G alpha signaling, Interleukins phenotype. Funded by grants from the Spanish-Ministry- and Toll-like receptors, Energy/Insulin metabolism, Phos- of-Economy-and-Competiveness (FIS PI16/00369) and pholipids, Nicotinic acetylcholine and NMDA/AMPA Ministry-of-Education-Culture-and-Sport (FPU16/06907). receptors. Finally, we constructed a network-based gene M. Costa-Roger: None. M. López-Sánchez: None. T. rankthroughthecomputationoftopologicalparametersand Vendrell: None. P. Muñoz-Cabello: None. B. Gener: centrality measures in Cytoscape. The genes PRKCA, None. E. Gabau: None. N. Capdevila: None. L. Pérez- GNG13 and ANK2 involved in phosphorylation, trans- Jurado: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; qGe- membrane signaling and membrane stabilization of ion nomics. I. Cuscó: None. transportersandchannels,whichareimportantprocessesfor the brain function, are the top-ranked genes.  P09
.022.B Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia: (PD/BD/131390/ Systems Biology approach for the identiﬁcation of 2017) neurotransmission and synaptic risk genes and dis- J. Vilela: None. H. Martiniano: None. S. Luzi: None. rupted biological processes in Autism Spectrum C. Rasga: None. A. Marques: None. J. Santos: None. G. Disorder Oliveira: None. A. Vicente: None. J. Vilela1,2, H. Martiniano1,2, S. Luzi1,2, C. Rasga1,2, A.  P09
.023.C Marques1,2, J. Santos1,2, G. Oliveira3,4, A. Vicente1,2,5 Family-based whole exome sequencing allows a 25% diagnostic yield in patients with autism spectrum 1INSA - Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, disorder Lisboa,Portugal,2UniversityofLisboaFacultyofSciences, BioISI – Biosystems and Integrative Science Institute, D. Carli1, E. Giorgio2, L. Pavinato2, E. Riberi1, P. Lisboa, Portugal, 3Neurodevelopment and Autism Unit Dimartino3,4, A. Bruselles5, S. Cardaropoli1, A. Mussa1, A. (UNDA), Serviço do Centro de Desenvolvimento da Pelle6, G.Mandrile6,V. Antona7, L.Sorasio8,E. Biamino1, Criança, Centro de Investigação e Formação Clínica, E. F. Belligni1, V. Rizzo2, F. Sirchia9, I. Bagnasco10, G. Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Zacchetti11, V. G. Naretto11, G. Gai11, A. Zonta11, E. Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4University Clinic of Pae- Grosso11, C. Davico12, R. Keller13, T. Pippucci3,4, M. diatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Tartaglia14, S. De Rubeis15, A. Brusco2,11, G. B. Ferrero1 Coimbra, Portugal, 5Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal 1DepartmentofPublicHealthandPediatrics,Universityof Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Medical Sciences,378 J.delPicchia UniversityofTorino,Torino,Italy,3MedicalGeneticsUnit, associated with geneticsyndromes (e.g.NF1),suggesting a Polyclinic Sant’Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, wide phenotype variability ranging from complex syn- Bologna, Italy, 4Department of Medical and Surgical dromes to isolated ASD. Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Depart- D. Carli: None. E. Giorgio: None. L. Pavinato: None. ment of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Super- E.Riberi:None.P.Dimartino:None.A.Bruselles:None. iore di Sanità, Roma, Italy, 6Medical Genetics, San Luigi S. Cardaropoli: None. A. Mussa: None. A. Pelle: None. Gonzaga University Hospital, Orbassano, Italy, 7Depart- G. Mandrile: None. V. Antona: None. L. Sorasio: None. ment of Sciences for Health Promotion and Mother and E. Biamino: None. E.F. Belligni: None. V. Rizzo: None. Child Care "G. D’Alessandro", University of Palermo, F.Sirchia:None.I.Bagnasco:None.G.Zacchetti:None. Palermo, Italy, 8Pediatrics, Santa Croce e Carle Hospital, V.G. Naretto: None. G. Gai: None. A. Zonta: None. E. Cuneo, Italy, 9Institute for Maternal and Child Health - Grosso: None. C. Davico: None. R. Keller: None. T. IRCCS“BurloGarofolo”,Trieste,Italy,10Neuropsichiatria Pippucci:None.M.Tartaglia:None.S.DeRubeis:None. infantileTorinoSud-ospedaleMartini-AslCittàdiTorino, A. Brusco: None. G.B. Ferrero: None. Torino, Italy, 11Medical Genetics Unit, Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Torino, Italy, 12Division  P09
.025.B of Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, Department of Application of oligonucleotide array comparative geno- PublicHealthandPediatrics,UniversityofTorino,Torino, mic hybridization in clinical diagnostics of 500 patients Italy, 13Adult autism centre, Local Health Unit ASL with autism spectrum disorders City of Turin, Department of Mental Health, Torino, Italy, 14Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, B. Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik1, I. Plaskota1, M. Kędzior1, J. Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù IRCSS, Roma, Italy, Bernaciak1, E. Obersztyn1, A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, N. 15Seaver Autism Center forResearch and Treatment,Icahn Braun-Walicka1,M.Geremek1,A.Pietrzyk1,J.Castañeda1, School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United A. Barczyk1, P. Szyld1, J. Klapecki1, A. Sobczyńska- States Tomaszewska2, K. Czerska2, B. Nowakowska1 Introduction:autismspectrumdisorders(ASD)representa 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2MED- major health issue, whose genetic bases are not yet fully GEN, Warsaw, Poland delineated. Methods: we performed family-based whole exome Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) are a heterogeneous sequencing (WES) in collaboration with the Autism group of neurodevelopmental disorders with an estimated Sequencing Consortium (Icahn School of Medicine at prevalenceof1.4-2%inthegeneralpopulation.ASDshave Mount Sinai) in 88 families with at least one subject acomplexmultifactorialetiology,withgeneticcausesbeing presentingwithASD.Array-CGHandFMR1analysiswere recognizedin25-35%ofcases.Arraycomparativegenomic negative. Patients have been clinically stratiﬁed in isolated hybridization studies showed that copy numer variants ASD, ASD associated with other neurological signs (CNVs), in particular rare and those encompassing brain- (seizures, brain anomalies, micro/macrocephaly) and syn- related genes, are associated with idiopathic ASDs. We dromic ASD (dysmorphisms, short stature/overgrowth, applied oligonucleotide microarrays (OGT) with average congenital anomalies). resolution of 30 kpz to evaluate its usefulness for identiﬁ- Results: we found pathogenic variants in 22/88 cases cation and characterization of CNVs in a cohort of 528 (25%). Diagnostic yield was 5/54 (9.3%) in patients with patients with ASDs. The analyses of the patients’ genomes isolated ASD (genes DSCAM, FOX P1
, GRIA3, NF1, were performed using genome-wide, high-resolution TLK2), 13/22 (59.1%) in patients with associated neurolo- (180K) array to accurate detection of copy number varia- gicsigns(ARID1B,DEAF1,GRIN1,HNRNPH2,IRF2BPL, tion at the exon level. Probes have been designed to target PHF8,PTEN,SATB2,SCN2A,SRCAP,TLK2,WDR26)and 4645 genes including 227 genes relevant for etiopatho- 4/12 (33.3%) in syndromic ASD (ARID1B, NAA15, genesis of ASDs. Chromosomal microarray analysis SHANK3, SETB P1
). In other 9 families we identiﬁed revealed 116 nonpolymorphic CNVs, ranging in size from potentially causative variants in 10 new candidate genes 9.3 kb to 8.16 Mb, in 100 (19%) patients. Pathogenic or (ARHGA P4
,ARHGA P5
,CASKIN2,CTSZ,METRN,NR C2
, likelypathogenicCNVswereidentiﬁedin42(8%)patients, PCDHA3,SEPT2,SL C4
A2,TSPY L2
).Variantsofunknown whereas CNVs with uncertain clinical signiﬁcance were signiﬁcance were found in 12 families (13.6%). identiﬁed in68 (12.8%) ofcases. Due tohigh resolution of Conclusions: these data conﬁrm that family-based WES theselectedmicroarray,itwaspossibletoidentify37CNVs hasahighdiagnosticrateinASD.Notably,thegenesfound that could not have been detected using the clinical mutated in patients with isolated ASD are known to be microarrays(OGT, 60k).Ourstudy conﬁrmed thepotentialAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 379 ofaCGHinelucidatingtheetiologyofASDs,demonstrated Jerez de la Frontera, La Frontera, Spain, 14Department of by the identiﬁcation of one novel gene LRRTM4 as candi- Mental Health, University Hospital of Puerto Real, dateforASDs.Theworkwassupportedbyprojects510-18- Department of Mental Health, Cadiz, Spain, 15Department 09 and 510-18-54 from the Ministry of National Education of Mental Health, Hospital Punta de Europa, Algeciras, B. Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. I. Plaskota: None. Spain, 16Department of Psychiatry, Carlos Haya Regional M. Kędzior: None. J. Bernaciak: None. E. Obersztyn: University Hospital, Malaga, Spain, 17Institute of Human None. A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: None. N. Braun- Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine & Walicka: None. M. Geremek: None. A. Pietrzyk: None. University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 18Centre J. Castañeda: None. A. Barczyk: None. P. Szyld: None. for Human Genetics, University of Marburg, Marburg, J. Klapecki: None. A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska: None. Germany K. Czerska: None. B. Nowakowska: None. Introduction: Bipolar disorder (BD) is a common, highly  P09
.026.C debilitating neuropsychiatric disorder. It has a life-time Identiﬁcation of rare risk variants in 12 multiply prevalence of about 1%. The disease manifests itself by affected families with bipolar disorder reoccurring episodes of depression and mania. BD is a complex disorder caused by a combination of genetic and A. Vettiger1, S. Fischer1, S. Herms1,2,3, P. Hoffmann1,2,3, S. environmental factors. Formal genetic studies have esti- Cichon4,3, A. Maaser2, F. Streit5, S. H. Witt6, J. Guzman- mated a relatively high heritability of approximately 75- Parra7, G. Orozco-Diaz8, G. Auburger9, M. Albus10, M. 80%.Ouractualprojectfocusesontheidentiﬁcationofrare Borrmann-Hassenbach10, M. González7, S. Gil-Flores11, F. risk variants for BD that segregate in 12 multiply affected Cabaleiro-Fabeiro12, F. Del Río Noriega13, F. Perez- families from Andalusia/Spain with a total of 71 indivi- Perez14, J. Haro-González15, F. Rivas16, F. Mayoral16, M. duals, using whole exome data. Rietschel6, M. Nöthen2, P. Förstner17,1,18 Methods: To identify risk variants that segregate within the pedigree we set up an analysis pipeline using a 1Human Genomics Research Group, Department of Bio- commercial software. The workﬂow includes trimming of medicine,UniversityofBasel,Basel,Switzerland,2Institute reads, mapping to the reference genome, removal of ofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,SchoolofMedicine duplicates,localrealignmentandvariantdetection.Variants & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of that matched the segregation pattern were further analyzed Medical Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital using different prediction tools and for known Basel, Basel, Switzerland Human Genomics Research candidate genes. Group, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Results: We have identiﬁed 138’000 missense variants, Basel, Switzerland, 4University of BaselHuman Genomics which were familywise present in all affected and none of ResearchGroup,DepartmentofBiomedicine,Universityof the healthy members. These variants were annotated using Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5Department of Genetic Epide- dbNSFP,includingseveraldifferentpredictionscores.Asa miology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, ﬁrst approach to identify causative variants, we looked at UniversityMedicalCenterMannheim/UniversityofHeidel- the overlap with the 30 loci described in the B P2
 GWAS berg,Mannheim,Germany,Mannheim,Germany,6Depart- from the PGC (Stahl, E.A. et al. 2019). We found 18 ment of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central mutations in BD associated genes, 3 of them being rare. Institute of Mental Health, University Medical Center SYN E1
 is outstanding, as 9 mutations pertain to this gene. Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, Next steps will comprise following up of these mutations 7Department of Mental Health, Institute of Biomedicine usingbiologicalpathwayanalysistoolsandstartinganalysis IBIMA, University Hospital of Malaga, Malaga, Spain, of identiﬁed frame-shift mutations. 8Unidad de Gestión Clínica del Dispositivo de Cuidado- A. Vettiger: None. S. Fischer: None. S. Herms: None. sCríticos y Urgencias del Distrito Sanitario Málaga, P. Hoffmann: None. S. Cichon: None. A. Maaser: None. Malaga, Spain, 9Department of Experimental Neurology, F. Streit: None. S.H. Witt: None. J. Guzman-Parra: Division of Neurology, Goethe University Hospital, Frank- None. G. Orozco-Diaz: None. G. Auburger: None. M. furt, Germany, 10Isar Amper Klinikum München Ost, kbo, Albus: None. M. Borrmann-Hassenbach: None. M. Haar,Germany,11DepartmentofMentalHealth,University González: None. S. Gil-Flores: None. F. Cabaleiro- Hospital of Reina Soﬁa, Cordoba, Spain, 12Department of Fabeiro: None. F. Del Río Noriega: None. F. Perez- Mental Health, University Hospital of Jaen, Jaen, Spain, Perez:None.J.Haro-González:None.F.Rivas:None.F. 13Department of Mental Health, University Hospital of Mayoral:None.M.Rietschel:None.M.Nöthen:None.P. Förstner: None.380 J.delPicchia  P09
.027.A C.KARTANOU1,M.Breza1,C.Potagas2,E.Kapaki3,4,G. Decrease of mitochondrial DNA copy number in P. Paraskevas3,4, V. C. Constantinides3,4, M. Rentzos4, L.  C9
ALS/FTD Stefanis4,5,6, S. G. Papageorgiou7, M. Panas1, G. Koutsis1, G. Karadima1 M. I. Alvarez-Mora1, P. Podlesniy2, T. Riazuelo3, N. Serra4, L. Rodriguez-Revenga5 1Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, School ofMedicine,EginitionHospital,NationalandKapodistrian 1Hospital12deOctubre,IDIBAPSandCIBERER,Madrid, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Neuropsychology Spain,2CIBERNED,BARCELONA,Spain,3HospitalClinic and Speech Pathology Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, ofBarcelona,BARCELONA,Spain,4IIBBandCIBERNED, School of Medicine, Eginition Hospital, National and Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, IDIBAPS Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Neu- and CIBERER, BARCELONA, Spain rochemistry and Biological Markers Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Eginition Hospital, Introduction:Hexanucleotiderepeatexpansionin C9
orf72 National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, gene is the most common genetic cause of amyotrophic Greece,41stDepartmentofNeurology,SchoolofMedicine, lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia ( C9
ALS/ Eginition Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University FTD).Lossof C9
orf72proteinfunction,atoxicRNAgain- of Athens, Athens, Greece, 52nd Department of Neurology, of-functionandagainoffunctionbyRANtranslationhave Attikon University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian been proposed as triggering pathological mechanisms. In University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 6Center of Clinical addition,mitochondrialdefectshavebeendescribedtobea Research, Experimental Surgery and Translational majordriverofdiseaseinitiation.MtDNAcopynumberhas Research,BiomedicalResearchFoundationoftheAcademy been proposed as a useful biomarker of mitochondrial of Athens, Athens, Greece, 7Cognitive Disorders/Dementia dysfunction. Therefore,we investigated the role ofmtDNA Unit, 2nd Department of Neurology, Attikon University copy number in the pathogenesis  C9
ALS/FTD. Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Material and Methods: Total mitochondrial and geno- Athens, Greece micDNAwasextractedfrompostmortemhumanprefrontal cortexbrainsfrom18 C9
orf72samplesand11controls.The A hexanucleotide repeat expansion located in  C9
ORF72 mtDNAcopynumberwasassessed bydigitaldropletPCR. gene is as an established cause of amyotrophic lateral Results: A statistically signiﬁcant decrease was obtained sclerosis (ALS) and/or frontotemporal dementia (FTD). when comparing  C9
orf72 samples (3923 mtDNA copies/ Since its discovery in 2011, many research groups have diploid genome ± 566) and controls (7017 mtDNA copies/ tried to assess its frequency in several neurodegenerative diploid genome ± 909), with a signiﬁcant decrease of 55% disorders, reporting differences among populations and of mtDNA copy number in  C9
orf72 frontal cortex brain phenotypicheterogeneity.Theaimofthepresentstudyisto samples. This association was independent of age and identify the  C9
ORF72 expansion in a broad spectrum of gender. neurodegenerative disorders in Greece (ALS, HD-like Conclusions:Agrowingnumberofstudiesdemonstrated syndromes, dementia, Parkinson’s disease-PD, Hereditary the inﬂuence of mtDNA copy number reduction on Spastic Paraplegia—HSP) and healthy controls. Using neurodegeneration. Our results provide new insights into molecular biological techniques including Repeat-Primed theroleofmitochondrialdysfunctioninthepathogenesisof PCR (RP-PCR) 860 patients (399 with ALS, 44 with HD-  C9
ALS/FTD like syndromes, 224 with dementia, 178 with PD and 15 Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the with hereditary spastic paraplegia, HSP) and 321 controls Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI17/01067), co-ﬁnanced by weretestedforthe C9
ORF72repeatexpansion.Thirty-eight Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) “una patients with ALS (9.5%), 2 with HD-like syndromes manera de hacer Europa” and AGAUR (2017 SGR1134). (4.5%), 8 with FTD (8.5%), 1 with AD (1.7%), and 2 with The CIBERER is an initiative of the Instituto de Salud PD (1.1 %) were expansion-positive. The expansion was Carlos III. notdetectedintheHSPorcontrolgroup.Theresultsofthis M.I. Alvarez-Mora: None. P. Podlesniy: None. T. study provide an update on the spectrum of  C9
ORF72- Riazuelo: None. N. Serra: None. L. Rodriguez- related neurodegenerative diseases, emphasizing the Revenga: None. importanceofestablishing C9
ORF72asadiagnostictestin laboratory routine for both familial and sporadic patients.  P09
.028.B C. Kartanou: None. M. Breza: None. C. Potagas: Study of the  C9
ORF72 repeat expansion in Greek None. E. Kapaki: None. G.P. Paraskevas: None. V.C. patients with neurodegenerative disorders. Constantinides: None. M. Rentzos: None. L. Stefanis:Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 381 None. S.G. Papageorgiou: None. M. Panas: None. G.  P09
.031.B Koutsis: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- Structural genome variations in cerebral cavernous borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants malformations already received); Signiﬁcant; Teva Pharmaceuticals, Gen- esis Pharma. Other; Signiﬁcant; Novartis, Genesis Pharma, R.A.Pilz1,K.Schwefel1,A.Weise2,T.Liehr2,P.Demmer3, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, Teva. G. Karadima: B. Research Grant A. Spuler4, S. Spiegler1, E. Gilberg1, C. A. Hübner2, U. (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and Felbor1, M. Rath1 pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; Pﬁzer. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Roche. 1Department of Human Genetics, University Medicine Greifswald, and Interfaculty Institute of Genetics and  P09
.029.C Functional Genomics, University of Greifswald, Greifs- The Cdkl5 phenotype at single cell resolution wald, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, J. Henck1,2, C. Prada1, Y. Hérault3, C. Dietrich1, V. Germany,3InstituteofMedicalDiagnostics,IMDPotsdam, Suckow1, V. M. Kalscheuer1, M. Spielmann1,2 Potsdam, Germany, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Helios Hospital Berlin Buch, Berlin, Germany 1Research Group Development and Diease, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Institut Introduction: Autosomal dominant cerebral cavernous für Medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik, Charité, malformations (CCM) are leaky vascular lesions that can Berlin, Germany, 3Institut de Génétique, Biologie Molécu- cause epileptic seizures and stroke-like symptoms. Germ- laire et Cellulaire, IGBMC, 67404 Illkirch, France line mutations in either CCM1, CCM2 or CCM3 are found inthemajorityofpatientswithmultipleCCMsorapositive In recent years, a multitude of single-cell sequencing tech- family history. Recently, we have identiﬁed the ﬁrst copy nologieshave beendeveloped that now enable thestudy of number neutral inversion in CCM2 by whole-genome neurodevelopmental disorders at the organismal scale and sequencing in an apparently mutation-negative CCM allow for detailed investigations of the roles of speciﬁc family. genes and regulatory sequences during development. Material and Methods: We here asked the question Here we aim to understand the underlying pathomechan- whether further structural genomic rearrangements can be ism of the CDK L5
 deﬁciency disorder (CDD), a rare detected within NGS gene panel data of unsolved CCM genetic disorder that causes seizures, developmental delay, cases. Hybrid capture NGS data of eight index patients and severe intellectual disability, by studying the Cdkl5 without a pathogenic single nucleotide, indel or copy phenotype at single cell resolution. The CDK L5
 encoded number variant were analyzed using two bioinformatics protein is a kinase responsible for normal neuronal pipelines. development, synapse formation and signal transmission, Results:Ina58-year-oldmalewithmultipleCCMsinhis but the mechanism(s) by which loss of CDK L5
 expression brain and spinal cord, we identiﬁed a 294 kb insertion leads to disease remains unclear. within the coding sequence of CCM2. Fine mapping of the We studied total brain isolated whole cells from breakpoints, molecular cytogenetic studies, and multiplex hemizygous Cdkl5-knockout male mouse embryos ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation veriﬁed that the ( E18
.5) by single-cell RNA sequencing and were able to structural variation was an inverted unbalanced insertion identify numerous cell-type-speciﬁc phenotypes. Our that originated from 1p12-p11.2. As this rearrangement single-cell approach provided the necessary resolution to disrupts the CCM2 gene on 7p13, it was classiﬁed as detect previously unidentiﬁed transcriptional changes and pathogenic. molecular states compared to wildtype mice. Additionally Conclusions: Our study demonstrates that efforts to we identiﬁed altered pseudotemporal trajectories of Cdkl5 detectstructuralvariations inknowndisease genesincrease deﬁcient brain cells during embryonic development. Our the diagnostic sensitivity of genetic analyses for well- dataprovidesnewinsightsintothemolecularpathomechan- deﬁned Mendelian disorders. ismofCDDandhighlightsthepotentialofsingle-cellRNA This study was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsge- sequencing as a phenotyping tool for mouse models of meinschaft(DFG,GermanResearchFoundation,RA2876/ neurodevelopmental disorders. 2-1). J.Henck:None.C.Prada:None.Y.Hérault:None.C. R.A.Pilz:None.K.Schwefel:None.A.Weise:None.T. Dietrich: None. V. Suckow: None. V.M. Kalscheuer: Liehr: None. P. Demmer: None. A. Spuler: None. S. None. M. Spielmann: None. Spiegler: None. E. Gilberg: None. C.A. Hübner: None. U. Felbor: None. M. Rath: None.382 J.delPicchia  P09
.032.C Ledbetter2,3,M.Fahey8,K.Retterer1,C.L.Martin2,3,M.C. Microcephaly-causing dynein mutations lead to severe Kruer5,6 neural stem cell proliferation defects in human cerebral organoïds 1GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 2Autism & DevelopmentalMedicineInstitute,Geisinger,Danville,PA, S. FARCY1,2, A. Di Cicco2, A. Baffet2, N. Bahi-Buisson1 United States, 3Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger, Danville, PA, United States, 4Department of Radiology, 1Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 2Institut Curie, Paris, Geisinger, Danville, PA, United States, 5Departments of France Child Health, Neurology, Genetics, and Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona College of The cortex is the centre for our complexes cognitive capa- Medicine, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 6Cerebral Palsy & cities. Its development is a highly regulated process. The Pediatric Movement Disorders Program, Barrow Neurolo- dynein protein is a unique molecular motor and is crucial gical Institute at Phoenix Children’s Hospital,, Phoenix, for intra-cellular trafﬁcking. Our team identiﬁed mutations AZ, United States, 7Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA, in the gene coding for the dynein in patients with micro- United States, 8Department of Paediatrics, Monash Uni- cephaly. Interestingly, distinct mutations within this same versity, Melbourne, Australia gene lead to a different phenotype, the spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). Why some mutations affect the cortex Introduction: Cerebral palsy (CP) describes a hetero- development and some doesn’tremain unclear. The project geneous group of developmental brain disorders character- isfocusonthecortex,andaimtoinvestigatewhichspeciﬁc ized by posture and movement impairments. Accumulating neuronaldyneinfunctionsarealtered,andhowitcanleadto evidence suggests a signiﬁcant genetic contribution. microcephaly.Inordertostudydynein-dependantfunctions Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing (ES) was during cortex development, I generate cerebral organoids, performed on 1,777 patients with CP. Positive cases 3D structures that fully recapitulate the human features of harboredoneortwopathogenicorlikelypathogenicalleles, the developing cortex. I reprogrammed two cell lines from depending on mode of inheritance, in a single gene. patients caring mutations leading either to microcephaly or Results:ESyieldedapositiveresultin27.5%ofpatients toSMAinto pluripotent stem cells (IPSC) and differentiate (488/1777). Causative variants were identiﬁed in genes them into cerebral organoids. Neuronal defects have been associated with autosomal dominant (66.0%), autosomal observed only in the organoids mutated for the micro- recessive(19.9%),andX-linkeddisorders(14.1%),encom- cephaly.Theﬁrstobservationwas astrongreduction inthe passing238different genes. Trio testing revealed ahigh de size of the organoids, which correlates with the patient’s novo rate (71.5%). Linear modeling indicated that the phenotypes. In those same organoids, an alteration of the likelihood of harboring a pathogenic variant was higher in neuralstemcellsproliferationhavebeenobservedaswellas patients with multiple co-morbid neurodevelopmental anincrease inthenumberofapoptoticcells.Iamusingthe disorders (OR=1.34; 95% CI=1.18-1.53; p=7.28x10−6). live imaging technique, a new outcome in the ﬁeld. This Subset analysis from one study center (n = 208) showed technique allows me to investigate in real time the division that individuals lacking CP risk factors were 8-fold more of the neural stem cells as well as the newborn neurons likely to have a genetic etiology when controlling for migration to their ﬁnal location. GMFCS score (95% CI=2.33-52.59; p=0.0052). S.Farcy:None.A.DiCicco:None.A.Baffet:None.N. Conclusions: ES identiﬁed a genetic etiology in more Bahi-Buisson: None. than a quarter of CP patients, supporting genetic testing in this group. Although recurrent CP-associated genes were  P09
.033.A elucidated, the results revealed vast genetic heterogeneity, Cerebralpalsy iscaused by genomicvariants in27% of underscoring the need for a broad genetic testing approach patients undergoing exome sequencing forCP.Thehighrateofdenovoﬁndingssupportsutilizing trio-testing. Individuals with multiple co-morbidities were F. Millan1, A. Moreno-De-Luca2,3,4, S. Lewis5,6, H. Z. morelikelytohaveapositiveﬁnding,aswerethoselacking Elloumi1, D. R. Pesacreta2,7, S. Shetty5,6, C. Teigen1, M. T. traditional CP risk factors. Genetic testing of patients with Oetjens2, J. Heim6, J. Scufﬁns1, K. E. Wain2, B. Norton5,6, CP can inform an accurate recurrence risk, and provide R.I.Torene1,S.M.Myers2,7,V.Gainullin1,K.Arvai1,D.H. information for prognosis, adjusted therapies, and manage- ment options. F. Millan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx.A.Moreno-De-Luca:None.S.Lewis:None.H.Z. Elloumi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant;Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 383 GeneDx.D.R.Pesacreta:None.S.Shetty:None.C.Teigen: Results: Inthree unrelated individuals, we identiﬁed two A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. M. different de novo missense alterations (Arg207His and T. Oetjens: None. J. Heim: None. J. Scufﬁns: A. Employ- Tyr679Cys) in SL C12
A6. Arg207His was found recurrent ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. K.E. Wain: in two patients. Functional analyses demonstrated a None. B. Norton: None. R.I. Torene: A. Employment (full signiﬁcant reduction of K+ inﬂux in all mutant KC C3
 or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. S.M. Myers: None. V. cotransporters (Arg207His, Arg207Cys and Tyr679Cys). Gainullin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; All patients presented early-onset sensorimotor, axonal and GeneDx. K. Arvai: A. Employment (full or part-time); demyelinating neuropathy with normal cognition and Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. D.H. Ledbetter: None. M. Fahey: brain MRI. None. K. Retterer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Conclusions: We conclude that heterozygous de novo Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. C.L. Martin: None. M.C. Kruer: F. SL C12
A6alterationscancauseintermediateCMT,amilder Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; PTC Therapeutics. phenotype than the autosomal-recessive disorder, Ander- mann syndrome. Although the patients with de novo  P09
.035.C variants in SC L12
A6 had a homogenous phenotype, the SL C12
A6 gene: De novo variants cause dominant- biophysical properties of all mutant cotransporters were intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth different. Furthermore, less is known about the role of histidine or cysteine on Arg207 that causes different J. Park1,2, B. Flores3, K. Scherer4, H. Küpper5, M. Rossi6, inheritance patterns. K. Rupprich7, M. Rautenberg1, N. Deininger1, A. J. Park: None. B. Flores: None. K. Scherer: None. H. Weichselbaum5, A. Grimm2, M. Sturm1, U. Grasshoff1, E. Küpper: None. M. Rossi: None. K. Rupprich: None. M. Delpire3, T. Haack1,8 Rautenberg: None. N. Deininger: None. A. Weichsel- baum: None. A. Grimm: None. M. Sturm: None. U. 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Grasshoff: None. E. Delpire: None. T. Haack: None. University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 2Department ofNeurologyandEpileptology,HertieInstituteforClinical  P09
.036.A Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Ger- Homozygous frameshift mutation in CHDH associated many, 3Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt Univer- with adult-onset Spastic Ataxia sity School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, United States, 4Children’s Clinic for Rehabilitative Services, Tucson, AZ, C. Catalli1, H. Maortua Olabe1, M. Gonzalez Bouzas1, L. United States, 5Department of Neuropediatrics, University Garcia Naveda1, I. Llano Rivas1, B. Gener Querol1, I. of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 6Clinical Genomics, Rouco Axpe2 Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States, 7Depart- ment of Neuropediatrics, Essen University Hospital, Essen, 1Osakidetza Basque Health Service, Cruces University Germany, 8Centre for Rare Diseases, University of Hospital,DepartmentofGenetics,Barakaldo,Spain,2Osa- Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany kidetzaBasqueHealthService,CrucesUniversityHospital, Department of Neurology, Barakaldo, Spain Introduction: Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) is the most common peripheral neuropathy. Biallelic truncating and Introduction: Spastic ataxias (SAs) are a heterogeneous missense variants in SL C12
A6 coding for the potassium group of diseases, sharing symptoms and molecular path- chloride cotransporter KC C3
 have been associated with ways with other classes of neurodegenerative entities, like autosomal-recessive Andermann syndrome. This condition Spinocerebellar Ataxias (SCAs) and Hereditary Spastic is characterized by agenesis of the corpus callosum, per- Paraplegias (HSPs), often manifesting with complicated ipheral neuropathy and developmental delay. One hetero- neurological features. Here we describe a new association zygous de novo missense alteration (Thr991Ala) has been withatruncatinghomozygousmutationinCHDHgene,not reported in a patient with progressive, early-onset neuro- associated with any disease until now. pathy with normal cognition. Materials and methods: A 70 years old man, son of Materials and Methods: We performed diagnostic trio second-cousins, presented with progressive spastic ataxia exome sequencing on three affected individuals and their since his ﬁfties, associated with ptosis, autonomic features, parents.Wecollectedclinicalandelectrophysiologicaldata. diffuse leukoencephalopathy and cortical atrophy. Routing Wild-type and mutant KC C3
 cotransporters were measured screening for acquired forms was performed, along with in Xenopus laevis oocytes using unidirectional 86Rb common causes of ataxia caused by dynamic expansions. uptakes. Exome was sequenced with xGen Exome Panel v1.0, IDT, on a NextSeq 500 by Illumina. Validated OMIM genes384 J.delPicchia were analyzed and broad search in all candidate genes was Results: Chromosome microarray analysis was per- performed in search of homozygous potentially pathologic formed in 1170 patients with NDDs and CNVs were mutations. identiﬁed in 89 children (7,6%). We identiﬁed 45 duplica- Results: No common SCAs nor Friedreich Ataxia tions and 44 deletions involving chromosomal regions expansions were detected. Exome analysis failed to ﬁnd 1q21.1, 3q29, 15q11.2, 15q13.3, 16p11.2, 16p13.11 and any variation amongst 33 validated genes causing auto- 22q11.2. 47 (52,8%) were considered to be pathogenic, 11 somal recessive SA. Broad analysis extended to all OMIM (12,3%)likelypathogenicand31werevariantsofunknown and no OMIM genes led to identify a ultrarare frameshift signiﬁcance (VUS). In 15 patients two or three copy mutation, c.386del (p.G129Vfs*89) in CHDH gene in number alterations were present. homozygous state. No other potentially pathological varia- Conclusions: A rare CNVs contribute to a signiﬁcant tions were found. proportion to the risk of developing NDDs. Counselling for Conclusions:CDHDisamitochondrialenzymeinvolved CNVsremainschallengingbecauseofvariablepenetranceand in mitophagy and interacts with other genes like SQSTM1, expressivity.Furtherdatacollectionisneededtofullyevaluate PARK2 and TMEM70, which cause different neurodegen- the impact of rare CNVs on complex the etiology of NDDs. erative diseases through mitochondrial dysfunction when Acknowledgement: This work was supported by Scientiﬁc mutated. Functional studies are ongoing. We propose Center of Excellence for Reproductive and Regenerative CHDH as candidate gene for autosomal recessive neuro- Medicine and by the European Union through the European generative diseases presenting with SA, inexplicable Regional Development Fund, under grant agreement No. leukoencephalopathy or cognitive decline. KK.01.1.1.01.0008, project „Reproductive and Regenerative C. Catalli: None. H. Maortua Olabe: None. M. Medicine - Exploring New Platforms and Potentials. Gonzalez Bouzas: None. L. Garcia Naveda: None. I. L. Morozin Pohovski: None. A. Bobinec: None. A. Llano Rivas: None. B. Gener Querol: None. I. Rouco Measic:None.N.VidanRogulj:None.I.Sansovic:None. Axpe: None. M. Kero: None. L. Boban: None. I. Barisic: None.  P09
.039.A  P09
.041.C Evaluation of recurrent copy number variations in DCTN1 mutation analysis in Italian patients with PSP, patients with neurodevelopmental disorders MSA and DLB L. Morozin Pohovski1, A. Bobinec1,2, A. Measic1,2, N. R. Procopio1,2,M.Gagliardi1,M. D’Amelio3,L. Brighina4, Vidan Rogulj1, I. Sansovic1,2, M. Kero1,2, L. Boban1,2, I. G.Nicoletti1,M.Morelli2,G.Bonapace5,A.Quattrone6,G. Barisic1,2 Annesi1 1Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Medical School University of 1Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, Zagreb,Zagreb,Croatia,2DepartmentofMedicalGenetics National Research Council, Section of Germaneto, Catan- and Reproductive Health, Children’s Hospital Zagreb, zaro, Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, Department of Medical Scientiﬁc Centre of Excellence for Reproductive and and Surgical Sciences, University Magna Graecia, Catan- Regenerative Medicine (CERRM), University of Zagreb zaro, Italy, 3Department of Experimental Biomedicine and School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia Clinical Neuroscience (BioNeC), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 4Department of Neurology, Milan Center Background: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are a for Neuroscience, San Gerardo Hospital, University of wide range of neuropsychiatric conditions caused by Milano-Bicocca,Monza,Italy,5UniversityMagnaGraecia, impaired growth and development of the central nervous Faculty of Medicine, Pediatrics, Catanzaro, Italy, 6Neu- system. NDDs include autism spectrum disorders, intellec- roscience Center, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, tual disability/developmental delay, communication dis- Italy orders, attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity, epilepsy, speciﬁc learning problems and motor disorders. The risk of devel- Introduction: Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), mul- oping NDDsseemstobe highly inﬂuenced bytheeffect of tiple system atrophy (MSA), and dementia with Lewy rare but recurrent copy number variations (CNVs). bodies (DLB) are deﬁned as atypical parkinsonisms. This Methods:WehaveanalysedtheﬁndingsofCNVstudies term describes a syndrome characterized by typical par- from a cohort of 1170 patients with NDDs referred for kinsonian features, such as bradykinesia, rigidity, postural clinical geneticist evaluation. The analysis was conducted instability and resting tremor, and other clinical signs aty- usingAgilent60Koligonucleotidearray-basedcomparative pical for Parkinson’s disease (PD). The signs are different genomic hybridization. for each disease, but they share the pathologicalAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 385 mechanisms: they presented intracellular protein aggrega- sequencing and  C9
orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion. tion in the brain of tau or α-synuclein, which is thought to Insubjectswithoutpositiveresults(n=56),targetedpanel bethecauseofthedevelopmentofthedisease.Mutationsin sequencing was performed on the Illumina platform. The genesencodingtauandα-synucleinhavebeenidentiﬁedas common AD genetic risk factors, APOE and MTHFR risk factors for these diseases. DCTN1 encodes the largest genotyping were performed too. subunit of dynactin complex essential in the retrograde Results: In the most common dementia associated genes axonal transport and cytoplasmic transport of vesicles; (PSEN1, PSEN2, APP, GRN), mutations were detected in mutations in DCTN1 have been reported predominantly in 8.1 % of the cases. Abnormal repeat number for  C9
orf72 individuals with Perry syndrome and, recently, in patients gene was identiﬁed in 6 cases. Further heterozygous with PSP. Here we performed a mutational screening of possibly damaging alterations were detected by NGS in DCTN1 in 207 patients with atypical parkinsonisms other genes such as TREM2, ABCA7, PLA2G6,  C19
orf12, from Italy. PARK7. In some cases the coexistence of a genetic risk Material and Methods: The cohort included 79 patients factors and a rare variant indicating monogenic dementia with PSP, 100 patients with MSA and 28 patients with has additive effect on the phenotype. DLB. A control group of 500 healthy subjects from the Conclusions: In our study, variants with potential same geographical area was also examined. All 32 exons association with the early onset dementia were identiﬁed and intron-exon boundaries region of DCTN1 were in20.7%oftheinvestigatedcohort.Withtheapplicationof sequenced. NGS both rare damaging variants and genetic risk factors Results: Sequence analysis revealed only a synonymous could be effectively identiﬁed, which could contribute to variant in one of PSP case, and two intronic variants with understand the complex genetic architecture of dementias the same frequency in patients with atypical parkinsonisms and could be helpful for genetic counselling. and healthy subjects cohort. Disclosure:HungarianBrainResearchProgram(KTIA_- Discussion:DCTN1mutationshavenotakeyroleinthe NAP_ 2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002) development of atypical parkinsonisms in the Italian D.Csabán:None.R.Bencsik: None.A.Illés: None.V. population. Molnár: None. P. Balicza: None. A. Gézsi: None. Z. R.Procopio:None.M.Gagliardi:None.M.D’Amelio: Grosz: None. Á. Palásti: None. N.Á. Varga: None. H. None.L.Brighina:None.G.Nicoletti:None.M.Morelli: Zeke: None. A. Gál: None. T. Kovács: None. M.J. None. G. Bonapace: None. A. Quattrone: None. G. Molnár: None. Annesi: None.  P09
.044.C  P09
.042.A Monogenic causes of developmental epileptic encepha- Genetic characterization of Hungarian patients with lopathies in a large cohort from Latin America early onset dementia H. T. Moraes1,2, H. Urquia-Osorio1,3, C. M. Cavalcante1, D.Csabán1,R.Bencsik1,A.Illés1,V.Molnár1,P. Balicza1, E. Almendares-Bonilla1,2, M. M. Guerreiro1, M. A.Gézsi1,Z.Grosz1,Á.Palásti1,N.Á.Varga1,H.Zeke1,A. Montenegro1, B. Henning1,2, B. S. Carvalho4,2, A. Coan1, Gál1, T. Kovács2, M. J. Molnár1 M. T. Medina3, R. Caraballo5, I. Lopes-Cendes1,2 1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, 1SchoolofMedicalSciences,StateUniversityofCampinas, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department Campinas, Brazil, 2Brazilian Institute of Neuroscience and of Neurology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hun- Neurotechnology - BRAINN, Campinas, Brazil, 35Faculty gary of Medical Sciences, National Autonomous University of Honduras, Tegucigalpa, Honduras, 4Institute of Mathe- Introduction: Dementia is one of the most common neu- matics, Statistics and Computer Science, University of rodegenerative disorder with a previously suggested het- Campinas, Campinas, Brazil, 5Hospital JP Garrahan, erogeneous genetic background. In the recent years the Neurology, Buenos Aires, Argentina increasing availability of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) has made it possible to better understanding the Introduction: Recent molecular genetics techniques genetic background of this disease group. improved mutations detection in patients with develop- Materials and Methods: In our study 111 Hungarian mental epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs). However, the patients with relatively early onset dementia (mean age of current studies are performed predominantly in European onset was 56 ± 7.41 years) were pre-screened for the most populations, and information in more ethnically diverse common AD or FTD associated genes by Sanger386 J.delPicchia groups is lacking. This study aims to search for the Introduction: Individuals with Downsyndrome(DS) have monogenic causes of DEEs in Latin-America. olfactory function impairment and are susceptible to Materials and Methods: We ascertained 316 patients develop Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Olfactory dysfunction fromdifferentcountries:Brazil(223),Argentina(57),Chile may be an early clinical symptom of AD. Recent studies (15),Peru(14),Uruguay(4),andHonduras(3).Todate,we show that vitamin D (VD ) has neuroprotective effects in 3 3 performed whole-exome sequencing in 100 patients. For mousemodelsofAD.Inthisstudy,weevaluatedtheeffects geneticvariantselection,twoﬁlterswereused:i)readdepth ofVD ontheolfactorybulb(OB)inmousemodelforDS. 3 (RD≥10), allele frequency in control population (≤1%) and MaterialsandMethods:Femalemicewith14-week-old exonic consequence; ii) 129 known genes related to DEEs. of the lineage B6Ei C3
Sn-Rb(12.Ts171665Dn)2Cje/CjeDnJ For variants of interest selection, three criteria were used: weredistributedintoexperimentalgroups:withtrisomy(Ts considered deleterious by variant effect predictors, impact or Ts ) and wild-type (Wt or Wt ), and (CO) (VD3) (CO) (VD3) in the protein, presence on dbSNP and CLINVAR. treated for 10-week with common diet (CO) or 12.500 IU/ Results: The mean RD was 30X, and the mean Kg of VD . At twenty-fourth week old the mice were 3 percentage of targets with at least 10x RD was 89%. The euthanized. The OB was processed for morphological/ mean number of genetic variants per patient was 19,5341 stereological analysis; immunochemistry/Western blotting before the ﬁlters and 22 after the ﬁlters. We selected sixty- for Aβ-42, Caspase-3 p12, MTHFR, NeuN and Pgp. Data threevariantsofinterestin41genesfrom49individualsfor were analyzed statistically (P < 0.05). The F-(F) and H- furtherstudies.Fromtheselectedvariants,51aremissense, statistic (H) were used to analyze between-groups factors 5 nonsense, 4 frameshift indel, 2 in-frame indel, and one (trisomy; vitamin D ; interaction). 3 affects a splicing site. According to the American College Results: Trisomy reduced the volume of the external of Medical Genetics classiﬁcation 52 variants are of plexiform layer (F = 4.313; P = 0.046), number of mitral uncertain signiﬁcance, 9 likely pathogenic, one likely cells(F=9.941;P=0.006),increasedPgpexpression(F= benign, and one pathogenic. 9.802;P=0.005),caspase-3p12in(P<0.0001)andAβ-42 Conclusions: The combined ﬁlters and selection criteria (H=8.67; P= 0.003). VD reduced the expression of 3 used identiﬁed genetic variants of potential clinical interest caspase-3 p12 (F=107.729; P < 0.0001) and MTHFR in 49% of Latin-American patients with DEE. (F=13.191; P=0.002) and increased the volume of the H.T. Moraes: None. H. Urquia-Osorio: None. C.M. mitral cell layer (F = 5.398; P = 0.034). Cavalcante: None. E. Almendares-Bonilla: None. M.M. Conclusions: Ts mice show morphological and molecu- Guerreiro: None. M. Montenegro: None. B. Henning: lar changes in the OB and VD can attenuate and reverse 3 None. B.S. Carvalho: None. A. Coan: None. M.T. these abnormalities indicating its neuroprotective function. Medina: None. R. Caraballo: None. I. Lopes- Grants: Capes (Code 001); CNPq (310806/2018-6) and Cendes: None. FAPESP (2018/09126-0). F. Campos Gomes: None. J.S. Melo-Neto: None. M.F.  P09
.045.A RamiresFerrari:None.O.Y.Galvis-Alonso:None.E.M. VitaminD3supplementationaffectsthemorphologyand Goloni-Bertollo: None. É.C. Pavarino: None. MTHFR and caspase 3 p12 expression in the olfactory bulb of a mouse model for Down syndrome  P09
.047.C A clinical case of dystonia-28 childhood-onset with a F. Campos Gomes1, J. S. Melo-Neto2, M. F. Ramires previously undescribed variant in the KMT2B gene. Ferrari3, O. Y. Galvis-Alonso4, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo1, É. C. Pavarino1 D. Guseva, I. Sharkova, N. Semenova, E. Dadali 1GeneticsandMolecularBiologyResearchUnit(UPGEM), Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian São José do Rio Preto Medical School (FAMERP), São Federation José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 2Institute of Health Sciences, Federal University of Pará (UFPA), Belém, Brazil, Introduction: Dystonia-28 is a neurological disorder 3Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Bios- characterized by onset of progressive dystonia in the ﬁrst ciences Institute, University of São Paulo (USP), São decade of life. It is an autosomal dominant disease with Paulo, Brazil, 4Laboratory of Experimental Physiology, incomplete penetrance. The clinical symptoms of dystonia- São José do Rio Preto Medical School (FAMERP), São 28 are development delayed, microcephaly, focal or gen- José do Rio Preto, Brazil eralized dystonia, gait difﬁculties and toe walking. Materials and methods: We present a 7-year-old girl with clinical symptoms of generalized dystonia. MotorAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 387 developmentisdelayed-keepshisheadfromaforemonth, disorder characterized by ataxia, dementia and hypogona- sits from a ten month, walk from a year. At the age of 2 dotropichypogonadismorHuntington-likedisorder(HDL). years, she started walking on "socks" and instability was To date, >10 mutations in RNF216 have been reported not observed. At the age of 6 years, after infections, there was only from the catalytic active site but also from N-terminal tension in the muscles of the left leg, involuntary move- part of the protein. ments, a turn of the left leg when walking, tiredness due to Objective: We intend to unravel the mechanisms by walking. The dystonia was progressive and eventually which RNF216 mutations lead to GHS and HDL. We aim became generalized with involvement of the upper limbs, to identify novel RNF216 mutations for genotype- hands,neck,face,tongue,andtrunk.Shehadmicrocephaly phenotype correlation studies, identify protein composition elongated face, dysarthria, generalized dystonia, and of the pathological intranuclear inclusions, and understand spasticity. EEG and MRI of the brain were normal. the cellular and biochemical function of the RNF216 Results: Analysis of whole genome sequencing data protein. revealed a previously undescribed heterozygous variant Methods: Frozen and ﬁxed brain material from patient с.3626G>AinKMT2Bgene.Thisvariantwasnotdetected wereusedforgeneralizedproteomicsandneuropathological ineitherparentandwasconﬁrmedwithSangersequencing. studies and patient ﬁbroblast and Hela cells were used for Conclusions: We report clinical case with undescribed cellular studies. heterozygous variant KMT2B in the girl with a clinically Results:WedescribeaSpanishpatientwithHDLhaving recognizable form of dystonia. Veriﬁcation of the genetic 2 novel compound heterozygous missense mutations in etiology of dystonia allowed selection of appropriate RNF216. The study of brain material from one of the two treatment strategies, determination of genetic risk and reported Belgian families demonstrated ubiquitin- and p62- discussion of the necessary of prenatal testing. positive intranuclear inclusions, negative for Tau, α- D. Guseva: None. I. Sharkova: None. N. Semenova: synuclein and TDP-43. Proteomics generated a list of None. E. Dadali: None. candidate genes whose histopathological examination is currently ongoing. Hela cells transfected with wildtype and  P09
.048.A mutant RNF216 constructs revealed RNF216 and ubiquitin Understanding the mechanism of RNF216-mediated positive intranuclear speckle-like bodies. neurodegeneration: genetic, proteomic, neuropathologi- Conclusions: The identity of intranuclear bodies should cal and cellular approach be further analyzed hoping to reveal molecular intricacies linked to this neurodegenerative disease. S. Roy1,2, P. Ervilha Pereira1,2, N. Schuermans1,2, A. OdysseusType-I(G0H8318N)FWOgrant,Startinggrant Sieben3,4, F. Thery5,6, E. Mondragon Rezola7, E. (01N10319) Ghent University Debackere1,2, P. LeBlanc1,2, M. Galas8, P. Santens3,4, F. S. Roy: None. P. Ervilha Pereira: None. N. Schuer- Impens5,6, E. Bogaert1,2, B. Dermaut1,2 mans: None. A. Sieben: None. F. Thery: None. E. Mondragon Rezola: None. E. Debackere: None. P. 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, LeBlanc: None. M. Galas: None. P. Santens: None. F. Gent, Belgium, 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Impens: None. E. Bogaert: None. B. Dermaut: None. FacultyofMedicineandHealthSciences,GhentUniversity, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, Ghent Uni-  P09
.049.B versity Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 4Department of Head and Identiﬁcation of genes for epileptic encephalopathy: the Skin, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent impact of exome analysis in a pediatric cohort. University, Ghent, Belgium, 5Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent L. Musante1, C. Zanus2, P. Costa2, A. P. d’Adamo1, A. M. University,Gent,Belgium,6CenterforMedicalBiotechnol- Bianco1, G. Ragusa1, E. Athanasakis1, F. Faletra1, P. ogy, VIB Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 7Department of Neurol- Gasparini1, M. Carrozzi2 ogy, University Hospital Donostia, Basque Country University, Donostia, Spain, 8Inserm, UMR S1172
, JPARC, 1SC Genetica Medica, Institute for Maternal and Child Alzheimer & Tauopathies, Lille, France Health IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2SC Neurop- sichiatriaInfantile,InstituteforMaternalandChildHealth Introduction:Neurodegenerativediseasesfrequentlyresult IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy frommutationsinubiquitin-signalinggenes.Ourgroupwas amongtheﬁrsttoreportbi-allelicmutationsinRNF216,an Early onset infantile epileptic encephalopathies (EIEE) are  E3
ubiquitinligase,asthegeneticcauseofGordonHolmes neurodevelopmental disorders, with persistent severe elec- syndrome (GHS), an adult-onset rare neurodegenerative troencephalographic abnormalities, developmental delay or388 J.delPicchia regression associated with ongoing epileptic activity and microarray with average resolution of 30 kb (180K, OGT) often characterized by pharmaco-resistant epilepsy. By with speciﬁcally designed coverage for over 212 selected Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) great advances have genes, known or candidate to play an important role in the been made in gene discovery for EIEE and several studies pathogenesisofepilepsy.Chromosomalmicroarrayanalysis emphasized de novo variants as major underlying cause. revealed 33 CNVs (17 duplications, 15 deletions, 1 tripli- Current diagnostic pathways allow molecular diagnosis to cation) in 29 out of 90 (32.2%) patients with epilepsy. 2 bemadeinabout20%ofcaseswithEIEEandrecentstudies pathogenic CNVs were detected in 2 patients from our have also highlighted extreme genetic heterogeneity. cohort. 9 potentially pathogenic CNVs, and 22 CNVs with Therefore, the current scenario indicates that most of the unknown clinical signiﬁcance were detected in 27 indivi- genes responsible for EIEE are probably still unknown. To duals. All of the identiﬁed CNVs were submicroscopic in this regard, our group recruited 21 patients (and their par- size, ranging from 1.7 kb to 8.85 Mb, and therefore could ents)withEIEEorepilepsyofunknownorigin,negativefor not have been detected by standard karyotype analysis. the presence of micro-arrangements, and investigated by Additionally,17CNVs(51%)couldnothavebeendetected WES, in the frame of the multicentric project EPI-IDEA, by our clinical microarray (60K). Our study highlights the which is part of the RETE-IDEA network constituted by role of CNVs in the etiopathogenesis of epilepsy and eight Italian pediatric IRCCS. In our study, we identiﬁed a demonstrates that the array CGH is an effective tool in the pathogenic or very likely pathogenic variant/genotype in genetic diagnosis of this neurodevelopmental disorder. The about 48% of the patients. Only in 2 patients a de novo work was supported by projects 510-18-47, 510-18-57, mutation was identiﬁed, whereas 64% of diagnosed cases 510-18-71 from the Ministry of National Education werecausedbyrecessivegenespreviouslyassociatedwitha I. Plaskota: None. M. Bartnik-Głaska: None. M. seizure-related phenotype/s, including ﬁve compound het- Smyk: None. B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. K. erozygosityforcausativesequenceand2homozygous.27% Kowalczyk: None. M. Paczkowska: None. M. Zbiciak: of the mutations were novel variants not described before. None. J. Bernaciak: None. E. Szczepanik: None. H. 10 patients are currently still under investigation. Our Mierzewska: None. E. Obersztyn: None. B. results conﬁrm a relevant role of mostly compound het- Nowakowska: None. erozygous recessive inheritance for EIEE with important implication for genetic counselling.  P09
.051.A L.Musante:None.C.Zanus:None.P.Costa:None.A. Two novel mutations in GRIN2A and LGI1 in multi- P. d’Adamo: None. A.M. Bianco: None. G. Ragusa: generational Bulgarian families with different forms of None. E. Athanasakis: None. F. Faletra: None. P. epilepsy Gasparini: None. M. Carrozzi: None. V. Peycheva1, K. Kamenarova1, R. Tzveova1, N. Ivanova1,  P09
.050.C S. Zhelyazkova2, M. Radionova2, I. Pacheva3, I. Ivanov3, I. Clinical signiﬁcance of submicroscopic copy number Litvinenko4, V. Mitev1, I. Tournev2, A. Jordanova1,5, R. variants (CNVs) in the etiopathogenesis of epilepsy Kaneva1 I.Plaskota,M.Bartnik-Głaska,M.Smyk,B.Wiśniowiecka- 1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical Kowalnik, K. Kowalczyk, M. Paczkowska, M. Zbiciak, J. Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Soﬁa, Bernaciak, E. Szczepanik, H. Mierzewska, E. Obersztyn, B. Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital Nowakowska “Alexandrovska”, Department of Neurology, Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3University Hospital “St. Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland George”, Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, MedicalUniversity-Plovdiv,Plovdiv,Bulgaria,4University Epilepsyisoneofthemostcommondiseasesofthecentral PediatricsHospital,ClinicofPediatricNeurology,Medical nervous system affecting about 1% of the human popula- University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 5Molecular Neurogene- tion. The etiology ofepilepsyremains unknown in40-50% nomics Group, VIB-Antwerp Center for Molecular Neurol- ofcases,althoughitiswellknownthatapproximately30% ogy, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium causes is genetic. According to recent studies, the copy number variants (CNVs) are important factors in this dis- Theaimofthestudywastorevealthegeneticcausesofthe order (2-11%). We used array CGH method in a cohort of familial epilepsy in two four-generational clinically het- 90 patients with epilepsy, and neurodevelopmental erogeneous Bulgarian families. Both families were clini- abnormalities with or without dysmorphic features. Array cally assessed in detail and mutation analysis was CGH analysis was performed using genome-wide performed using Clinical Exome Sequencing(CES) withAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 389 Illumina platform. In the ﬁrst family CES revealed a fra- 7University of Khartoum, Faculty of medicine, department meshift deletion (c.194delT,p.Leu65ArgfsTer3) affecting of physiology, Sudan, khartoum, Sudan, 8Department of the GRIN2A gene. The proband presented unprovoked genetics, La Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, AP-HP Sorbonne myoclonic and Generalized Tonic-Clonic Seizures(GTCS), Université, paris, France, 9Institut du Cerveau et de la motor aphasia and moderate intellectual disability (ID). In Moelle épinière, INSERM U1127, CNRS UMR7225, paris, his pedigree we diagnosed a total of seven additional France, 10University of Khartoum, Faculty of medicine, affected members all having GTCS with onset around 4-6 Sudan, Khartoum, Sudan, 11University of Khartoum, years of age. The GRIN2A gene encodes a subunit of N- Faculty of medicine, department of biochemistry, Sudan, methyl-D-aspartate(NMDA) receptors found in excitatory khartoum, Sudan, 12Department of genetics, La Pitié- synapses with role in neural plasticity. GRIN2A mutations Salpêtrière Hospital, AP-HP Sorbonne Université, Paris, areassociatedwithfocalepilepsywithspeechdisorderwith France or without cognitive disability. In the second family CES revealed a possibly pathogenic splice-acceptor variant Objective:Genetic generalized epilepsies (GGE) including c.216-1G>A in exon 2 of the LGI1 gene. This family childhood absence epilepsy (CAE), juvenile absence epi- consists of a total of eight affected members. The proband lepsy (JAE), juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME), and GGE presented a fever-provoked GTCS, while his ﬁrst-degree with tonic-clonic seizures (TCS) alone (GGE-TCS), are relatives have GTCS preceded by auditory aura and later mainly determined by genetic factors with a likely poly/ onset. LGI1 gene encodes brain leucine-rich protein reg- oligogenic mode of inheritance. Recent studies on large ulating postnatal glutamatergic synapse development. Loss American or European cohorts showed that susceptibility of function LGI1 mutations are associated with partial epi- genes for GGE are numerous and their variants rare, chal- lepsy with auditory features. Conﬁrmation Sanger sequen- lengingtheiridentiﬁcation.Inthisstudy,weaimedtoassess cing showed that the variants segregate with disease the GGE genetic etiology in a Sudanese population. phenotype in all available affected members from each Methods:We collected 13 large consanguineous families family.Bothvariantsareabsentinpublicdatabases.Further with GGE from Sudan including 34 patients to search for investigations are needed to elucidate the splice-site muta- GGE susceptibility genes. We performed whole exome tion effect on RNA level. The study was supported by sequencing (WES) in DNA samples of probands from 13 Grants DTK/67/2009andDUNK/01-2/2009ofNSF,MES, families. We ﬁltered non-silent ultrarare/rare variants Bulgaria. identiﬁed in each family and compared them with publicly V. Peycheva: None. K. Kamenarova: None. R. available data and ethnicity-match controls. Tzveova: None. N. Ivanova: None. S. Zhelyazkova: Results:Weidentiﬁedinafamilyof3siblingswithGGE- None.M.Radionova:None.I.Pacheva:None.I.Ivanov: TCS one ultra-rare missense variant in ADGRV1, a gene None. I. Litvinenko: None. V. Mitev: None. I. Tournev: recentlyinvolvedinthepathogenesisofsporadicmyoclonic None. A. Jordanova: None. R. Kaneva: None. epilepsies.FiveadditionalADGRV1ultrarare/raremissense variants segregated with GGE in three of the remaining  P09
.053.C families. The frequency of this class of ADGRV1 variants ADGRV1 is a susceptibility gene for familial forms of wassigniﬁcantlyhigherinourcohortcomparedtognomAD Genetic Generalized Epilepsy African controls (P=0.0018). Ahomozygous patientfor an ADGRV1 variant presented a more severe phenotype than M. Dahawi1,2, M. S Elmagzoub3, E. A Ahmed4, F. A her heterozygous brother, suggesting a dosage effect. Elmugadam5,W.AAbdelgadir6,O.Abdalla7,J.Buratti8,E. Signiﬁcance:Our study showed for the ﬁrst time the Noé9, M. Alzubeir5, R. Abubakr10, S. Baldassari9, S. segregation of ADGRV1 variants with familial GGE, Baulac9, L. Elsayed11, A. E Ahmed5, E. Leguern9,12 extending the phenotype spectrum of ADGRV1-related epilepsies to CAE/JAE and GTC epilepsy. This work was 1University of Khartoum, Faculty of medicine, department supported by INSERM (France), IHU-A-ICM (France), the of physiology, Khartoum, Sudan, 2niversity of Khartoum, Sudanese Ministry of Higher Education. Faculty of medicine, department of physiology, Khartoum, M. Dahawi: None. M. S Elmagzoub: None. E. A Sudan, 3National Ribat University Faculty of Medicine, Ahmed: None. F. A Elmugadam: None. W. A Abdelga- khartoum,Sudan,4UNESCOChaironBioethics,University dir: None. O. Abdalla: None. J. Buratti: None. E. Noé: of Khartoum, Faculty of Medicine, Sudan, khartoum, None. M. Alzubeir: None. R. Abubakr: None. S. Sudan, 5University of Khartoum, Faculty of medicine, Baldassari: None. S. Baulac: None. L. Elsayed: None. Sudan,khartoum,Sudan,6Al-NeelainUniversity,Facultyof A. E Ahmed: None. E. Leguern: None. science and technology, department of biochemistry and molecular biology, Khartoum, Sudan., khartoum, Sudan,390 J.delPicchia  P09
.054.A Salzburg, Austria, 6Institute for Neurogenomics, Helmholtz EFH C2
 variants in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany S. V. JOSHI1, P. Raju1, P. Satishchandra2, S. Sinha2, S. Introduction: STX1B (Syntaxin 1B) encodes a presynaptic Nayak1, A. Anand1 protein which is part of the SNARE complex. De novo, mostly loss of function variants cause a spectrum of epi- 1Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientiﬁc leptic disorders.Thesehaverecentlybeendividedintofour Research, Bengaluru, India, 2National Institute of Mental groups: (1) Genetic epilepsies with febrile seizures plus Health and Neurosciences, Bengaluru, India (GEFS+), (2) Genetic generalized epilepsy (GGE), (3) Developmentalandepilepticencephalopathy(DEE)and(4) Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) is a brain disorder Focal epilepsy. Most patients with STX1B-associated epi- characterized by frequent myoclonic seizures often accom- lepsycanbeclassiﬁedasGEFS+,whereasthosewithGGE panied by generalized tonic-clonic seizures during adoles- or focal epilepsy are less common. cence. Here, we present, our work on contribution of MaterialsandMethods:Wescreenedourdiagnosticin- EFH C2
inpredispositiontoJME.EFH C2
encodesaprotein houseexomesequencingdatabasecomprising4000datasets containing three DM10 domains and a putative EF-hand for cases with de novo and/or loss of function variants in motif.EFH C2
isexpressedinthemammalianbrainregions: STX1B and reviewed the clinical information of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, hypothalamus and cere- respective patients. bellum. In cultured mammalian cells, it localizes to the Results: We identiﬁed four patients with pathogenic or spindle poles and midbody. We have identiﬁed seven likely pathogenic variants in STX1B: c.293G>A, p.(Ser98- potentially pathogenic EFH C2
 variants present almost Asn); c.165dup, p.(Gln56ThrfsTer3); p.(Phe215CysfsTer9) exclusively among 500 JME patients examined. On over- and c.537+1G>A, p.(?). All patients had epilepsy and the expression of EFH C2
 carrying these variants, signiﬁcant clinical spectrum ranged from febrile and afebrile seizures levels of spindle abnormalities, multi-polarity and chro- to developmental and epileptic encephalopathy with mosome segregation defects are observed. We analyze the cerebral malformations. contribution of the DM10 domains to subcellular localiza- Conclusions: Our ﬁndings conﬁrm the broad clinical tion and function of the protein. EFH C2
 is a homolog of spectrum of STX1B associated epilepsies. We identiﬁed EFH C1
, a known JME causing gene. Cellular defects three loss of function variants in differently affected causedbyEFH C2
variantsinculturedmammaliancellsare individuals implying that a one-to-one genotype- partially rescued by EFH C1
, and vice versa. EFH C2
 co- phenotype correlation cannot be established. precipitates with α-tubulin and γ-tubulin suggesting that M.Schlögl:None.M.Krenn:None.E.Pataraia:None. EFH C2
 is a microtubule-associated protein. EFH C2
’s role S.Schröder:None.J.A.Mayr:None.C.Rauscher:None. in microtubule organization during cell cycle are being D.Kotzot:None.F.Zimprich:None.T.Meitinger:None. currently studied. M. Wagner: None. WewouldliketoacknowledgethegrantBMS/TF/Trans- Neuro-2014-3681/Jul-2015/47/KA/Govt.  P09
.057.A S.V. Joshi: None. P. Raju: None. P. Satishchandra: Whole-exome sequencing is effective for clariﬁcation of None.S.Sinha:None.S.Nayak:None.A.Anand:None. unsolved causes of epileptic encephalopathies  P09
.055.B L.Sedlackova1,P.Lassuthova1,K.Sterbova2,M.Vlckova3, Delineating the phenotypic spectrum of STX1B asso- D. Stanek1, P. Seeman1 ciated epilepsy 1DNA laboratory, Department of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd M. Schlögl1, M. Krenn1,2, E. Pataraia2, S. Schröder3, J. A. Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University Mayr4, C. Rauscher4, D. Kotzot5, F. Zimprich2, T. Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Meitinger1, M. Wagner1,6 Pediatric Neurology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech 1Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Depart- Republic, 3Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, ment of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 2ndFacultyofMedicine,CharlesUniversityandUniversity Austria, 3Dr. von Hauner Children’s Hospital, Ludwig- Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany, 4Uni- versity Children’s Hospital, Salzburger Landeskliniken Introduction: Epileptic encephalopathies (EE) are severe (SALK), Salzburg, Austria, 5Unit of Clinical Genetics, epilepsies of childhood with early onset of usually drug-Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 391 resistant seizures and developmental delay or regression. 5DepartmentofHumanNeurosciences,SapienzaUniversity Their etiology is extremely heterogeneous. Whole-exome ofRome, Rome, Italy, 6IRCCS NeuromedInstitute, Pozzilli, sequencing(WES)wasusedinpatientspreviouslyunsolved Italy, 7Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, using standard diagnostic methods and clinical experience. IRCCS Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 8Department of Patients and Methods: Here we present WES results of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, 48 EE patients. These patients were selected based on Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, Genova, previousexperiencebytheexpertinepilepsygeneticsfrom Italy, 9Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, the cohort of patients unsolved after targeted NGS National Research Council, Rome, Italy, 10Laboratory of gene panel. Molecular and Cell Biology, IRCCS Istituto Dermopatico Results: To date, causative variants were found in ten dell’Immacolata, Rome, Italy patients (20.8%) in genes explaining the cause of EE (HUW E1
, UBTF, SERPINI1, SL C1
A4, GABRB2, DHDDS, Familial Adult Myoclonic Epilepsy (FAME; OMIM Phe- PP P2
R5D,NAR S2
,YWHAG,KMT2A).Inothersixpatients notypicSeries-P S601068
)isanautosomaldominantadult- (12.5%), seven suspected variants of unknown causality onset disorder characterized by cortical myoclonic tremor were found and wait to be validated and interpreted by and epilepsy. FAME is genetically heterogeneous with 6 family segregation or phenotype conﬁrmation by the distinct disease-causative genes identiﬁed over the last two physician (CACNA1A, SNA P25
, NLGN3, CBL, DONSON, years. Notably, all share an emerging common pathomole- SPATA5,PAK3).Infurtherthreepatients,wefoundvariants cularmechanismconsistingintheexpansionofnon-coding ingenesnotassociatedwithEEoranyotherhumandisease (intronic)pentanucleotiderepeatsatdistinctloci.Wereport (KCNJ4, TUL P4
, PHYHIP). Five variants out of twenty a novel three generation FAME pedigree with 3 affected presented were already published before (by different subjects and a healthy carrier. Two sibs had full-blown authors) and the rest of them are novel. FAMEphenotype,whilea32-year-oldgirlmanifestedonly Conclusions: WES represents efﬁcient tool for clariﬁca- myoclonus starting at age 25. Molecular genetics investi- tion of various EE types. It has an important potential for gation by means of repeat primed PCR (RP-PCR) detected novel candidate genes detection, however, international the pathogenic ATTTC pentanucleotide expansion in collaboration is required for searching other patients for STARD7, diagnostic of FAM E2
. The ATTTT repeat refer- genotype-phenotype conﬁrmation. WES may help in ence sequence was not identiﬁed in the expansion. Sanger selected patients to obtain genetic diagnosis in those who sequencingconﬁrmedanapparentlossofheterozygosityin remained unclariﬁed after targeted NGS gene panel (up to affected members and, more interestingly, depicted a com- 40% of patients). Supported by: MH CR AZV 15-33041 plex structure of wild-type (not expanded) alleles. Of note, L. Sedlackova: None. P. Lassuthova: None. K. ATTTC-STARD7 expansion was conﬁrmed in the unaf- Sterbova: None. M. Vlckova: None. D. Stanek: None. fected 89-year-old mother of affected sibs. To our knowl- P. Seeman: None. edge this is the ﬁrst report of reduced penetrance in a molecularly conﬁrmed STARD7 expansion carrier indivi-  P09
.059.C dual. In addition, the identiﬁcation of atypical wild-type A novel Italian family with Familial Adult Myoclonic alleles broadens the repeat structure repertoire suggesting Epilepsy (FAME) broadens the phenotypic and mole- further complexity at the STARD7/FAM E2
 locus. cular spectrum of FAM E2
 caused by a pentanucleotide L. Veneziano: None. A. Coppola: None. L. Fontana: expansion in STARD7 None.S.Rossi:None.L.Camerota:None.E.Mantuano: None. A. Suppa: None. L. Bilo: None. M. Iacomino: L. Veneziano1, A. Coppola2, L. Fontana3, S. Rossi1, L. None.F.Zara:None.G.Novelli:None.G.Cestra:None. Camerota4,3, E. Mantuano1, A. Suppa5,6, L. Bilo2, M. P.Striano:None.A.Botta:None.M.Cozzolino:None.F. Iacomino7,8, F. Zara7,8, G. Novelli3,6, G. Cestra9, P. Brancati: None. Striano7,8, A. Botta3, M. Cozzolino1, F. Brancati1,4,10  P09
.062.C 1Institute of Translational Pharmacology, National Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress contri- Research Council, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Neu- bute to the phenotype of FOX P1
 deﬁciency roscience, Reproductive and Odontostomatological Sciences, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy, J. Wang, H. Fröhlich, G. A. Rappold 3Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 4Institute of Medical Institut für Humangenetik, Heidelberg, Germany Genetics, Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy,392 J.delPicchia PatientswithFOX P1
haploinsufﬁciencypresentintellectual expansions are dependent on MSH2, a factor essential for disability, autism spectrum disorder, severe speech and expansions in vivo. Altogether, our data has implications language impairments as well as motor dysfunction. To for the timing of expansion and allows these cells to be unravel the pathological mechanism underlying useful for modeling the expansion mutation. Additionally, FOX P1
 syndrome, we analysed Foxp1+/- mice, which clo- we demonstrate that these cells have abnormalities con- sely reﬂect FOX P1
 haploinsufﬁciency. We can show that sistentwithhumandiseaseincludingelevatedmitochondrial Foxp1+/- animals exhibit behavioural deﬁcits such as copy numbers and Fmr1 hyperexpression, that we show is reduced neonatal ultrasonic vocalization, hyperactivity, O -sensitive. Thus, this new stem cell model should facil- 2 anxiety and alterations in spatial navigation and memory. itate studies of both expansion and the consequences of Furthermore,theymanifestdecreasedexercisecapacityand expansion during early embryonic development. endurance. We also found that Foxp1+/- animals display a I. Gazy: None. C. Miller: None. G. Kim: None. K. reduced striatal expression of proteins involved in mito- Usdin: None. chondrial biogenesis and dynamics (Pgc-1α, Tfam, Opa1 and Drp1), suggesting that mitochondrial dysfunction may  P09
.065.C contribute to the symptoms. To address this issue in more Autophagic alterations in skin ﬁbroblasts from Fragile detail, we investigated mitochondria in WT and Foxp1+/- X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome patients animals. We demonstrate that Foxp1+/- striatal neurons display a disrupted mitochondrial membrane potential. In L. Rodriguez-Revenga1, M. Alvarez-Mora1, I. Gonzalez- addition, we detected an increased abundance of reactive Casacuberta2, T. Barcos1, G. Garrabou2 oxygen species, increased cytochrome C release as well as lipidperoxidationintheFoxp1+/-striatum.Insummary,our 1Hospital Cinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, Barcelona, results indicate mitochondrial dysfunctionin murine Foxp1 Spain deﬁciency, suggesting that mitochondrial dysfunction and increasedoxidativestressmayalsocontributetothedeﬁcits Introduction:FragileX-associatedtremor/ataxiasyndrome in FOX P1
 Syndrome. (FXTAS) is a late-onset neurodegenerative disorder with J. Wang: None. H. Fröhlich: None. G.A. reducedpenetrancethatappearsinadultFMR1premutation Rappold: None. carriers(55-200CGGs).Theneuropathologicalhallmarkof  P09
.063.A FXTAS consists of presence of ubiquitin-positive nuclear FragileXpremutationmouseembryonicstemcellsasan inclusionsthatarebroadlydistributedthroughoutthebrain. in vitro model for CGG repeat expansion and disease Additionally, bioenergetic deﬁcits and mitochondrial dys- pathology functionhavebeenalsoreported.Sinceautophagypromotes cell survival by elimination of damaged organelles and I. Gazy1,2, C. Miller2, G. Kim2, K. Usdin2 proteins aggregates, we aimed to study its potential role in the pathogenesis of FXTAS. 1KwaZulu-Natal Research Innovation and Sequencing Material and Methods: Skin ﬁbroblasts cultures from Platform (KRISP), University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, FXTAS patients (n = 4) were used to quantify autophagic South Africa, 2Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology, ﬂux (time-course baﬁlomycin a1-mediated autophagic NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, inhibition) by measuring by western blot autophagic United States substrates (p62 levels), autophagosome formation (L C3
- BII content) and mitochondrial amount (VDA C1
 The Fragile-X related disorders (FXDs) are Repeat Expan- expression). sion Disorders (REDs) that result from expansion of a Results: The analysis of autophagic ﬂux in skin CGG-repeat tract in the FMR1 gene. While expansion ﬁbroblasts cultures evidenced enhanced autophagic path- affects both disease risk and severity in humans, the way activation and increased mitochondrial amount in underlying molecular mechanism responsible is unknown. FXTAS patients compared to controls. Increased autopha- Despite a high frequency of expansions in vivo, existing gosome number was also conﬁrmed by confocal patient-derived cell models do not show signiﬁcant repeat microscopy. instability. Here, we describe the generation of mouse Conclusions: These ﬁndings suggest that despite the embryonicstemcells(mESCs)carryinganexpandedCGG- increase in autophagic ﬂux, abnormal cell waste may repeattractintheendogenousmurineFmr1gene.Weshow contribute to the pathology of FXTAS ﬁbroblasts by that these cells show high frequency repeat expansions, causing the accumulation of incomplete degraded mito- visible in a matter of days in culture. Moreover, using the chondria, among other subtracts. As a result, we postulate CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing system, we show that theseAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 393 that FXTASﬁbroblasts suffer from abioenergetic collapse, LSDgenesinPDcases(P=0.003).Inparticular,the36%of leading to cell stress that triggers cell death. patientswascarrierofatleastonemutationinanLDSgene Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the compared to the 23% of controls. Moreover, performing Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI17/01067 and PI18/00498), single-geneanalysis,weobservedthatasecondmutationin co-ﬁnanced by Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional GBA represents the strongest modulator of GBA itself (5% (FEDER) “una manera de hacer Europa” and AGAUR vs 1%, P=0.012). The identiﬁcation of genetic lesions in (2017 SGR1134). The CIBERER is an initiative of the lysosomal genes increasing the risk to develop PD may Instituto de Salud Carlos III. contribute to classify patients in subgroups most likely to L. Rodriguez-Revenga: None. M. Alvarez-Mora: beneﬁt from existing and upcoming targeted therapies. None. I. Gonzalez-Casacuberta: None. T. Barcos: None. L. Straniero: None. V. Rimoldi: None. S. Bonvegna: G. Garrabou: None. None. G. Melistaccio: None. G. Soldà: None. M. Aureli: None. A. Di Fonzo: None. A. Zecchinelli: None. G.  P09
.068.C Pezzoli: None. R. Cilia: None. S. Duga: None. R. Contribution of lysosomal gene variants to Parkinson’s Asselta: None. Disease penetrance in GBA mutation carriers  P09
.069.A L.Straniero1,V.Rimoldi1,2,S.Bonvegna3,G.Melistaccio1, Modellingmotor-neuronsinadishtostudytheeffectsof G. Soldà1,2, M. Aureli4, A. Di Fonzo5, A. Zecchinelli3, G. a homozygous codon-stop mutation in GDA P1
 respon- Pezzoli3, R. Cilia6, S. Duga1,2, R. Asselta1,2 sible for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 1Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele (Milano), Italy, F. Miressi1, N. Benslimane1, L. Richard1,2, S. 2HumanitasClinicalandResearchCenter,IRCCS,Rozzano Bourthoumieu1,3, M. Rassat1, C. Laroche4, L. Magy1,2, C. (Milano), Italy, 3Parkinson Institute, ASST “Gaetano Pini- Magdelaine1,5,F.Favreau1,5,F.Sturtz1,5,P.Faye1,A.Lia1,5 CTO”, Milano, Italy, 4Department of Medical Biotechnol- ogy and Translational Medicine, University of Milan, 1EA6309 - University of Limoges, Limoges, France, 2CHU Milano, Italy, 5Foundation IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Limoges - Service de Neurologie, Limoges, France, 3CHU Maggiore Policlinico, Neurology Unit; Dino Ferrari Limoges - Service de Cytogénétique, Limoges, France, Center,NeuroscienceSection,DepartmentofPathophysiol- 4CHU Limoges - Service de Pédiatrie, Limoges, France, ogy and Transplantation, University of Milan, Milano, 5CHU Limoges - Service de Biochimie et Génétique Italy, 6Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico ‘Carlo Moléculaire, Limoges, France Besta’, Milano, Italy Introduction: Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease, the Introduction: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most mostcommoninheritedperipheralneuropathyinhumans,is common neurodegenerative disorder affecting more than caused by mutations in more than 90 genes. Among these, 1% of the over-65 population. To date, mutations in the GDA P1
 encodes for a mitochondrial protein important for GBA gene, coding for the lysosomal glucocerebrosidase, mitochondrialdynamicandprotectionfromROS.However, represent the most frequent cause of genetic PD. Besides motor neurons (MNs), the mainly involved cells in this GBA, other lysosomal genes have also been implicated in neuropathy,cannotbeobtainedfrompatients.Ourgoalwas PD pathogenesis, such as SMPD1, NP C1
, and SCARB2. to generate MNs derived from iPSc (induced-pluripotent- The reason why patients with the same mutation may or stem-cells) in order to investigate the effects of GDA P1
- may notdevelop neurodegeneration andPDisstillunclear. mutations. To this end, we evaluated the impact of the burden of Materials and Methods: We created iPSc from ﬁbro- deleterious mutations in lysosomal genes in patients het- blasts of two unaffected subjects and a CMT-patient erozygous for pathogenic GBA mutations vs asymptomatic carrying a GDA P1
 homozygous codon-stop mutation. iPSc GBA-mutation carriers. weredifferentiatedinneuralprogenitors(NP),theninmotor Materials and Methods: This analysis was performed neurons (MN). To study GDA P1
 expression, we realized using a custom NGS panel by exploiting a DNA pooling RNA-extraction, qRT-PCR and immunocytochemistry. strategy. The panel included 50 genes responsible for Electronic microscopy and functional tests were also lysosomal storage disorders (LSD) and all previously achieved. reported PD-genes to evaluate if they contribute to PD Results: By studying GDA P1
 mRNA expression in penetrance in GBA-mutation carriers. Fibroblasts, iPSc, NPs and MNs, on controls’ cells, we Results and Conclusions: Statistical analysis revealed a observed that GDA P1
 is mostly expressed in neural cells signiﬁcantly increased burden of deleterious variants in (NPs and MNs), showing the importance of generating394 J.delPicchia MNstostudyGDA P1
mutationseffects.Interestingly,inall Conclusions: HDpatients have asigniﬁcantly(p <0,05) patient’scelltypes,GDA P1
expressionwaslow,suggesting lowertelomerlengthandhighermtDNAcopynumberthan that GDA P1
 mRNA, containing a premature termination healthy controls. Both telomere length and mitochondrial codon (PTC), is probably degraded by the nonsense- copy number decreased with HD disease severity (with a mediated-decay (NMD) system. These results have been small spike in Stage I patients) but the changes were not conﬁrmed by immunocytochemistry. Then, we analyzed statistically signiﬁcant in that regard with the given morphological and functional properties of our cellular sample sizes. models. B.A.Fekete:None.A.Illés:None.D.Csabán:None.H. Conclusions: Cellular models are useful tools to Zeke: None. V. Molnár: None. M.J. Molnár: None. investigate the impact of genomic mutations on functional level. Our study highlighted the importance of employing  P09
.077.C the good cellular model (MNs), to study the altered Redeﬁning the spectrum of disorders with white matter molecular mechanisms associated to GDA P1
-mutations in abnormalities in the genomic era CMT disease. F. Miressi: None. N. Benslimane: None. L. Richard: P. Kaur1, N. Kausthubham1, A. Shrikiran2, R. Bhat2, L. None. S. Bourthoumieu: None. M. Rassat: None. C. EdwardLewis2,S.Nampoothiri3,S.J.Patil4,S.Sharma5,S. Laroche:None.L.Magy:None.C.Magdelaine:None.F. Bijarnia Mahay6, S. Pai7, A. Kaur8, K. C. Rakshith7, N. Favreau: None. F. Sturtz: None. P. Faye: None. A. Kamath9,S.Bajaj10,R.Shetty11,R.Shenoy12,B.Banerjee13, Lia: None. M. Kamate14, B. Baliga7, K. M. Girisha1, A. Shukla1  P09
.074.C 1Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical Telomere length and mitochondrial DNA copy number College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, changes in Huntington’s Disease Manipal, India, 2Department of Paediatrics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher B.A.Fekete,A.Illés,D.Csabán,H.Zeke,V.Molnár,M.J. Education, Manipal, India, 3Department of Paediatric Molnár Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Kochi, India, 4Division of Genetics, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Mazumdar Shaw Medical Center, Narayana Health City, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary Bangalore, India, 5Department of Paediatrics, Lady Hard- inge Medical College, New Delhi, India, 6Institute of Introduction:Telomerelengthwaspreviouslyshowntobe MedicalGenetics andGenomics,Sir GangaRamHospital, decreased in several neurodegenerative disorders including New Delhi, India, 7Department of Neurology, Kasturba Huntington’sDisease(HD)whilemitochondrialDNAcopy Medical College, Mangalore, Manipal Academy of Higher number changes were reported to show conﬂicting results. Education, Manipal, India, 8Department of Paediatrics, Simultaneous measurements and detailed data on disease PostgraduateInstituteofMedicalEducationandResearch, severity is lacking. Chandigarh, India, 9Department of Paediatrics, Kasturba Materials and methods: HD patients and preclinical Medical College, Mangalore, Manipal Academy of Higher patients (pathologic CAG expansion carriers) were staged Education,Manipal,India,10JaslokHospitalandResearch (n = 142) based on the Shoulson-Fahn clinical staging Centre, Mumbai, India, 11Department of Paediatrics, system(StageI-V.andpreclinical).Ahealthycontrolgroup Indiana Hospital and Heart Institute, Mangalore, India, was used (n = 71). mtDNA copy number and telomere 12DepartmentofPaediatrics,K.S.HegdeMedicalAcademy, lengths were measured with real-time PCR technique. NITTE University, Mangalore, India, 13Department of Results:ForpreclinicalHDpatientstheaveragetelomere Paediatrics, Manipal Hospitals, Bangalore, India, lengthis133.8(±88.2)(kb/cel)andmtDNAcopynumberis 14Department of Paediatrics, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical 387.5 (±167.4) (pcs/cel). Stage I HD patients have an College, Belgaum, India average telomere length of 138.7 (±101), mtDNA copy numberof393.7(±117.4),whilestageIItelomerelengthis Genetic disorders with centralnervous system white matter 124.5 (±74.8) and mtDNA copy number is 382.5 (±119.8) abnormalities, also referred to as leukodystrophies and/or and stage III telomer lengths is 94.1 (±65.8) while mtDNA genetic leukoencephalopathies (LD/gLE), are a hetero- copynumberis326.5(±127).WedidnothaveanystageIV geneous group of neurodegenerative conditions. Till date, andVHDpatients.Averagetelomerelengthforthecontrol 316 monogenic and 2 chromosomal disorders are desig- patients is 167.3 (±84.7) while mtDNA copy number is nated as LD/gLE. Though neuroimaging was the key to 201.5 (±103.7) diagnosis over last two decades, broad-spectrum geneticAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 395 testinghasnowtakenacentralroleindiagnosis.Methods: studies demonstrate an important contribution of genetic We reviewed literature to retract a list of genetic disorders factors. with white matter abnormalities. We also evaluated 109 Materials and methods: We performed diagnostic individuals from 101 families with white matter abnormal- genetic studies in 100 CP-patients that are followed at the ities. Exome sequencing (ES) was performed for genomic Pediatric Neurology department using a whole exome evaluation. Results: Literature review rendered 445 condi- sequencing (WES) based gene panel consisting of 200 tions with white matter abnormalities. One-hundred-and- genes associated with CP and CP-mimics. two conditions present with hypomyelination and 343 Results: Here, we report the presence of de novo KIF1A conditions have de/dysmyelination. Of the total, 129 dis- variants in a relatively large proportion of our CP orders have not yet been designated as LD/gLE but have population (7/100 patients tested,7%). Thesevariants were predominantwhitematterabnormalities.Diagnosticyieldof located in the KIF1A motor domain, absent in control ESinheterogenouscohortsofindividualswithwhitematter databases, predicted pathogenic by in silico prediction abnormalities hasbeennoted tobe intherange of40-50%. programs and reported as likely pathogenic (class 4/5) or ES has led to discovery of 63 novel conditions with white pathogenic (class 5/5). Patients presented with develop- matterabnormalitiesinthepastdecade.Inourcohortof109 mental delay and mild to moderate ID (7/7), spastic families, 14 had hypomyelination and 95 had de/dysmye- paraplegia (7/7), periventricular white matter abnormalities lination.Moleculardiagnosiswasestablishedin67families (4/7), corpus callosum hypoplasia (2/7), cerebellar atrophy (66.33%). Thirty-eight (59.37%) of 64 disease-causing (1/7), behavioural problems (ADHD/autism) (4/7) and variants were novel. Four novel conditions with patho- seizures (1/7). These ﬁndings were already reported in genic variants in ISCA1, AIM P2
, EXOS C1
 and ANKRD17 KIF1A variants. were identiﬁed. Conclusions: The spectrum of genetic Conclusions: Variants in KIF1A, which encodes a disorderswithwhitematterabnormalitiesisever-increasing kinesin axonal motor protein, have been described to cause and ES has emerged as a highly efﬁcient modality for variable neurological disorders. This is the ﬁrst report in diagnosis of known conditions as well as elucidation of which de novo KIF1A mutations are demonstrated to be an novel conditions. importantcauseofCPassociatedwithearlyonsetspasticity P.Kaur:None.N.Kausthubham:None.A.Shrikiran: and a frequent ﬁnding of periventricular white matter None. R. Bhat: None. L. Edward Lewis: None. S. abnormalities. Nampoothiri: None. S.J. Patil: None. S. Sharma: None. D.Beysen:None.F.Roelens:None.S.Kenis:None.E. S. Bijarnia Mahay: None. S. Pai: None. A. Kaur: None. Reyniers: None. K. Janssens: None. M. K.C.Rakshith:None.N.Kamath:None.S.Bajaj:None. Meuwissen: None. R. Shetty: None. R. Shenoy: None. B. Banerjee: None. M.Kamate:None.B.Baliga:None.K.M.Girisha:None.  P09
.080.C A. Shukla: None. Complexsocialbehaviourdeﬁciencies inamousemodel for Kleefstra Syndrome  P09
.079.B De novoKIF1A mutations play an important role in the I. M. van der Werf1,2, M. Negwer1, P. Decuzzi2, H. van development of cerebral palsy Bokhoven1, N. Nadif Kasri1 D. Beysen1, F. Roelens2, S. Kenis1, E. Reyniers3, K. 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Italian Institute of Janssens3, M. Meuwissen3,4 Technology, Genoa, Italy 1Dept. of Pediatric Neurology, Antwerp University Hospi- Haploinsufﬁciency of the EHMT1 gene is the cause of tal, Edegem, Belgium, 2Dept. of Pediatrics, AZ Delta, Kleefstra Syndrome (KS), a disorder characterized by Roeselare, Belgium, 3Center for Medical Genetics, Uni- intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders and spe- versity of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Center for Medical ciﬁc facial features. EHMT1 encodes the Euchromatic Genetics,AntwerpUniversityHospital,Edegem,Belgium Histone Lysine Methyltransferase 1 (EHMT1) protein, which in complex with EHMT2 can deposit methyl groups Introduction: Cerebral palsy (CP) is a clinical descriptive on histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9me1/H3K9me2), important term deﬁning a heterogeneous group of non-progressive, epigenetic marks for gene repression. The Ehmt1+/- mouse neurodevelopmental disorders of motor impairment, which model, with heterozygous knockout of Ehmt1, shows phe- co-occurwithawiderangeofmedicalconditions,including notypic resemblance of the human disorder with develop- intellectual disability, speech and language deﬁcits, autism, mental delay, learning and memory deﬁcits, craniofacial epilepsy and visual and/or hearing impairment. Recent abnormalitiesanddiminishedresponsetosocialnovelty.To396 J.delPicchia evaluate social behaviour in the Ehmt1+/- mouse model in Results: We described 14 unrelated patients with more depth, we used the recently developed Live Mouse pathogenicmutationsinKMT2A.Allthemutationoccurred Trackersystem(deChaumontetal.2019).Thissystemcan de novo. Age at diagnosis ranged from 2 to 19 years, sex automatically track andscore behaviour ofa group of mice ratio 1. All patients presented with global developmental inahomecage-likesetting.WerecordedEhmt1+/-miceand delay with a wide range of severity, only 14% with severe theirwildtypelittermatesovertimeperiodsof23hoursand intellectual disability. 86% of the patients have language analyzed general activity, isolated behaviour, dyadic inter- disorders. Gastrointestinal ﬁndings were common (feeding actions and group dynamics in familiar social contexts, difﬁculties 100%, constipation 22%). 94% of the patients thereby excluding social novelty. Our results indicate that had an hypertrichosis whose more than half with hairy Ehmt1+/- mice are generally hypoactive when compared to elbow. Abnormalities of craniocervical junction were wildtype littermates and display speciﬁc social behaviour reported in 4 patients (29%). Two patients developed deﬁcits, in particular in group dynamics. These phenotypes conductive deafness. will be further investigated as endpoint measures for phe- Conclusions: This study improved the description of notypic rescue in drug studies. natural history of WSS, especially about neurological This work was supported by the K.I.D.S.IQ Project and development. Moreover, our cohort emphases the impor- theIITMINDEDproject (European Union’sHorizon 2020 tance of early detection of craniocervical junction abnorm- research and innovation programme, Marie Skłodowska- alities and deafness. Curie grant agreement No 754490) C. Ormieres: None. S. Rondeau: None. G. Barcia: I.M. van der Werf: None. M. Negwer: None. P. None. S. Lyonnet: None. A. Guimier: None. C. Michot: Decuzzi: None. H. van Bokhoven: None. N. Nadif None. G. Baujat: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. M. Kasri: None. Rio: None.  P09
.082.B  P09
.083.C Clinical and genetic ﬁndings in 14 patients with A rare missense variant in the AT P2
C2  gene is Wiedemann Steiner syndrome caused by mutation in associatedwithdevelopmentallanguagedisorder(DLD) the KMT2A gene A. Martinelli1, M. Rice2, S. Smith3, J. Talcott4, J. Stein5, L. C. ORMIERE
S1 ,2, S. Rondeau1, G. Barcia1, S. Lyonnet1,3, Kent1, M. Hayiou-Thomas6, D. Newbury7, C. Hulme5, S. A. Guimier1, C. Michot1, G. Baujat1, V. Cormier-Daire1,2, Pitt1, S. Paracchini1 M. Rio1 1University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom, 1Fédération de Génétique et Institut Imagine, AP-HP, 2University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, United States, 3Uni- Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, F-75015 Paris, France, versity of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, United States, 4Aston Paris, France, 2Université de Paris, UMR1163, INSERM, University, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5University of F-75 015, Paris, France, Paris, France, 3Université de Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6University of York, Paris,UMR1163,INSERM,F-75015,Paris,France,Paris, York, United Kingdom, 7Oxford Brookes University, France, Paris, France Oxford, United Kingdom Introduction: Wiedemann Steiner syndrome (WSS) Developmental Language Disorder (DLD) is a common (605130 OMIM), is a rare autosomal dominant disorder condition presenting unexpected difﬁculties in expressing characterized by distinctive facial features, variable devel- and understanding spoken language. DLD presents exten- opmental delay, short stature, and hypertrichosis especially sive comorbidity with other disorders like dyslexia and of the elbows; related to heterozygous mutations in the ADHD. DLD is highly heritable but few genes have been KMT2A gene. To date, more than 100 cases have been identiﬁedsofar.Throughanexomesequencinganalysiswe describedexpandingtheclinicalphenotype.Theaimofthis identiﬁed a rare missense mutation (chr16:84405221 G>A study is to improve the clinical description of patients (GRCh38.p12)) in the AT
P2 C2
 gene. Exactly the same with WSS. variant was reported previously in a different exome Materials and methods: This retrospective study sequencing study for DLD, and AT P2
C2  was previously included patients followed in our center with conﬁrmed proposed as susceptibility gene for language disorders by WSS. Data from the medical records were abstracted, linkageandassociationstudies.Wefollowedthisﬁndingup recordedinanExcelspreadsheetandanalyzedusingsimple bygenotypingthemutationincohortsselectedforDLDand frequency analysis. We compare these patients with comorbiddisorders.Wefound thatthevariant hadahigher previously reported cases. frequency in DLD cases (1.8%, N=360) compared toAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 397 cohorts selected for dyslexia (0.8%, N = 520) and ADHD Material and methods: Four lines of ﬁbroblast from (0.7%, N = 150), which presented frequencies comparable patients with LI
S1  de novo heterozygous mutations were to reference databases (0.9%, N = 24,046 gnomAD con- used. Two of them displaying a severe phenotype carry an trols). Analysis of quantitative phenotypes in the ALSPAC intronic mutation (c.1002+1G>T) or a missense birthcohortshowedthatcarriers(N=42)ofthevarianthad, (c.445C>T) while the two other patients presenting a less as a group, lower mean scores on a range of reading and severe phenotype display a splice site mutation (c.569- language-relatedmeasurescomparedtocontrols(N=1825), 10T>C). LI
S1  transcripts and proteins were quantiﬁed and e.g. carriers had a mean score 0.4 SD lower than non- thesubcellulardistributionoftheproteinwas visualizedby carriers on a phoneme awareness task. We are currently immunoﬂuorescence. investigating the potential effects of this variant on protein Results:AnalysisofLI
S1 mRNAshowedthatthec.569- functionwitharangeofbiochemicalandelectrophysiology 10T>C mutant transcripts were degraded while both assays. This work is supported by an Action Medical c.445C>T et c.1002+1G>T mutant transcripts, associated Research Action/The Chief Scientist (CSO) Ofﬁce, Scot- to the severe phenotypes, were not. Yet, no difference of land grant (GN2614) and a Cunningham Trust grant. LI
S1 proteinlevelwasdetectedbetweenpatientandcontrol A.Martinelli:None.M.Rice:None.S.Smith:None.J. lines, by Western Blot. But, immunoﬂuorescence targeting Talcott:None.J.Stein:None.L.Kent:None.M.Hayiou- LI
S1  after proteasome inhibition allowed the detection of Thomas: None. D. Newbury: None. C. Hulme: None. S. clusters in ﬁbroblasts associated to the severe phenotypes Pitt: None. S. Paracchini: None. (c.1002+1G>T ; c.445C>T). Conclusions: In LI
S1  lissencephalies, our data suggest 
P09 .085.B thatmoresevereformswouldbeassociatedtoanabnormal Contribution and consequences of LI
S1  dosage in repartition of the LI
S1  protein forming clusters after physiopathological mechanism of LI
S1  mutations- proteasome inhibition, which might be toxic for the cell. related lissencephaly Recentstudiesindicatetheclustersmightbestressgranules, membraneless organelles involved in post-transcriptional C.MAILLARD1,2,M.Philbert3,M.Cavallin4,S.Auvin5,M. regulation and translational control, formed by RNA-RNA, Milh6, A. Goldenberg7, C. Masson8, N. Boddaert9, A. El protein-protein and RNA-protein interactions, in which Morjani10, J. Steffann10, J. Chelly11, X. Gerard12, N. Bahi- LI
S1  would bind RNA-binding proteins. Buisson1,2,13 C. Maillard: None. M. Philbert: None. M. Cavallin: None. S. Auvin: None. M. Milh: None. A. Goldenberg: 1Genetics and Development of the Cerebral Cortex, None. C. Masson: None. N. Boddaert: None. A. El Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 2Sorbonne Paris Cite Morjani: None. J. Steffann: None. J. Chelly: None. X. University, Paris, France, 3University Hospital of Martini- Gerard: None. N. Bahi-Buisson: None. que, Fort-de-France, Martinique, 4Meyer Pediatric Hospi- tal, Florence, Italy, 5Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic 
P09 .087.A Diseases,RobertDebréHospital,Paris,France,6Pediatric The involvement of MAN2
C1  in the development of Neurology, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France, cortical malformations 7Unit of Clinical Genetics, University of Rouen, Rouen, France, 8Plateform of Bioinformatic, Imagine Institute, L. Kerkhove1, H. Yildirim1, S. Seneca1,2, A. Gheldof1,2, D. Paris, France, 9Pediatric Radiology, Necker-Enfants Dumitriu3, K. Sermon4, A. Jansen1,5, M. Nassogne6, K. Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 10Unit of Clinical Stouffs1,2 Genetics,Necker-EnfantsMaladesHospital,Paris,France, 11Genetics and Physiopathology of Neurodevelopmental 1Neurogenetics Research Group, Reproduction – Genetics and Epileptogenic Diseases, IGBMC, Illkirch, France, and Regenerative Medicine Research Cluster, Vrije Uni- 12Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology, Imagine versiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Centre for Medical Institute, Paris, France, 13Pediatric Neurology, Necker- Genetics, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZ Brussel), Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France Brussels, Belgium, 3Pediatric Radiology Unit, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium, Introduction: LI
S1  is an ubiquitous protein of which loss 4ReproductionandGeneticsResearchGroup,Reproduction offunctionmutationsleadtolissencephalies,whereasLI
S1  – Genetics and Regenerative Medicine Research Cluster, overexpressioncausesmicrocephaly.Thissuggestscerebral Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 5Pediatric development is very sensitive to LI
S1  dosage. The main Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, UZ Brussel, goal of this project is to evaluate the dose-effect impact of Brussels, Belgium, 6Pediatric Neurology Unit, Cliniques LI
S1  on the different degrees of lissencephalies’ severity. universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium398 J.delPicchia epilepsy. Some of the MCD causative genes have been The development of the cerebral cortex is a complex pro- identiﬁed, but part remain unknown. Here, we describe a cess and pathogenic variants in >200 genes have been patientwithheterozygousvariantsintheC-terminaldomain associated with malformations of cortical development phosphatase1(CTD
P1 )gene,agenepotentiallyinvolvedin (MCD).Yet, theetiology still remains to beelucidated ina MCD. CTD
P1  functions as a phosphatase which depho- large group of MCD patients. The proband of this study, a sphorylates the C-terminus of RNA polymerase II, making 17-year old boy presented with a complex brain mal- it available for initiation of gene expression. formation including severe cortical dysplasia, agenesis of A 2.5-year old girl presented with congenital arthrogry- the corpus callosum, interhemispheric cysts and pontocer- posis,periventriculargraymatterheterotopia,opticatrophy, ebellar hypoplasia. Parents are non-consanguineous. The absent optic chiasma and unilateral auditory neuropathy. father of the proband has a simple arachnoid cyst. Whole Trio exome analysis revealed that the index is compound exome sequencing showed a novel homozygous variant heterozygous for twonovel variantsinCTD
P1 :c.609G>C, (c.607G>A, p.(Gly203Arg)) in the MAN2
C1  p. (Gln203His) and c.2665C>T, p. (Arg889Trp). To assess (NM_006715.3) gene. This variant was not reported earlier thegeneexpressionlevelsofCTD
P1 ,real-timepolymerase and classiﬁed as variant of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS 3). chain reaction (RT-PCR) is performed. The phosphatase TheMAN2
C1 geneencodesacytosolicmannosidaseandis activity of CTD
P1  was assessed by performing western involved in the degradation of misfolded glycoproteins. blotting (WB) of its target RNA polymerase II. Possibly,asaconsequenceoftheaccumulationofproteins, RT-PCRdatashowedanon-signiﬁcantdownregulationof theorganizationandmaturationofneuronsisalteredduring CTD
P1  expression in the patient versus controls. By fetogenesis. Preliminary RT-PCR results showed that the performing WB, more phosphorylated RNA polymerase II expressionlevelofMAN2
C1 isdownregulatedinﬁbroblasts was detected in patient cells. comparedtocontrols,althoughthisdownregulationwasnot Our preliminary analyses show that the phosphatase signiﬁcant. The variant in MAN2
C1  causes a ± 50% activity of CTD
P1  is altered in the patient compared to decrease incytosolic alpha-mannosidase enzymatic activity controls,supportingitsroleinMCD.CTD
P1 isinvolvedin in the patient compared to controls. RNA sequencing ana- the regulation of RNA polymerase II and forms a complex lysis in patient and control ﬁbroblasts showed up/down withINT
S1 andINT
S8 .Variantsinthelattergenesresultin regulationofmultipleglycosylatedproteins.Thefunctional a phenotype similar to that of in our index patient, further consequences of the detected variant and the exact role of suggesting a role for CTD
P1  in brain development. theMAN2CgeneinthedevelopmentofMCDneedfurther H.Yildirim: None.L. Kerkhove: None. B.I.Dimitrov: investigation. None.E.Cannaerts:None.K.Sermon:None.K.Stouffs: L. Kerkhove: None. H. Yildirim: None. S. Seneca: None. A.C. Jansen: None. None.A.Gheldof:None.D.Dumitriu:None.K.Sermon: None. A. Jansen: None. M. Nassogne: None. K. 
P09 .090.A Stouffs: None. Malformations of cortical development: international consensus recommendations on diagnostic work-up 
P09 .089.C The association of CTD
P1  mutation withmalformations R.Oegema1,T.Barakat2,N.Bahi-Buisson3,E.Aronica4,5, of cortical development V.Conti6,M.Zaki7,W.Dobyns8,9,A.Fry10,11,T.Geis12,D. GomezAndres13,R.Guerrini6,U.Hehr14,A.Jansen15,16,R. H. Yildirim1, L. Kerkhove1, B. I. Dimitrov2, E. Cannaerts2, Leventer17, D. Amron18,19, G. Mirzaa8,9, E. Parrini6, D. K. Sermon3, K. Stouffs1, A. C. Jansen4 Pilz20, E. Said21,22, D. Soler23, K. Stouffs24, L. M. Valor25, O. Reiner26, I. Pogledic27, M. Wilke28, G. M. S. Mancini28, 1Neurogenetics Research Group, Research Cluster Repro- N. Di Donato29 duction - Genetics and Regenerative Medicine, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Jette, Belgium, 2Center for Medical 1UMC Utrecht - WKZ, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department Genetics, UZ Brussel, Jette, Belgium, 3Reproduction and of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC University Medical GeneticsResearchGroup,ResearchClusterReproduction- Center,, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Pediatric Neurology Genetics and Regenerative Medicine, Vrije Universiteit Necker Enfants Malades UniversityHospital Imagine Insti- Brussel,Jette,Belgium,4PediatricNeurologyUnit,Depart- tute Paris France, Paris, France, 4Amsterdam UMC, ment of Pediatrics, UZ Brussel, Jette, Belgium University of Amsterdam, Dept (Neuro)pathology, Amster- dam, Netherlands, 5Stichting Epilepsie Instellingen Neder- Malformations of cortical development (MCD) represent a land (SEIN), Hoofddorp, Netherlands, 6Pediatric major cause of developmental disabilities and severe Neurology, Neurogenetics and Neurobiology Unit andAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 399 Laboratories, Department of Neuroscience, A. Meyer heterogeneity and lack of guidelines in the recognition and Children’s Hospital, University of Florence, Florence, classiﬁcation of these rare disorders. Italy, 7Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics Methods: The international network on brain malforma- andGenomeResearchDivision,NationalResearchCentre, tions Neuro-MIG formed a multidisciplinary task force. Cairo, Egypt, 8Center for Integrative Brain Research, Through expert meetings, literature search, and the Delphi Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United consensusmethodadiagnosticstrategyforindividualswith States, 9Department of Pediatrics, University of Washing- MCD was developed. ton, Seattle, WA, United States, 10Institute of Medical Results: We present consensus recommendations on the Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United optimal work ﬂow applicable to any individual with MCD. Kingdom, 11Division of Cancer and Genetics, School of This includes a ﬂow chart for the clinical work-up, Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, laboratory standards, and a curated MCD gene panel list. 12Department of Pediatric Neurology, Klinik St. Hedwig, In addition, we discuss the differential diagnosis, possible University Children’s Hospital Regensburg (KUNO), diagnosticpitfallsandspecialrecommendationsforspeciﬁc Regensburg, Germany, 13Child Neurology. Hospital Uni- MCD subtypes. versitariValld’Hebron,Barcelona,Spain,14Centerforand Conclusions: These recommendations will aid clinicians Institute of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, in providing the optimal diagnostic strategy, which will Regensburg,Germany,15PediatricNeurologyUnit,Depart- improvegeneticandprognosticcounselingandpatientcare. ment of Pediatrics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 16Neu- Financial support: Neuro-MIG is supported by COST rogenetics Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Action CA16118 (https://www.neuro-mig.org/). Brussels, Belgium, 17Department of Neurology, Royal R. Oegema: None. T. Barakat: None. N. Bahi Children’s Hospital, Murdoch Children’s Research Insti- -Buisson: None. E. Aronica: None. V. Conti: None. M. tuteandUniversityofMelbourneDepartmentofPediatrics, Zaki: None. W. Dobyns: None. A. Fry: None. T. Geis: Melbourne, Australia, 18Kannerklinik, Centre Hospitalier None. D. Gomez Andres: None. R. Guerrini: None. U. de Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 19Hôpital Hehr: None. A. Jansen: None. R. Leventer: None. D. Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Université Libre Amron: None. G. Mirzaa: None. E. Parrini: None. D. deBruxelles,Brussels,Belgium,20WestofScotlandClinical Pilz: None. E. Said: None. D. Soler: None. K. Stouffs: Genetics Service, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, None. L.M. Valor: None. O. Reiner: None. I. Pogledic: Glasgow, United Kingdom, 21Section of Medical Genetics, None. M. Wilke: None. G.M.S. Mancini: None. N. Di Mater dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 22Department of Donato: None. Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 23Department of Paediatrics, Mater dei Hospital, 
P09 .091.B Msida, Malta, 24Centre for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel; Mutations of PCDHG
C4  encoding protocadherin Neurogenetics Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, gamma-
C4 causeprimarymicrocephalyandintellectual Brussels, Belgium, 25Hospital Universitario Puerta del disability Mar, INiBICA, Cádiz, Spain, 26Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, M. Iqbal1,2,3, S. M. Baig3, U. Abdullah4, E. U. H. 27Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image Guided Makhdoom1,3, Z. Ali3, S. Khan3, M. Jameel3, A. A. Therapy, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, Noegel2,5, P. Nürnberg1,5, M. Osmond6, M. S. Hussain1,2,5 28DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusMCUniversity Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 29Institute for 1Cologne center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Clinical Genetics, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany Cologne, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry I, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, Introduction: Malformations of cortical development 3Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health Biotech- (MCD) are a group of predominantly genetic disorders due nology Division, National Institute for Biotechnology and to abnormal formation of cerebral cortex during fetal brain GeneticEngineering(NIBGE)College,PIEAS,Faisalabad, development. Main examples of MCD are lissencephaly, Pakistan, 4University Institute of Biochemistry and Bio- heterotopia, and polymicrogyria. MCD place a signiﬁcant technology (UIBB), PMAS-ARID Agriculture University, burdenonaffectedindividuals,theirfamiliesandsociety,as Rawalpindi, Pakistan, 5Center for Molecular Medicine patients often suffer from lifelong symptoms including Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, drug-resistant epilepsy, cerebral palsy, and intellectual dis- Germany, 6Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario ability. Although next-generation sequencing has become Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, broadly available worldwide, marked differences in diag- Canada nostic yield remain due to broad genetic and clinical400 J.delPicchia Introduction: Primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a neuro- Introduction: Thyroid hormone is crucial for brain and developmental disorder manifesting as cerebral cortical other tissue development, and monocarboxylate transporter hypoplasia and intellectual disability. Biallelic mutationsin 8(MCT8) facilitates T3 uptake into cells. Mutations in 25 genes have been demonstrated to cause MCPH, and the MCT8 (SL
C16 A2 gene on Xq13.2) cause Allan-Herndon- numbers are growing with more inclusive and cross dis- Dudley syndrome(AHDS), characterized by severe neuro- ciplinary collaborative approaches. cognitive impairment and abnormal thyroid function (low Materials and Methods: This study analyzed two serum T4, high T3 levels). consanguineous MCPH families (Pakistani and Syrian) Methods: Male subjects clinically suggestive of AHDS through homozygosity mapping and whole-exome sequen- underwent thyroid function testing(particularly T3), cing (WES). The functional consequences of the candidate SL
C16 A2 analysis, or WES. variants were studied by immunoﬂuorescence, confocal Results: We report 7 individuals from 5 families,3 were microscopy and Clariom™ S microarray analysis. siblings. All boys startled easily and showed progressive Results: In the Pakistani family, WES identiﬁed a hypotonia by 3-6 months-old. Key unifying features homozygous missense mutation, c.1449C>G;p.Asp483Glu, included severe motor and intellectual disability, axial of PCDHG
C4  (NM_018928.2), residing within a linkage hypotonia, progressive spasticity, microcephaly, failure to interval afore identiﬁed on chromosome 5 (LOD score of thrive. Limb dystonia was a dominant feature, and 3 3.1). In the Syrian patient (identiﬁed through Gene- demonstrated paroxysmal movements. Two had seizures/ Matcher),clinicalWESrevealedanothermissensemutation abnormal EEG, one had sleep myoclonus. MRI brain in the same gene, NM_018928.2:c.1463C>T:p.Ala488Val. showed delayed myelination with progression in 4 boys. Together with its isoforms, PCDHG
C4  is expressed on the TFT revealed high serum T3, low T4 and normal TSH in surface of neuronal cells in different combinations, thereby all. Four novel hemizygous pathogenic variants in providing cells with a unique “barcode” for self/non self- SL
C16 A2 (3 frameshift,1 missense) were identiﬁed in discrimination. PCDHG
C4  is a highly conserved Ca+2 4unrelated families. The ﬁfth variant(c.698G>T) was binding protein and in silico analyses predicted both classiﬁed VUS but in-silico analyses suggest it disease- variants to decrease its Ca+2 afﬁnity, which most likely causing, and patient showed clinical and biochemical impairs its function. We also observed endogenous and correlation. Four mothers were carriers. Upon diagnosis, transiently overexpressed PCDHG
C4  to localize within the L-thyroxine in 3 individuals was ceased as not to further nucleus and cytoplasm. In patient-derived ﬁbroblasts, exacerbate the high T3 and resulting hypermetabolism. blebbing of the nuclear envelope, micronuclei, misshapen Conclusions: We wish to highlight the combination of nuclei and higher apoptotic rates were observed. Array clinical features and abnormal TFT unique to MCT8 transcriptome analysis revealed altered expression of genes deﬁciency in prompting early diagnosis, as disease involved in cadherin signaling. conﬁrmation not only directs accurate genetic counselling Conclusions: Our ﬁndings indicate that PCDHG
C4  is a andreproductiveoptions,butalsoofferstherapeutichopeas novel MCPH gene,anditsoptimal function seemstobean ongoing clinical trials suggest encouraging response to T3 indispensable requirement for the development of a proper analogue Triac as a potential therapy. brain structure. W.P. Ong: None. H.B. Chew: None. L.H. Ngu: None. M. Iqbal: None. S.M. Baig: None. U. Abdullah: None. Y. Yakob: None. W.T. Keng: None. E.U.H. Makhdoom: None. Z. Ali: None. S. Khan: None. M. Jameel: None. A.A. Noegel: None. P. Nürnberg: 
P09 .093.A None. M. Osmond: None. M.S. Hussain: None. Biallelic MFSD2 Avariants associated with congenital microcephaly, developmental delay, and recognizable 
P09 .092.C neuroimaging features. MCT8 deﬁciency: clinical and neuroradiological fea- turesandﬁvenovelmutationsinaMalaysiancaseseries M. Scala1,2,3, G. Chua4, C. Chin4, H. Alsaif5, B. Artem6, S. Riazuddin7,S.Riazuddin8,9,M.Manzini10,M.Severino11,A. W. P. Ong1, H. B. Chew1, L. H. Ngu1, Y. Yakob2, W. T. Kuk4,H.Fan12,13,14,Y.Jamshidi15,M.BeiraghiToosi16,M. Keng1 Doosti16, E. Karimiani16, V. Salpietro17,3, E. Dadali6, G. Baydakova6, F. Konovalov18,19, E. Lozier18,19, E. 1Department of Genetics, Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala O’Connor2, Y. Sabr20, A. Alfaiﬁ21, F. Ashrafzadeh22, P. Lumpur, Malaysia, 2Unit of Molecular Diagnostics, Insti- tute for Medical Research, National Institute of Health, Kuala Lumpur, MalaysiaAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 401 Striano3,1, F. Zara3,23, F. Alkuraya24,25, H. Houlden17, R. Introduction: Major Facilitator Superfamily Domain con- Marooﬁan15, D. Silver4 taining 2a (MFSD2A) is an essential endothelial lipid transporter at the blood-brain barrier. Biallelic MFSD2A 1Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, IRCCS pathogenic variants cause autosomal recessive primary Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 2Department of microcephaly 15 (MCPH15, OMIM# 616486). We sought Neuromuscular Disorders, Institute of Neurology, Univer- to expand our knowledge of the phenotypic spectrum of sity College London,, London, United Kingdom, 3Depart- MCPH15 and demonstrate the underlying mechanism of ment of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, inactivation of the MFSD2A transporter. Genetics,MaternalandChildHealth,UniversityofGenoa, MaterialsandMethods:Wecarriedoutdetailedanalysis Genoa, Italy, 4Signature Research Program in Cardiovas- of the clinical and neuroradiological features of eight cularandMetabolicDisorders,Duke-NUSMedicalSchool, individualsfromsevenconsanguineousfamilieswithsevere Singapore, Singapore, 5Department of Genetics, King microcephaly.Geneticinvestigationwasperformedthrough Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, exome sequencing. Structural insights on the human Saudi Arabia, 6Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Mfsd2a model and in vitro biochemical assays were used Moscow, Russian Federation, 7Department of Otorhinolar- to investigate the functional impact of the identiﬁed yngology Head & Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, variants. University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, United States, Results: All patients had primary microcephaly and 8Center for Genetic Diseases, Shaheed Zulﬁqar Ali Bhutto severe developmental delay. Brain MRI showed variable Medical University, Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences, degrees of white matter reduction, ventricular enlargement, Islamabad, Pakistan, 9National Centre of Excellence in callosal hypodysgenesis, and pontine and vermian hypo- Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Lahore, plasia. ES led to the identiﬁcation of the novel biallelic Pakistan, 10Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology MFSD2A variants p.(Pro493Leu), p.(Pro164Thr), p. and Child Health Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers Robert (Arg326His), p.(Val250Phe), p.(Gln462HisfsTer17) and p. WoodJohnsonMedicalSchool,NewBrunswick,NJ,United (Cys251SerFsTer3), and the recurrent variants p. States, 11Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina (Thr198Met) and p.(Thr159Met), all resulting in either Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 12Bioinformatics Institute, Agency reduced MFSD2A expression and/or transport activity. for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 30 Conclusions:Ourstudyfurtherdelineatesthephenotypic Biopolis St., Matrix No. 07-01, Singapore, Singapore, spectrum of MCPH15, reﬁning its clinical and neuroradio- 13DepartmentofBiologicalSciences,NationalUniversityof logical characterization and supporting that MFSD2A Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 14Centre for Computa- deﬁciency causes early prenatal brain developmental tional Biology, DUKE-NUS Medical School, Singapore, disruption. We also show that poor MFSD2A expression Singapore, 15Genetics Research Centre, Molecular and despite normal transporter activity is a relevant pathome- Clinical Sciences Institute, St George’s, University of chanism in MCPH15. London, Cranmer Terrace, London, United Kingdom, Funding: NRF Singapore (NRF2016NRF-NRFI001-15); 16Department of pediatric diseases, Faculty of medicine, BMRC A*STAR; MRC (MR/
S01165 X/1, MR/
S005021 /1, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, G0601943); UCLH/UCL Biomedical Research Centre; Islamic Republic of, 17Department of Neuromuscular Rosetree Trust; Ataxia UK; MSA Trust; Brain Research Disorders, Institute of Neurology, University College UK;SparksGOSHCharity;MuscularDystrophyUK-USA; London, London, United Kingdom, 18Independent Clinical March of Dimes USA; NINDS/NIH (R01 RN
S107428 A). Bioinformatics Laboratory, Moscow, Russian Federation, M. Scala: None. G. Chua: None. C. Chin: None. H. 19Genomed Ltd., Moscow, Russian Federation, 20Depart- Alsaif: None. B. Artem: None. S. Riazuddin: None. S. mentofObstetricsandGynecology,KingSaudiUniversity, Riazuddin: None. M. Manzini: B. Research Grant Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 21Pediatrics Department, Security (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 22Department of pending grants as well as grants already received); Pediatric Diseases, Mashhad University of Medical Signiﬁcant; March of Dimes USA. M. Severino: None. Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 23Unit of A. Kuk: None. H. Fan: B. Research Grant (principal MedicalGenetics,IRCCSIstitutoGianninaGaslini,Genoa, investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants Italy, 24Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Biomedical Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Research Council of A*STAR. Y. Jamshidi: None. M. 25Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Beiraghi Toosi: None. M. Doosti: None. E. Karimiani: Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia None. V. Salpietro: None. E. Dadali: None. G. Bayda- kova: None. F. Konovalov: None. E. Lozier: None. E. O’Connor: None. Y. Sabr: None. A. Alfaiﬁ: None. F.402 J.delPicchia Ashrafzadeh: None. P. Striano: None. F. Zara: None. F. Nac Cienc Neurol, Lima, Peru, 32Univ Per Cayetano Alkuraya: None. H. Houlden: None. R. Marooﬁan: Heredia, Lima, Peru, 33Bellvitge Biomed Res Inst (IDI- None. D. Silver: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, BELL), L’Hosp Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 34Inst Med collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Genet Appl Genom, Univ Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, grants already received); Signiﬁcant; National Research 35UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 36Inst Cerveau Moelle Foundation grants, Singapore NRF2016NRF-NRFI001-15. Épinière, Pitié-Salpetrière Hosp, Paris, France, 37EPHE, PSL Res Univ, Paris, France, 38Shuang Ho Hosp; Taipei 
P09 .096.A Neurosc Inst, Taipei Med Univ, Taipei, Taiwan, 39Taipei Prevalence of Machado-Joseph disease (MJD/SCA3) VetGenHosp;NtlYang-MingUniv,Taipei,Taiwan,40Coll explained by migration and multiple founder effects Med, Univ Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States S.Martins1,2,I.P.D.Costa1,2,P.Giunti3,M.Watanabe4,H. Machado-Joseph disease (MJD/SCA3) is a neurological Sasaki5, B. C. Almeida1,2, A. Amorim1,2,6, C. Gaspar7, G. disorder caused by an unstable (CAG) in ATXN3, ranging n Nicholson8,M.L.Saraiva-Pereira9,10,S.Tsuji11,Q.Li12,S. usually61-87repeatsinpatients.AlthoughMJDisthemost Chen12, G. Landouré13,14,15, P. Maciel16, R. Zaltzman17,18, frequent dominant ataxia worldwide, our previous studies R. Sharony17,18, Y. Zhou19, J. Barros20, J. L. Loureiro21,22, suggest that de novo expansions would not explain its V. T. Cruz23,24, L. Ruano22,24, E. R. P. Brunt25, M. Marc worldwide prevalence. To date, only two major MJD Corral-Juan26, M. Hsieh27, L. Tranebjærg28, O. mutational origins have been identiﬁed: the Machado line- Olajumoke29, S. A. Ogun29, M. F. Finkel30, C. Gordon17,18, age,morerecent,mostfrequentinpartsofPortugal;andthe M. Cornejo-Olivas31,32, K. Fischbeck15, A. Matilla- ancient Joseph lineage, of Asian origin, spread worldwide. Dueñas26,V.Volpini33,O.Riess34,Z.Wu12,G.A.Rouleau7, Weextendedourpreviousstudiesandtestedthepotentialof L.B.Jardim10,35,G.Stevanin36,37,A.Brice36,P.Coutinho22, additional markers for higher-resolution MJD haplotypes. B. Soong38,39, L. P. Ranum40, A. Durr36, J. Sequeiros1,21 We analysed a total of 370 families, from 30 world popu- lations(5continents);assessedasetof30SNPsinciswith 1i3S, Univ Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2IPATIMUP, Porto, the(CAG) expansion,toestablishlineages;andgenotyped n Portugal, 3Univ Coll London Inst Neurol, Univ London, 7 STRs ﬂanking ATXN3, to construct phylogenetic net- London, United Kingdom, 4NBI TA-CNS/Immunol, Tokyo, works.InadditiontotheJoseph(n=210)andMachado(n Japan, 5Fac Med Grad Sch Medicine, Hokkaido Univ, = 90 families) pure lineages, we observed 7 sublineages, Sapporo, Japan, 6Fac Ciências, Univ Porto, Porto, differingfromthosetwomainhaplotypebackgroundsat1-3 Portugal, 7Montreal Neurol Inst; McGill Univ, Montréal, variants. Based on extended STR-haplotypes, the highest QC, Canada, 8Concord Hosp; Univ Sydney, Sidney, genediversitywasobservedinJoseph-lineagefamiliesfrom Australia, 9ICBS, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 10Hosp theUSA(0.91±0.05)andAsia (0.88±0.03), followed by Clin Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 11Univ Tokyo, central European populations (around 0.50), with Portu- Tokyo, Japan, 12Res Ce Neurol Sec Afﬁl Hosp; Zhejiang guese families showing the lowest diversity (0.18 ± 0.08). Univ Sch Med, Hangzhou, China, 13Fac Méd d’Odonto, Besides its epidemiological and historical interest, these USTTB, Bamako, Mali, 14Cen Hosp Univ Point "G", variants could be of great value to study phenotypic varia- Bamako, Mali, 15Nt Inst Neurol Dis Stroke, Bethesda, tion and genetic modiﬁers linked to these haplotypes; to MD, United States, 16Life Health Sci Res Inst, Sch study genetic instability of the (CAG) ; and for ther- n Medicine, Univ Minho, Braga, Portugal, 17Sackler Fac apeutical interventions, including gene-based targeting, Medicine, Tel Aviv Univ, TelAviv,Israel,18Meir Med Cen, namely in the best design for allele-speciﬁc ATXN3 silen- Kfar Saba, Israel, 19MedStar Med Gr, MedStar St Mary’s cing, that might be applicable tomost MJD patients. SMis Hosp MedStar Georgetown UnivHosp,Leonardtown, MD, funded by FCT:CEECIND/00684/2017 United States, 20Hosp Sto António, CHP - Cen Hosp Univ S.Martins:None.I.P.D.Costa:None.P.Giunti:None. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 21IBMC, Univ Porto, Porto, M. Watanabe: None. H. Sasaki: None. B.C. Almeida: Portugal, 22CHEDV, Feira, Portugal, 23Hosp Pedro None. A. Amorim: None. C. Gaspar: None. G. Nichol- Hispano, Matosinhos, Portugal, 24ISPUP, Porto, Portugal, son: None. M.L. Saraiva-Pereira: None. S. Tsuji: None. 25Univ HospGroningen,Groningen,Netherlands, 26Health Q. Li: None. S. Chen: None. G. Landouré: None. P. Sci Res Inst Germans Trias i Pujol (IGTP); Univ Autòn Maciel:None.R.Zaltzman:None.R.Sharony:None.Y. Barcelona, Badalona, Spain, 27Tunghai Univ, Taichung, Zhou: None.J. Barros: None. J.L.Loureiro:None.V.T. Taiwan, 28Rigshospit /Kennedy Cen; Inst Clin Med, Univ Cruz: None. L. Ruano: None. E.R.P. Brunt: None. M. Copenhagen,Copenhagen,Denmark,29LagosStUnivColl Marc Corral-Juan: None. M. Hsieh: None. L. Tra- Med (LASUCOM) /Teach Hosp (LASUTH), Ikeja, Nigeria, nebjærg: None. O. Olajumoke: None. S.A. Ogun: None. 30Physic Reg Med Cen, Naples, FL, United States, 31Inst M.F. Finkel: None. C. Gordon: None. M. Cornejo-Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 403 Olivas: None. K. Fischbeck: None. A. Matilla-Dueñas: grantandRosalindFranklinFellowshipoftheUniversityof None.V.Volpini:None.O.Riess:None.Z.Wu:None.G. Groningen (DSV). A. Rouleau: None. L.B. Jardim: None. G. Stevanin: M. Huang: None. E. Nibbeling: None. J.D. Vries: None. A. Brice: None. P. Coutinho: None. B. Soong: None. E. Brunt: None. C. Verschuuren-Bemelmans: None. L.P. Ranum: None. A. Durr: None. J. None. T. Schmidt: None. D.S. Verbeek: None. Sequeiros: None. 
P09 .098.C 
P09 .097.B Clinical and molecular characterization of a large Conserved methyltransferase NSUN5: a novel genetic MPAN cohort modiﬁer of Machado-Joseph disease (MJD/SCA3)? P. Sparber1, T. Krylova1, S. Repina1, N. Demina1, G. M. Huang1, E. Nibbeling2, J. d. Vries3, E. Brunt3, C. Rudenskaya1,I.Sharkova1,A.Sharkov2,3,4,V.Kadishev1,I. Verschuuren-Bemelmans1, T. Schmidt4, D. S. Verbeek1 Kanivets3, S. Korostelev3, E. Pomerantseva5, M. Ivanova6, S. Mikhailova7, E. Zaharova1, A. Filatova1, M. Skoblov1 1Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, Uni- versity Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Nether- 1Research center of medical genetics, Moscow, Russia, lands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Veltischev Research and Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of ClinicalInstitutefor Pediatrics Pirogov RNRMU, Moscow, Neurology, University of Groningen, University Medical Russian Federation, 3Genomed ltd., Moscow, Russian Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Institute of Federation, 4Institute of Gene Biology RAS, Moscow, Medical Genetics & Applied Genomics, University of Russian Federation, 5Genetico ltd., Moscow, Russian Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany Federation, 6Oftalmic ltd., Moscow, Russian Federation, 7Russian Children’s Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) or spinocerebellar ataxia Federation (SCA3) is caused by a coding CAG repeat expansion in Ataxin-3 (ATXN3). The CAG repeat length is inversely Introduction: Mitochondrial membrane protein-associated correlated with the age of onset (AO) but only explains up neurodegeneration (MPAN) is a rare neurological disorder to 60-70% of AO variation. Thus, additional modiﬁers of with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance and AO need to be identiﬁed. Whole exome sequencing was characterized by spasticity, optic nerve atrophy, neu- performed in 4 early AO and 5 late AO (±10 years devia- ropsychiatric abnormalities and most important iron accu- tion) patients of a large Dutch MJD/SCA3 family (n mulation in the basal ganglia. MPAN is caused by biallelic affec- =32) via Illumina HiSeq. Sequencing data were pathogenicvariantsinthe
C19 orf12geneandisconsidered ted_total analyzedviaanin-housebioinformaticspipelineandAlissa the third most common clinical form of neurodegeneration (Agilent).ATXN3proteinaggregateswerequantiﬁedusing with brain iron accumulation. Nevertheless, only few a ﬁlter-trap assay. We identiﬁed a rare non-synonymous patient cohorts were described and MPAN clinical and variant c.472G>C, p.Gly158Arg in the highly conserved genetic diversity is of great interest. methyltransferase domain of NSUN5 in the late AO cases Material and methods: For cohort formation, we but not in the cases with early AO. NSUN5 was previously analyzed the internal database in Research Centre for shown to regulate lifespan and stress resistance in yeast, Medical Genetics in Moscow and several commercial worms, and ﬂies. Upon screening of all 32 affected family genetic laboratories. Patients were examined by a clinical members, we identiﬁed 8 cases carrying the p.Gly158Arg geneticistandgavetheirinformconsenttoparticipateinthe variant, who showed an average delay in AO (7.9 ± 4.8 study. Mutation analysis was performed by whole exome years) compared tonon-carriers. Upon silencing of NSUN5 sequencing or by Sanger sequencing of 
C19 orf12 gene. in HEK293T cells transiently expressing ATXN3-148Q Functionalanalysisofc.193+5G>Avariantwasperformed increased protein aggregates were observed compared to using a minigene assay. Disease prevalence was calculated control. with the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Allelic imbalance OurpreliminaryresultspointtoNSUN5aslikelymodiﬁer was detected using RT-PCR. gene of AO in MJD/SCA3. Further studies are needed to Results: We gathered a cohort of 17 conﬁrmed MPAN conﬁrm if the p.Gly158Arg variant changes NSUN5’s patients with detailed clinical information. The common modifyingroleonATXN3proteinaggregationandtoxicity. c.210_214del variant accounted for 73,5% of all the China Scholarship Council (CSC) #201608440359 and de pathogenicalleles.Wedetectedfourpreviouslyundescribed Jan Kornelis de Cock Stichting grant (MH), JPND eRARE variants and several patient with an unusual clinical presentation. The estimated MPAN prevalence was404 J.delPicchia 1:600000.Inoneheterozygouscarrier,apronouncedallelic abundant in the brain, where it regulates the transport and imbalance with lower expression levels of the wild-type translation of mRNAs of genes involved in synaptic allele was detected. plasticity. As other ND-related proteins, it is a component Conclusion: We describe the third largest cohort of of stress granules and harbours a prion-like domain (PRD). MPAN patients to date with novel clinical ﬁndings. Our In accordance with the in silico predictions suggesting that work expand the clinical and mutational spectrum the p.
P512 L mutation increases its aggregation propensity, of MPAN. CAPRIN1
P512 L overexpression causes the formation of P.Sparber:None.T.Krylova:None.S.Repina:None. insoluble aggregates in transfected HEK293T cells. To N. Demina: None. G. Rudenskaya: None. I. Sharkova: investigate themutationeffects inneurons,we successfully None. A. Sharkov: None. V. Kadishev: None. I. introducedthemissensemutationinhumaniPSCsusingthe Kanivets: None. S. Korostelev: None. E. Pomerantseva: CRISPR/Cas9 system. None. M. Ivanova: None. S. Mikhailova: None. E. Conclusions: Our results suggest that CAPRIN1
P512 L is Zaharova: None. A. Filatova: None. M. Skoblov: None. prone to aggregation. As CAPRIN1 deﬁciency is linked to autism-spectrum disorders (ASD) in humans, we identify 
P09 .100.B CAPRIN1 as a novel gene implicated in NDs, and a novel A recurrent de novo CAPRIN1 mutation causes a novel class of mutations perturbing CAPRIN1 function in a progressive early onset neurodegenerative disorder dominant manner. A. Delle Vedove: None. G. Zanni: None. M. Eck- A. Delle Vedove1,2,3, G. Zanni4, M. Eckenweiler5, M. enweiler: None. M.Storbeck:None.S. Barresi: None. S. Storbeck1,2,3,S.Barresi6,S.Pizzi6,S.Hosseinibarkooie1,2,3, Pizzi: None. S. Hosseinibarkooie: None. N. Mendoza- N. Mendoza-Ferreira1,2,3, I. Hölker1,2,3, F. Körber7, M. Ferreira: None. I. Hölker: None. F. Körber: None. M. Kye1,2, E. Bertini4, J. Kirschner8, M. Tartaglia4, B. Kye: None. E. Bertini: None. J. Kirschner: None. M. Wirth1,2,3 Tartaglia: None. B. Wirth: None. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 2Center 
P09 .101.C for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, Implementation of WES-based gene panel testing in 3Institute for Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 4Department patients with adult-onset neurological disorders at the of Neurosciences, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, University Hospital of Ghent: a retrospective observa- Rome, Italy, 5Clinic for Neuropediatrics and Muscular tional analysis of 176 patients Disorders, Freiburg, Germany, 6Genetics and Rare Dis- eases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino N. Schuermans1,2, E. Debackere1,2, S. Symoens1,2, B. Gesù, Rome, Italy, 7Institute of Diagnostic and Interven- Poppe1,2, P. Santens3,4, J. De Bleecker3,4, D. Hemelsoet3,4, tional Radiology, Cologne, Germany, 8Department of B. Dermaut1,2 Neuropediatrics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Ger- many 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Introduction: Neurodegenerative disorders (NDs) repre- FacultyofMedicineandHealthSciences,GhentUniversity, sent increasingly prevalent and severely debilitating dis- Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, Ghent Uni- eases. In several cases, their molecular diagnosis remains versityHospital,Ghent,Belgium,4DepartmentofHeadand elusive. Skin, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent Materials and methods: Trio-based WES and Sanger University, Ghent, Belgium sequencingled tothe identiﬁcationof thedisease-causative variant. Its functional impact is being investigated in Introduction: Neurodegenerative inherited diseases are an HEK293T cells and iPSCs. important cause of morbidity and mortality. A molecular Results:Wedescribetwoindividualsfromtwounrelated diagnosisiselementaryforgeneticcounselingandpotential non-consanguineous families with an identical de novo therapeutic strategies. In January 2019 6 novel WES-based mutationinCAPRIN1(CellCycleAssociatedProtein1):an gene panels were introduced at the Ghent University Hos- 8 year-old girl with progressive muscular atrophy, who pital to facilitate diagnostics in patients with neurodegen- developed ataxia and cognitive decline at 11 years, and a 7 erativediseases.Inthisstudywewanttoestablishtheadded year-old boy with spinocerebellar ataxia and learning value of these panels and deﬁne patient- and disease- difﬁculties. Both carry an identical de novo c.1535C>T speciﬁc characteristics associated with a high variant (p.Pro512Leu) which is not reported in gnomAD diagnostic yield. and affects a highly conserved residue. CAPRIN1 isAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 405 Methods: 6 novel gene panels were introduced in disorder characterized by global developmental delay and diagnosticsettingattheCentreforMedicalGeneticsGhent: severe intellectual disability. Microcephaly, progressive 1. Ataxia/spasticity 2. Leukodystrophy 3. Paroxysmal/ cortical atrophy, cerebellar hypoplasia and delayed myeli- episodic disorders 4. Movement disorders 5. Neurodegen- nation are neurological hallmarks in affected individuals. eration with brain iron accumulation 6. Progressive NMIHBA is caused by biallelic variants in PRUN
E1  myoclonic epilepsy encodingpruneexopolyphosphatase1.Weprovidein-depth Results:FromJanuarythe1stuptillDecember31st2019 clinical description of two affected siblings harboring 176caseshavebeenanalyzed.Themeanageofthepatients compound heterozygous variant alleles, c.383G>A (p. was 50 years with a majority of the patients being adults Arg128Gln), c.520G>T (p.Gly174*) in PRUN
E1 . To gain (98%).Theleukodystrophy panelwasmostpopular(43%), insights into disease biology, we biochemically character- followed by the ataxia/spasticity panel (26%) and the ized missense variants within the conserved N-terminal movement disorders panel (20%). The overall diagnostic aspartic acid-histidine-histidine (DHH) motif and provide yield was 15%. In another 15% variants of unknown evidence that they result in the destabilization of protein signiﬁcance were found. The diagnostic yield was highest structure and/or loss of exopolyphosphatase activity. among patients presenting with spinocerebellar ataxia Genetic ablation of Prune1 results in midgestational leth- (30%). The causal mutations were missense (62%), ality in mice, associated with perturbations to embryonic nonsense (25%), splice-site (10%) and deletion (3%) growthandvasculardevelopment.Ourﬁndingssuggestthat mutations. NMIHBA results from hypomorphic variant alleles in Conclusions: Gene panel testing is a successful tool to humans and underscore the potential key role of PRUN
E1  diagnose inherited neurological diseases. The overall exopolyphoshatase activity in neurodevelopment. diagnostic yield after analysis of 176 cases was 15%, with H. Nistala: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- another 15% of potential but unsure diagnoses. Patients cant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. E. Ownership suffering from ataxia and/or spastic paraplegia were most Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual likely to obtain a molecular diagnosis (30%). property); Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. J. N. Schuermans: None. E. Debackere: None. S. Dronzek: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: A. Employment Symoens: None. B. Poppe: None. P. Santens: None. J. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, De Bleecker: None. D. Hemelsoet: None. B. Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or Dermaut: None. other intellectual property); Modest; Regeneron Pharma- ceuticals,Inc.S.Chim: A.Employment(fullorpart-time); 
P09 .102.A Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. E. Ownership NMIHBA causing PRUN
E1  variants result in loss of Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual exopolyphosphatase activity. property); Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. S. Rajamani: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; H. Nistala1, J. Dronzek1, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui1, S. Chim1, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest S. Rajamani2, S. Nuwayhid2, D. Delgado2, E. Burke3, E. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Karaca4,M.C.Franklin2,P.Sarangapani2,M.Podgorski2, Modest;RegeneronPharmaceuticals,Inc.S.Nuwayhid:A. Y. Tang2, M. G. Dominguez2, M. Withers5, R. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Deckelbaum2, C. J. Scheonherr1, W. A. Gahl3, M. C. Pharmaceuticals, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock Malicdan3, B. Zambrowicz2, N. W. Gale2, R. A. Gibbs5, W. options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; K. Chung6, J. R. Lupski5, A. N. Economides1 Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. D. Delgado: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharma- 1RegeneronGeneticsCenter,Tarrytown,NY,UnitedStates, ceuticals, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, 2Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Tarrytown, NY, United patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Regeneron States, 3Undiagnosed Diseases Program Translational Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. E. Burke: None. E. Karaca: None. Laboratory, NHGRI, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Uni- M.C. Franklin: A. Employment (full or part-time); versity of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, United States, 5Bay- Signiﬁcant;RegeneronPharmaceuticals,Inc..E.Ownership lor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual 6Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, property); Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. P. United States Sarangapani: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- cant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. E. Ownership Neurodevelopmental disorder with microcephaly, hypoto- Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual nia, and variable brain anomalies (NMIHBA) is an auto- property); Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. M. somalrecessiveneurodevelopmentalandneurodegenerative Podgorski: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant;406 J.delPicchia Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest Bangladesh. Through the Synaptopathies and Paroxysmal (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Syndromes (SYNaPS) Study Group, we aimed to elucidate Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Y. Tang: A. thegenetic basis ofneurodevelopmentaldisorders affecting Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron the Bangladeshi patients. Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock Methods:Weappliedwholeexomesequencing(WES)in options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; a cohort of 50 Bangladeshi families with primarily Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. M.G. Dominguez: A. Mendelian neurodevelopmental diseases. In families with- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron out likely pathogenic variants in known disease causing Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria genes; novel candidate genes were prioritized according to (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Signiﬁ- functional impact, rarity in multiple databases especially in cant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. M. Withers: None. Southeast Asia population, presence in multiple families R.A. Deckelbaum: A. Employment (full or part-time); with overlapping phenotypes, mutational tolerance of the Signiﬁcant;RegeneronPharmaceuticals,Inc..E.Ownership gene,animalstudies,predicteddeleteriousnessbyseveralin Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual silicotoolsandexpressionoftheproteininaffectedtissues. property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. C. Results:Wefoundknownpathogenicornovelvariantsin J. Scheonherr: A. Employment (full or part-time); known disease genes with phenotypic expansion in 18 Signiﬁcant;RegeneronPharmaceuticals,Inc..E.Ownership families and 12 novel candidates in 10 families including Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual RTN4R, ITGB8 and ACBD6. Overall, molecular diagnosis property);Signiﬁcant;RegeneronPharmaceuticals,Inc..W. was provided by variants in known genes in 36 families A. Gahl: None. M.C. Malicdan: None. B. Zambrowicz: (72%) and by novel candidate genes in additional 10 A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron families,resultinginapotentialmoleculardiagnosticrateof Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock 92%. Homozygous variants were causative in only 34.7%, options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; despite high rate of consanguinity in our cohort. Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. N.W. Gale: A. Employ- Conclusions: Our study shows the beneﬁts of WES ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharma- analysis in neurodevelopmental disorders in non-European ceuticals, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, populations and highlights ongoing difﬁculties in variant patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Regen- interpretation. In our cohort, only six of identiﬁed variants eron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. R.A. Gibbs: None. W.K. werepreviouslyreported,theremainingwerenovelvariants Chung: None. J.R. Lupski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, and hence interpretation of pathogenicity was challenging stock options, patent or other intellectual property); especially in cases with atypical phenotypes. Signiﬁcant; 23andMe, Lasergen Inc.. F. Consultant/Advi- H. Morsy: None. V. Salpietro: None. S. Banu: None. sory Board; Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc, M. Zaman: None. S. Efthymiou: None. R. Maarooﬁan: NovartisInternationalAG,.A.N.Economides:A.Employ- None. A. Fragkouli: None. T. Bourinaris: None. J. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharma- vandrovcova: None. H. Houlden: None. ceuticals, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Regen- 
P09 .104.C eron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.. Update on a sponsored no-cost epilepsy gene panel for seizureonsetbetween2-4yearsofage:Resultsfrom682 
P09 .103.B tests Exome Sequencing in Bangladeshi families with neuro- developmental disorders S.Aradhya1,T.Y.Pang2,F.Leal-Pardinas2,M.Bailey2,S. Koh3, J. J. Millichap4, R. Truty1, E. C. Wirrell5 H. Morsy1,2, V. Salpietro1, S. Banu3, M. Zaman3, S. Efthymiou1, R. Maarooﬁan1, A. Fragkouli1, T. Bourinaris1, 1Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2BioMarin SYNaPS Study Group, J. vandrovcova1, H. Houlden1 Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA, United States, 3Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States, 1InstituteofNeurology,London,UnitedKingdom,2Medical 4Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Research Institute, Alexandria, Egypt, 3ICH and SSF Chicago, IL, United States, 5Mayo Clinic, Novato, CA, Hospital Mirpur, Dhaka, Bangladesh United States Background: Neurodevelopmental disorders are char- Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis Type 2 (CLN2) disease acterized by high clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Their oftenpresentswithepilepsyatapproximatelythreeyearsof molecular basis had not been well characterized in ageaccompaniedbyahistoryoflanguagedelay.BehindtheAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 407 Seizure®(BTS)isaUS-based,sponsored,no-cost,targeted, 
P09 .105.A next-generationsequencingepilepsygenepanelforchildren A copy number variation map of pediatric neuropsy- suspected to have genetic epilepsy. The goal is to utilize chiatric traits BTS to lower the age of CLN2 disease diagnosis. Eligibility criteria were: age-at-test-order between 24-60 M. Zarrei1, D. Merico1,2, C. L. Burton3, W. Engchuan1, E. months and unprovoked seizure onset >24 months. BTS J. Higginbotham1, J. Wei1, J. R. MacDonald1, B. uses an epilepsy gene panel of 180+ genes with the option Thiruvahindrapuram1,A.J.S.Chan1,T.Nalpathamkalam1, to include preliminarily associated genes. L. J. Strug1,4, R. F. Wintle1, R. K. C. Yuen1, M. Woodbury- Non-BTS epilepsy gene panel testing, which includes no Smith1,5, C. R. Marshall1,6,7, P. D. Arnold8,9,10, J. limitationforage-at-test-orderandage-of-seizure-onset,has Crosbie3,11, R. J. Schachar3,11,12, S. W. Scherer1,13 showna15.5%(n=1234/7939)moleculardiagnosticyield (MDx)overalland0.05%speciﬁcallyinvolvingTP
P1 gene 1The Centre for Applied Genomics, Program in Genetics (CLN2disease).WithintheBTSprogram,theoverallMDx and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, was 6.74% (n = 46/682). However, the yield of TP
P1  Toronto,ON,Canada,2Deep GenomicsInc.,Toronto,ON, positives was 0.88%, representing a 17.6-fold increase in Canada, 3Neurosciences and Mental Health Program, The comparison to non-BTS cohort. Age of CLN2 disease Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Divi- diagnosis was earlier than as described in the literature sion of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, (3.89-year versus 5-year). CLN2 disease was not a University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Institute of suspected diagnosis for 5 out of 6 individuals tested using Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, BTS. Other genes that contributed to positive molecular United Kingdom, 6Genome Diagnostics, Department of diagnosesintheBTSprogramincludedCACNA1A,CHD2, Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick EHMT1, FOXG1, FRR
S1 L, GRIN2A, IQSE
C2 , KANS
L1 , Children,Toronto,ON,Canada,7LaboratoryMedicineand KIAA2022, MEC
P2 , PAC
S1 , PCDH19, PPT1, PURA, Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, SCN1A, SCN2A, SL
C6 A1, STX1B, SYNGA
P1 , TS
C1  and Canada, 8Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The ZEB2. Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 9Mathi- The BTS program has facilitated earlier CLN2 disease son Centre for Mental Health Research and Education, identiﬁcation. These ﬁndings indicate that broad epilepsy University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 10Depart- gene panel tests can increase diagnostic yield for CLN2 mentsofPsychiatryandMedicalGenetics,HotchkissBrain disease and simultaneously identify other genetic causes of Institute, Cumming School of Medicine, University of epilepsy. Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 11Department of Psychia- S. Aradhya: A. Employment (full or part-time); try,UniversityofToronto,Toronto,ON,Canada,12Institute Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Canada, 13Department of Molecular Genetics and Invitae. T.Y. Pang: A. Employment (full or part-time); McLaughlin Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc.. E. Ownership Canada Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. F. ‘Spit for Science’ is a cohort of over 17,000 youth (6-17 Leal-Pardinas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- years of age) with associated psychiatric phenotype mea- niﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc.. E. Ownership surements and saliva DNA collection. Quantitative pheno- Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual type data were collected for attention deﬁcit hyperactivity property); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. M. disorder (ADHD), obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), Bailey: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; and response inhibition using Stop-Signal Reaction Time BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (SSRT). We genotyped unrelated Caucasians (n = 4,817) (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); using Illumina HumanCoreExome beadchips. We per- Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc.. S. Koh: None. formedglobalandfunctionalgene-setburdenanalyses,and J.J. Millichap: None. R. Truty: A. Employment (full or locus association test on rare CNVs using linear regression part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest against different traits. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); We identiﬁed CNVs linked with neuropsychiatric dis- Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E.C. Wirrell: F. Consultant/Advisory ordersin191(4.0%)participantswithelevatedstandardized Board; Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Biocodex. z-scores for all traits. These CNVs included i) sex- chromosome and autosomal aneuploidies in 12 (0.25%) individuals, ii) 13 unique genomic loci previously impli- cated in NDD in 52 (1.1%) different participants, and iii)408 J.delPicchia CNVs affecting genes with known functions in the human Results:Damagingvariantshasbeninfoundin7.84%of brain such as ASTN2, DLGA
P2 , MACROD2, NRXN1, and the cases, in 51 patiens 16 missense substitutions were others.ADHDtraitswereassociatedwithincreaseddeletion found in the NOTCH3 gene. Twelve have been previously burden(p=0.014),whereastherewasanincreasedburden describedaspathogenicvariants(p.R90C,
C146 R,
C208 R, of duplication for SSRT (p = 0.034). We found no global 
C440 R 
C448 R, 
C75 R, R110C R141C, R153C, R169C, CNV burden for OCD traits. ADHD traits showed R182C, R1076C), while 4 were novel, likely pathogenic signiﬁcant enrichment for deletions in genes associated alterations (p. 
C222 S, G420C, R133C, R207C). These with mouse neurophenotypes (p = 0.009) and with human variants were not present in controls and were predicted as brain gene expression (p = 0.04). OCD and SSRT traits disease causing by in silico analysis. showed enrichment for duplications in genes expressed in Conclusions: In the Hungarian cohort the most common human brain (p = 0.004 and 0.016, respectively). SSRT rare variant was the R90C NOTCH3 gene, the mutation traits showed enrichment for duplications in eight loci: frequency was, 2.5%. In the Caucasian population this 1q21.1, 1q42.3, 2q37.3, 9q22.2, 12q13.13, 18p11.21, and variantisthemostfrequentpathogenicvariant.Wedetected 22q11.21. rare variants characteristic of Asian population as well These results highlight the importance of mapping the (R133C).Wecanconcludethattheheneticepidemiological prevalence and impact of rare variants in community data of the Hungarian pateints with CADASIL can be samples to improve understanding of pediatric mental explained by the Hungarian history. This study was health. supported by the Hungarian Brain Research Program M.Zarrei:None.D.Merico:None.C.L.Burton:None. (KTIA_NAP_ 2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002). W. Engchuan: None. E.J. Higginbotham: None. J. Wei: F. Szabo: None. Z. Grosz: None. P. Balicza: None. A. None. J.R. MacDonald: None. B. Thiruvahindrapuram: Gal: None. B. Gunda: None. K. Sas: None. M. None.A.J.S.Chan:None.T.Nalpathamkalam:None.L. Molnár: None. J. Strug: None. R.F. Wintle: None. R.K.C. Yuen: None. M. Woodbury-Smith: None. C.R. Marshall: None. P.D. 
P09 .107.C Arnold:None.J.Crosbie:None.R.J.Schachar:None.S. Biallelic loss-of-function NRROS variants impairing W. Scherer: None. active TGF-β1 delivery cause a severe infantile onset neurodegenerative condition with intracranial 
P09 .106.B calciﬁcation Genetic epidemiology analysis of theNOTCH3gene mutations in Hungary X. Dong1,2, N. B. Tan1,2,3, K. B. Howell1,2,4, S. Barresi5, J. L. Freeman1,4, D. Vecchio5, M. Piccione6, F. Clementina F. Szabo1, Z. Grosz1, P. Balicza1, A. Gal1, B. Gunda2, K. Radio5, D. Calame7,8, S. Zong1, S. Eggers1,3, I. E. Sas3, M. Molnár1 Scheffer1,2,9, T. Y. Tan1,2,3, N. J. Van Bergen1,2, M. Tartaglia5, J. Christodoulou1,2,3, S. M. White1,2,3 1SemmelweisUniversity,InstituteofGenomicMedicineand Rare Disorders, Budapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis Uni- 1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, Vic- versity, Department of Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, toria, Australia, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of 3Albert Szent-Györgyi Clinical Center, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 3Victorian Clin- Szeged, Szeged, Hungary ical Genetics Services, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 4Department of Neurology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Background: Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy Parkville,Victoria, Australia, 5Genetics and Rare Diseases with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, (CADASIL) isa hereditary, small vessel disease associated Rome, Italy, 6Department of Science for Health Promotion with resurrent stroke syndrome, migraine, progressive and Mother and Child Care, Università degli Studi di cognitive decline, and psychiatric disturbances. The Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 7Baylor College of Medicine, worldwide prevalence of CADASIL has been estimated at Houston, TX, United States, 8Texas Children’s Hospital, approximately 5:100,000. Houston, TX, United States, 9Department of Medicine, Methods: Total coding region ofthe NOTCH3 gene was University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Heidelberg, analyzed with Sanger or NGS sequencing in 650 patients Victoria, Australia (359male,291female;meanage45.27±15.95years)with the MRI sign of small vessel disease. In our cohort non Introduction: NRROS is a leucine-rich repeat-containing genetic risk factors for cerebovascular disorders have been proteinthatassociateswithlatentTGF-β1andanchorsiton excluded. the cell surface, a requirement for activation of TGF-β1 inAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 409 microglia.Wereportsixindividualsfromfourfamilieswith is essential for neurotransmitter release. Dysregulation of biallelic variants in NRROS. All affected individuals had neurotransmitter releasing process has been recognized as refractory epilepsy, developmental regression, and reduced the mechanistic basis for neurological disorders. Here, we white matter volume with delayed myelination. Intracranial describe two patients with de novo pathogenic variants in calciﬁcation was detected in three individuals. These fea- NSF with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. tures are consistent with those observed in the Nrros Clinical Report: Patient 1 was a girl with no signiﬁcant knockout mouse. family medical history. She was born at 37 weeks of Methods: Confocal microscopy in HEK293T cells was gestation by uneventful delivery after an uneventful used to investigate the localisation of wild-type and mutant pregnancy. Immediately after birth, she developed contin- NRROSproteins.Flowcytometrywasperformedtoanalyse uous tonic seizures. Electroencephalography showed burst- theinﬂuenceofmutantNRROSproteinsinanchoringlatent suppressionpatterns.Patient2wasa1-year-oldgirlwithno TGF-β1 to the cell surface. signiﬁcant family medical history. In her prenatal period, Results: Wild-type and mutant NRROS proteins were she exhibited failure to thrive, fetal hydrops, and anemia. found to co-localise with latent TGF-β1 intracellularly. After birth, she had no spontaneous respiration, which However, ﬂow cytometry showed that the mutant NRROS required mechanical ventilation, and had frequent myoclo- proteins failed to anchor latent TGF-β1 on the cell surface, nic seizures. Her electroencephalography showed burst- as compared to wild-type NRROS. Moreover, wild-type suppression patterns. NRROS rescued the defect of the disease-associated Results: Trio-based exome sequencing revealed a de mutants in presenting latent TGF-β1 to the cell surface. novoheterozygousvariantintheNSFgene(NM_006178.3) Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest that loss of NRROS in both the probands: c.1375G>A chr17:44782125G>A functioncausesaseverechildhood-onsetneurodegenerative (GRCh37) p.Ala459Thr in patient 1 and c.1688C>T condition with features suggestive of a disordered response chr17:44791279C>T (GRCh37) p.Pro563Leu in patient 2. to inﬂammation. Functional analysis: When ectopically expressed in the Funding: Research at Murdoch Children’s Research developing eye of Drosophila in the presence of normal ﬂy Institute is supported by the Victorian Government’s protein, the mutant human NSF protein severely affected Operational Infrastructure Support Program and the Harbig eyedevelopment,whilethewild-typehumanproteinhadno Foundation. NBT acknowledges the Australian NHMRC detectable effect under the same conditions. This ﬁnding CREinNeurocognitiveDisordersfortheirsupport.KBHis suggested that the two variants had a dominant negative supported by funding from the Australian NHMRC. MT effect. acknowledges the Italian Ministry of Health (Ricerca Conclusions: De novo heterozygous mutations in the Corrente 2019) and Fondazione Bambino Gesù (Vite NSF cause early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. Coraggiose). Research grant: The Japan Agency for Medical Research X.Dong:None.N.B.Tan:None.K.B.Howell:None.S. and Development (J
P18 ek0109301, J
P19 gk0110038, and Barresi: None. J.L. Freeman: None. D. Vecchio: None. J
P18 ek0109288h0002). M. Piccione: None. F. Clementina Radio: None. D. H. Suzuki: None. T. Yoshida: None. N. Morisada: Calame: None. S. Zong: None. S. Eggers: None. I.E. None. T. Uehara: None. K. Kosaki: None. T. Takano- Scheffer:None.T.Y.Tan:None.N.J.VanBergen:None. Shimizu: None. T. Takenouchi: None. M. Tartaglia: None. J. Christodoulou: None. S.M. White: None. 
P09 .109.B Homozygous variants of PAC
S1 cause an autosomal 
P09 .108.A recessive developmental and epileptic encephalopathy De novo NSF mutations cause early infantile epileptic encephalopathy N. Chatron1,2, A. Rad3, S. Efthymiou4, A. Labalme1, B. Vona3,M.Carneiro5,K. Saeidi6,7,H.Houlden4,T. Sultan8, H. Suzuki1, T. Yoshida2, N. Morisada3, T. Uehara1, K. R. Marooﬁan4, G. LESCA1,9 Kosaki1, T. Takano-Shimizu4, T. Takenouchi1 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,HospicesCivilsdeLyon, 1Keio University, Tokyo, Japan, 2Kyoto University, Kyoto, Lyon,France,2InstitutNeuroMyoGène,CNRSUMR5310- Japan, 3Kobe Children’s Hospital, Hyogo, Japan, 4Kyoto INSERM U1217, Université de Lyon Université Claude Institute of Technology, Kyoto, Japan BernardLyon1,Lyon,France,Lyon,France,3Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Tuebin- Introduction: N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) gen Hearing Research Centre (THRC), Eberhard Karls plays a critical role in intracellular vesicle transport, which University, Tuebingen, Germany, 4Department of410 J.delPicchia Neuromuscular Disorders Institute of Neurology, Univer- 
P09 .117.A sity College London, Queen Square, London, United Mitochondrial-speciﬁc polygenic risk score is associated Kingdom, 5Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hospices with increased Parkinson’s disease risk Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 6Neuroscience Research Center, Institute of Neuropharmacology, Kerman Univer- Z. Landoulsi1, D. Bobbili1,2, S. Pachcheck1, G. Arena3, sityofMedicalSciences,Kerman,Iran,IslamicRepublicof, NCER-PD Consortium, R. Krüger3,4,5, P. May1 7Department of Medical Genetics, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 1Bioinformatics Core, Luxembourg Centre for Systems 8Department of Pediatric Neurology, Institute of Child Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Belvaux, Luxem- Health, TheChildren’s Hospital Lahore, Lahore,Pakistan, bourg,2MegenoS.A.,Esch-sur-Alzette,Luxembourg,3Clin- 9Institut NeuroMyoGène, CNRS UMR 5310 - INSERM ical and Experimental Neuroscience, Luxembourg Centre U1217, Université de Lyon Université Claude Bernard for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Lyon 1, Lyon, France Belvaux, Luxembourg, 4Parkinson Research Clinic, Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg, PAC
S1  (OMIM 607492) encodes a trans-Golgi-membrane 5TransversalTranslationalMedicine,LuxembourgInstitute trafﬁc regulator that directs protein cargo and several viral of Health, Strassen, Luxembourg envelope proteins. It is upregulated during human embryonic brain development and has low expression after Introduction:Strongevidenceindicatesthatmitochondrial birth. Homozygous KO mice are lethal. A recurrent mis- dysfunction is implicated in Parkinson’s disease (PD) sense variant was reported in patients with Schuurs- pathophysiology. The underlying mechanism of mitochon- Hoeijmakers syndrome (OMIM 615009), an autosomal drial processes in the sporadic form of PD is still largely dominant disorder characterized by intellectual disability, unknown. Polygenic risk scores (PRS) gather the total risk distinct craniofacial features, and variable additional con- for disease in an individual based on common variants, genitalabnormalities.Seizuresofvarioustypesarefrequent where the risk alleles and their effects are deﬁned by pre- andusuallyrespondwelltoantiepilepticdrugs.Thisvariant vious genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Here we was suggested to act via a dominant-negative or a gain-of- evaluate whether an additive genetic risk of variants from function mechanism. No other pathogenic variant has been gene-sets is associated with increased PD risk. reported to date. We report on four patients from three MaterialandMethods:ALuxembourgishcohortof656 unrelated families, with homozygous variants of PAC
S1 . controls and 633 PD patients were genotyped on the They presented with severe developmental delay, poor eye Neurochip array. PRS for each individual were calculated contact, absent language. Seizures started in infancy. They with PRSice-2, using the GWAS data from Nalls et al., were of various types (focal seizures in one patient, spams 2018. The PRS was tested for association with PD status in another one and generalized seizures in three patients) with mitochondrial and other pathway-related gene-sets. and drug resistant. EEG showed multifocal spikes or gen- The Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI) eralized sharp waves. Brain MRI showed variable patterns dataset included 363 PD cases and 165 controls genotyped in patients, including delayed myelination or cerebral atro- with NeuroX chip. phy. Patients did not show the dysmorphic features remi- Results:Theresultsshowasigniﬁcantlyhighercommon niscent of Schuurs-Hoeijmakers syndrome. One family variant burden in PD cases compared to controls in carried a homozygous stop variant and the two others dif- mitochondrial gene-sets (odds ratio: 1.31 [1.18, 1.48] per ferent unreported homozygous missense variants, affecting one standard deviation; empirical-P = 8.9 e-04). The PRS highly conserved amino acids. These variants were absent was also associated with PD status within the known PD or with a very low occurrence in the gnomAD v2.1 data- genes, lysosomalandautophagygene-sets. Thesameresult base. These observations suggest that biallelic variants of was observed with the (PPMI) data. PAC
S1  can cause a phenotype of developmental epileptic Conclusions: Our study suggests that cumulative effect encephalopathy. Functional analyses will be performed to of common variants in mitochondrial genes signiﬁcantly characterize the consequences of these variants. contribute to PD. Association tests targeting speciﬁc N.Chatron:None.A.Rad:None.S.Efthymiou:None. mitochondrial pathways and functional studies could A. Labalme: None. B. Vona: None. M. Carneiro: None. determine the level of involvement of each mitochondrial K. Saeidi: None. H. Houlden: None. T. Sultan: None. R. process in the disease onset and progression. Marooﬁan: None. G. Lesca: None. Z. Landoulsi: None. D. Bobbili: None. S. Pachcheck: None.G. Arena:None. R.Krüger: None.P. May: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 411 
P09 .120.A a single pathogenic or likely- pathogenic variant in PNKP. Genetic and clinical report of ten additional patients This study expands considerably the number of AOA4 with PNKP-related ataxia (AOA4) patients genetically characterized by our group, from 11 reportedin2015toatotalof21.Further,conﬁrmsAOA4as S.Sousa1,2,J.Oliveira1,2,J.Parente-Freixo1,2,I.Alonso1,2, among the most frequent subtypes of recessive ataxia in P. Silva1,2, A. Moreira3, L. Valdemar4, M. Pereira5, C. Portugal. Considering the limited number of patients Soares6, M. Rosas6, M. Leão7, L. Azurara8, S. Rocha9, J. reported in the literature so far (n = 8), studies in other Ferreira8, J. Damásio1,2,10, J. Sequeiros1,2 populations are much needed. S. Sousa: None. J. Oliveira: None. J. Parente-Freixo: 1CGPP-IBMC, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, None.I.Alonso:None.P.Silva:None.A.Moreira:None. 2i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, L. Valdemar: None. M. Pereira: None. C. Soares: None. Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de M. Rosas: None. M. Leão: None. L. Azurara: None. S. Neurologia,HospitaldeDonaEstefânia,CentroHospitalar Rocha: None. J. Ferreira: None. J. Damásio: None. J. de Lisboa Central, EPE, Lisboa, Portugal, 4Serviço de Sequeiros: None. Neurologia, Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo de Ponta Delgada, EPE, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 5Serviço de 
P09 .121.B Neurologia,CentroHospitalareUniversitáriodeCoimbra, Genome-Wide Association Study of Postoperative Cog- EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Consulta de Neurologia Geral, nitive Dysfunction in older surgical patients Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, EPE, Porto, Portugal, 7Serviço de Genética Médica, Centro Hospitalar N. Göttel1,2, M. Rickenbacher1, C. S. Reinbold3, S. Universitário de São João / Faculdade de Medicina da Herms3,4,5, P. Hoffmann3,4,5, S. Cichon3,4, A. U. Monsch6, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 8Serviço de L. A. Steiner1,2 Neurologia Pediátrica, Hospital de São Francisco Xavier, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Ocidental, EPE, Lisboa, 1Department of Anesthesia, Prehospital Emergency Medi- Portugal, 9Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de Braga, cine and Pain Therapy, University Hospital Basel, Braga, Portugal, 10Centro Hospitalar Universitário do University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Department of Porto, Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Portugal Clinical Research, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3Human Genomics Research Group, Department of Bio- Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia (AOA) is the second most medicine,UniversityofBasel,Basel,Switzerland,4Institute frequent recessive ataxia in Portugal. It is characterized by of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital childhood-onset cerebellar ataxia, sensorimotor axonal Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5Institute of Human Genetics, neuropathy, oculomotor apraxia and dystonia; with a vari- University of Bonn, School of Medicine & University able degree of cognitive impairment. Diallelic variants in Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 6Memory Clinic, Univer- the polynucleotide kinase 3’-phosphatase (PNKP) gene sity Center for Medicine of Aging Basel, Felix Platter were shown to be the cause of AOA4, by our group, in Hospital, Basel, Switzerland 2015. We now reviewed genetic and clinical data from a sequential series with pathogenic variants in PNKP, 2015 Introduction:Postoperativecognitivedysfunction(POCD) through 2019, to update mutational spectrum and reassess is a common neurocognitive complication after surgery, phenotypes; we report 10 additional AOA4 patients. We particularly in elderly patients. Various studies suggest used Sanger sequencing of PNKP or a NGS multigene genetic risk factors for POCD. This prospective cohort (whole-exomebased)panelforrecessive ataxias,according study aimed to detect genome-wide associations with toclinicalrequest;10PortugueseAOApatients(7families), POCD in older patients. were found to be homozygotes (2 families) or compound Methods: Studyparticipants aged≥65yearscompleteda heterozygotes (5 families), bearing 4 known PNKP patho- battery of neuropsychological tests consisting of the genic variants: c.1221_1223del (p.Thr408del) and Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s c.1123G>T (p.Gly375Trp) (each present in 4 families), Disease-Neuropsychological Assessment Battery c.1315_1330delinsGGGGACG (p.Arg439_Pro444de- (CERAD-NAB), Trail Making Tests A and B, and the linsGlyAspAla)andc.1029+2T>C(r.spl)(eachpresentin1 Phonemic Fluency Test (S-words) before, and at 1 week family); and 2 novel variants: c.1510del (p.Arg504Glyfs*) and3monthsaftermajornoncardiacsurgery.Testvariables and c.1282_1283insACAAACCCAGAC (p.Ala428de- were converted into standard scores (z-scores) based on linsAspLysProArgPro), for which pathogenicity is being demographicvariables.POCDwasdiagnosedifthedecline conﬁrmed.Incidentally,throughmultigenepanels,sixother was >1 standard deviation in 2 or more of the 15 variables patients with ataxia (or other differential diagnoses) carried in the test battery. A genome-wide association study412 J.delPicchia (GWAS) was performed to determine potential alleles that detected in the blood samples. In POLG2-mutant ﬁbro- are linked to the phenotype POCD. blasts, we demonstrated an impaired mitochondrial net- Results: Sixty-three patients with blood samples were work, a decreased mitochondrial membrane potential, and included in the study. POCD was diagnosed in 47.6% of decreasedTOMM20proteinlevelsincomparisontohealthy patientsat1weekandin34.2%ofpatientsat3monthsafter controls. A muscular biopsy was not available. surgery. Insufﬁcient sample quality led to exclusion of 26 Conclusions: We provide multiple lines of evidence that patients. In the remaining 37 patients, a GWAS was this POLG2 variant is associated with impaired mitochon- performed, but no association with POCD was found. A drial integrity suggesting its pathogenicity in respect to the subsequent gene set analysis on 36 genes using VEGA
S2  mitochondrial phenotype (ataxia and progressive external did not reveal any signiﬁcant associations. ophthalmoplegia) in this family. Our work highlights the Conclusions: In this patient cohort, a GWAS did not importance of functional characterization of VUS to enable reveal an association between speciﬁc genetic alleles and meaningful genetic counselling. POCDat1weekand3monthsaftersurgery.Futuregenetic M. Dulovic Mahlow: None. M. Borsche: None. H. analysis should focus on speciﬁc candidate genes Baumann: None. S. Tunc: None. E. Knappe: None. S. for POCD. Özcakir: None. J. Trinh: None. N. Brüggemann: None. N. Göttel: None. M. Rickenbacher: None. C.S. K. Lohmann: None. Reinbold: None. S. Herms: None. P. Hoffmann: None. S. Cichon: None. A.U. Monsch: None. L.A. 
P09 .123.A Steiner: None. Extending the phenotypic spectrum of NEDHIB (neu- rodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia and variable 
P09 .122.C intellectual and behavioral impairment) in a girl with FunctionalcharacterizationofanovelvariantinPOLG2 multipleanomaliesandadenovoframeshiftmutationin shows disrupted mitochondrial integrity POLR2A. M. Dulovic Mahlow1, M. Borsche1,2, H. Baumann1, S. J. Behunova, F. Laccone Tunc2, E. Knappe1, S. Özcakir1, J. Trinh1, N. Brug̈ gemann1,2, K. Lohmann1 InstituteofMedicalGenetics,MedicalUniversityofVienna, Vienna, Austria 1Institute of Neurogenetics, Luebeck, Germany, 2Depart- ment of Neurology, UKSH, Luebeck, Germany The gene POLR2A is coding polymerase II, RNA, subunit A and its heterozygous mutations have been described to Introduction:PathogenicvariantsintheDNApolymerase- causeglobaldevelopmentaldelaywithhypotonia,abnormal gamma2 (POLG2) cause a rare mitochondrial disease with behaviour, feeding and visual problems, strabismus, vari- variable phenotypic presentations. able craniofacial dysmorphic features, frequent infections, Material and methods: We performed exome sequen- and,eventually,structuralbrainanomalies.Todateonly16 cinginafamilywithataxia.Tointerpret pathogenicityofa patients with POLR2A mutations have been described in a POLG2 variant, we used deep mitochondrial DNA single publication, three of them carrying a truncating (mtDNA) sequencing, tested for mitochondrial deletions; mutation. Many features in the published patients are and established primary ﬁbroblast lines from two mutation overlappingwiththoseofourpatient.However,noneofthe carriers to investigate mitochondrial integrity by immuno- patients reported presented a polydactyly (in our girl pre- cytochemistry, immunoblotting, and ﬂow cytometry. axial with a double thumb on the left), a thumb hypoplasia Results: The index patient, a 55-year-old woman, (in our girl just a „soft tissue thumb“, which had been presented with signs of vertigo at 30 years, followed by removed,ontheright),analantepositionandstenosis,anda the development of cerebellar ataxia and progressive heart defect (ASDII). There was signiﬁcant neonatal ophthalmoplegia. Her brother and mother had onset of hypotonia. Unsupported walking was possible only at the ataxiaatagesof40and50years.Byexomesequencing,we age of 4 years. Developmental delay now at the age of 14 identiﬁed a segregating, heterozygous, novel missense yearsissevere.Thegirldoesnotspeakatall.Aftertheﬁrst variant (c.1270T>C [p.Ser424Pro], NM_007215.3) in decade the tendon-reﬂexes of the legs decreased and bilat- POLG2 in all three affected family members. Initially, this eralpescavusdeveloped,possibly manifestingaperipheral was a variant of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS). We found a neuropathy.Therearecraniofacialdysmorphicfeatures,but higher number of mtDNA sequence changes in blood cells no microcephaly. Whole exome sequencing (incl. CNV) from the mutation carriers compared to matched healthy identiﬁed a 2 bp deletion in POLR2A which is supposed to controls. However, large mtDNA deletions were not causeaframeshiftandaprematurestopofproteinsynthesis.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 413 No other DNA variants were identiﬁed that could explain reduced volumes of left accumbens area, increased risk of the symptoms unusual for NEDHIB. The healthy unrelated cardiovascular disease and reduced volumes of thalamus parents do not carry the mutation, two sisters are healthy. proper, as well as increased risk of having higher p-tau J. Behunova: None. F. Laccone: None. levels and reduced volumes of right thalamus proper and right cerebellum cortex. We provide strong evidence that 
P09 .124.B genetic liability of cardiovascular diseases and core AD Polygenic-wide analysis to predict genetic risk proﬁles biomarkers inﬂuences brain morphology in ALFA partici- on brain morphometry over phenome-wide diseases pants. In addition, across all diseases, ALFA participants showed increased genetic risk of AD and altered CSF N. Vilor-Tejedor1,2,3,4, R. Guigo1,4, G. Operto2,5,6, M. biomarker. Crous-Bou2,5,6,7, R. Cacciaglia2,5,6, C. Falcón2,6,8, E. M. N. Vilor-Tejedor: None. R. Guigo: None. G. Operto: Arenaza-Urquijo2,5,6, C. Minguillón2,5,6, K. Fauria2,5,6, J. None. M. Crous-Bou: None. R. Cacciaglia: None. C. Molinuevo2,4,5,6, J. Gispert2,4,6,8 Falcón: None. E.M. Arenaza-Urquijo: None. C. Min- guillón: None. K. Fauria: None. J. Molinuevo: F. 1Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Roche Diagnostics, Institute for Science and Technology., Barcelona, Spain, Genentech, Novartis, Lundbeck, Oryzon, Biogen, Lilly, 2Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center (BBRC), Pasqual Janssen, Green Valley, MSD, Eisai, Alector, BioCross, GE Maragall Foundation., Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Healthcare, ProMIS Neurosciences. J. Gispert: None. Clinical Genetics, ERASMUS Medical Center., Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, 
P09 .125.C Spain, 5Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Biallelic loss of function mutations in JAM2 cause Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (CIBERFES), primary familial brain calciﬁcation Madrid,Spain,6IMIM(HospitaldelMarMedicalResearch Institute), Barcelona, Spain, 7Department of Epidemiology, Z. Cen, Y. Chen, S. Chen, D. Yang, L. Wang, H. Wang, X. Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, Chen, P. Liu, B. Zhang, W. Luo United States, 8Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina, Madrid, The Second Afﬁliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School Spain of Medicine, Hangzhou, China Neurodegenerative diseases are associated with progressive Introduction: Primary familial brain calciﬁcationis a neuronal damage along with an accelerated brain atrophy, monogenicdiseasecharacterizedbybilateralcalciﬁcationin which is inﬂuenced by multiple genetic factors. Polygenic the basal ganglia and other brain regions, and commonly risk scores (PRS) are used for identifying the genetic presents motor, psychiatric, and cognitive symptoms. Cur- architecture of complex diseases in order to predict disease rently, four autosomal dominant (SL
C20 A2, PDGFRB, genetic risk, as well as testing their shared genetic archi- PDGFB, XPR1) and one autosomal recessive (MYORG) tecture. In this study, we investigated the association causative genes have been identiﬁed. between PRS related to neurodegenerative and complex Materials and Methods: Homozygosity mapping and diseasesandbrainmorphometry.Atotalof479cognitively whole genome sequencingwere performed in a consangui- unimpaired middle-age participants atincreased risk of AD neous family with two affected siblings diagnosed with (ALFA cohort) with available genotyping and neuroima- primary familial brain calciﬁcationto detect novel causative gingdatawereincluded.PRSwerecalculatedfromthemost gene. Further genetic screening was performed in a cohort recent genome-wide association meta-analyses for Alzhei- of 398 probands with primary familial brain calciﬁcation. mer’s disease (AD), Parkinson disease, stroke, hyperten- Results: A homozygous frameshiftmutation (c.140delT, sion, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, depression, p.
L48 *) in the JAM2gene in theconsanguineous family. cerebrovascular disease, and CSF core AD biomarkers. Furthermore,ahomozygousstartcodonmutation(c.1A>G, Association analyses included brain regional volumes as p.M1?)andcompoundheterozygousmutations[c.504G>C, outcomes. Associations were estimated using linear p.W168C and c.(67+1_68-1)_(394+1_395-1), p. regression models adjusted for age, sex, education, APOE- Y23_V131delinsL], respectively, in two unrelated famil- ϵ4status,andtotalintracranialvolume.Wefoundincreased ieswere detected. In Chinese hamster ovary cells, truncated PRS average of AD, p-tau and Aβ42 levels among ALFA His-tagged JAM2 proteins were detected by western blot participants. Furthermore, results suggested evidence of an following transfection of p.Y23_V131delinsLmutant plas- association between increased risk of cholesterolemia and mid,whilenoproteinwasdetectedfollowingtransfectionof414 J.delPicchia p.
L48 * or p.1M? mutant plasmids. In immunoﬂuorescence qPCRandwesternblotshoweda≈80%reductionofcDNA experiments, the p.W168C mutant JAM2 protein failed to and 60% of protein. Gene knockdown experiments in translocate to the plasma membrane. zebraﬁsh indicate that slc7a6os plays a critical role in Conclusions: Our ﬁndings offer a novel causative gene deﬁned areas of the developing CNS. forprimaryfamilialbraincalciﬁcation,whosevitalfunction Conclusions:OurresultssuggestthatSL
C7 A6OSmaybe and high expression in the neurovascular unitfurther a novel gene causing progressive myoclonus epilepsy supports impairment of the neurovascular unit as the root phenotype resembling Unverricht-Lundborg disease. of primary familial brain calciﬁcationpathogenesis. A. Labalme: None. L. Mazzola: None. M. Muona: Z.Cen:None.Y.Chen:None.S.Chen:None.D.Yang: None. B. Baykan: None. T.H. Joensuu: None. C. None. L. Wang: None. H. Wang: None. X. Chen: None. Courage: None. N. Chatron: None. G. Borsani: None. P. Liu: None. B. Zhang: None. W. Luo: None. E. Alix: None. F. Ramond: None. R. Touraine: None. S. F.Berkovic:None.N.Bebek:None.A.Lehesjoki:None. 
P09 .126.A G. Lesca: None. Novel progressive myoclonus epilepsy syndrome caused by a recurrent homozygous variant of SL
C7 A6OS 
P09 .128.C The genotype-phenotype correlation of intragenic A. Labalme1, L. Mazzola2, M. Muona3, B. Baykan4, T. H. RBFOX1 deletions. Joensuu3,C. Courage3,N. Chatron1, G.Borsani5,E. Alix1, F. Ramond6, R. Touraine6, S. F. Berkovic7, N. Bebek4, A. M. A. Paczkowska, M. Geremek, B. Nowakowska Lehesjoki3, G. Lesca1 Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland 1University Hospital of Lyon, Lyon, France, 2University Hospital of Saint Etienne, Saint Etienne, France, 3Fol- The RBFOX1 gene encodes a protein that regulates pre- khälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 4Istanbul mRNA splicing in developmental genes expressed in Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 5University of muscle, heart and neuronal cells. Intragenic deletions of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 6University Hospital of Saint- RBFOX1 gene have been identiﬁed as susceptibility loci Etienne,Saint-Etienne,France,7EpilepsyResearchCentre, and reported in patients with aggressive behavior, conduct University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia disorder,epilepsyandautismspectrumdisorder.Despiteof the documented correlation with neurodevelopmental dis- Purpose: Progressive myoclonus epilepsies are a geneti- orders, the deletions of RBFOX1 gene are often inherited cally heterogeneous group of rare Mendelian disorders fromthehealthyparents,thereforetheclinicalinterpretation deﬁnedbythecombinationofactionandreﬂexmyoclonus, of CNVs within this gene is still unclear. We applied oli- other types of epileptic seizures, and progressive neuro- gonucleotide microarrays (OGT) in a cohort of 9430 cognitive impairment. In addition to the classical diseases, patients with neurodevelopment disorders and their healthy namely Unverricht-Lundborg and Lafora, several other relatives. The analyses of genomes were performed using genetic forms have been identiﬁed during the past years. genome-wide array to accurate detection of copy number Despite recent advances, a substantial proportion of cases variation at the exon level in RBFOX1 gene. Chromosomal remain without a molecular diagnosis and additional genes analysis revealed intragenic RBFOX1 deletions in 36 still remain to be identiﬁed. patients. The differential distribution across the gene Methods: Individuals from two families from different between patients with neurodevelopmental disorders and ethnicbackgroundswithseveralindividualsaffectedwitha the control group allowed to distinguished evidently similar presentation of progressive myoclonus epilepsy pathogenic areas within the gene. Deletions of exones 1-2 resembling Unverricht-Lundborg disease were analyzed by and 13-14 have high penetrance, and are mainly associated exome sequencing. with conduct disorder and autism spectrum disorder. While Results: Affected individuals from both families were the middle part of the gene and all intronic CNVS were homozygous for the same p.(Gln64Arg) variant affecting a observed with higher frequency in the control group, sug- splicesiteinSL
C7 A6OS.Itoccurs7timesingnomADasa gesting their benign impact on the phenotype. heterozygote, and is absent as a homozygote. Haplotype TheworkwassupportedbyMINDDS-CACOSTAction analysissuggeststhevariantaroseindependentlyinthetwo CA16210 - Maximising Impact of research in NeuroDeve- families.Analysis ofcDNAfrom lymphoblastoidcellsof a lopmental DisorderS patient showed a partial abolition of the splice site and the creationofanabnormalisoformwiththeretentionofintron 1 (NM_032178.2:r.191_193ins[ag;192+1_193-1]). RT-Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 415 M.A. Paczkowska: None. M. Geremek: None. B. between cases and controls using standard burden testing. Nowakowska: None. AsvariantsinaMIP’sbindingregionsaffectitssequencing yield, we also analyzed target sequencing depths as an 
P09 .130.B integrative and independent assessment of the differential Deep targeted-NGS identiﬁes RLS genes by differential variant burden. burden with low-frequency variants and differential Results: Differential variant burden results of both types target sequencing depth of analysis overlapped signiﬁcantly. Therefore, 14 genes were signiﬁcantly associated and validated. Both types of E. Tilch1, B. Schormair1, C. Zhao1, A. Salminen1, A. Antic analysis also converged signiﬁcantly in ﬁne-mapping Nikolic1, E. Holzknecht2, B. Högl2, W. Poewe2, C. potentially causative domains within these genes. Bachmann3, W. Paulus4, C. Trenkwalder5, W. Oertel1, M. Conclusions: By assessing differential burden with Hornyak6, I. Fietze7, K. Berger8, P. Lichtner9, C. Gieger10, intragenic low-frequency variants we identiﬁed at least 14 A. Peters10, B. Müller-Myhsok11,12, A. Hoischen13, J. putatively causative genes in RLS. In keeping with other Winkelmann1,11,14, K. Oexle1 polygenic diseases, the variant burden was higher in patients. Methodologically, we demonstrate that target 1Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München depth analysis is useful for independent validation of GmbH, German Research Center for Environmental conventional variant-based burden tests. Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, Acknowledgements: DFG (project 310572679), RLS e. Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, V., and SRLS. 3Department of Neurology, Paracelsus Clinic Osnabrück, E.Tilch:None.B.Schormair:None.C.Zhao:None.A. Osnabrück, Germany, 4Department of Clinical Neurophy- Salminen:None.A.AnticNikolic:None. E.Holzknecht: siology, Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany, None. B. Högl: None. W. Poewe: None. C. Bachmann: 5Center of Parkinsonism and Movement Disorders, None. W. Paulus: None. C. Trenkwalder: None. W. Paracelsus-Elena Hospital, Kassel, Germany, 6Neuropsy- Oertel: None. M. Hornyak: None. I. Fietze: None. K. chiatry Center Erding/Munich, Erding, Germany, 7Depart- Berger: None. P. Lichtner: None. C. Gieger: None. A. ment of Cardiology and Angiology, Center of Sleep Peters: None. B. Müller-Myhsok: None. A. Hoischen: Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Ger- None. J. Winkelmann: None. K. Oexle: None. many, 8Institute of Epidemiology and Social Medicine, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 9Institute of 
P09 .131.C Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München GmbH, Extension of the phenotypes caused by RNF13 variants German Research Center for Environmental Health, to include a choreo-dystonic movement disorder Neuherberg, Germany, 10Institute of Epidemiology, Helm- holtz Zentrum München GmbH, German Research Center E. Ranza1, X. Blanc1, F. Santoni1, F. Guerry1, S. for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, Antonarakis1, C. Korff2 11MunichClusterforSystemsNeurology,Munich,Germany, 12Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 1Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine, 13Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Geneva, Switzerland, 2Pediatric Neurology, Geneva Uni- Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 14Department of versity Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland Neurogenetics and Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany The substantial recent advances in genetic diagnosis, have identiﬁed numerous pathogenic variants on genes involved Introduction:Restlesslegs syndrome (RLS) is one of the in neurodevelopment in patients with developmental delay most common and burdensome neurological disorders. andepilepsy.Amongthose,heterozygousmissensegain-of- Patientstypicallypresentwithanurgetomovethelegsat function variants in RNF13 leading to altered signaling of rest at night which severely impairs sleep and quality of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response, have been life. Based on previous GWAS results, we performed recently reported in three children with congenital micro- mutational load analysis of putatively causal candidate cephaly, encephalopathy with epilepsy, blindness, and genes. failure to thrive (PMID 30595371). None of these patients Materials and Methods: We sequenced exons and presentedwithmovementdisorders. We here report a child promotors of 84 genes in 4,649 RLS patients and 4,982 with early-onset global developmental delay, acquired population-basedcontrolsfromGermanyinatargetedNGS microcephaly, failure-to-thrive, infantile spasms, focal sei- approach with 11,214 molecular inversion probes (MIPs). zures and gastrointestinal dysfunction, who also presented We compared the variant load (MAF < = 0.05) by gene at 3 years with a choreo-dystonic movement disorder. An416 J.delPicchia extended metabolic work-up was normal. Brain MRI did regulators of Bmp4) and Dpysl2 (negatively regulated by not reveal signiﬁcant abnormalities. A trio whole-exome BM
P4 ). Consequently, as in case of some SZ-patient sequencing revealed a heterozygous de novo c.932delT:(p. derived iPS cells, Tet/Tet ES cells possessed a decreased Leu311TyrfsTer2) variant in the RNF13 gene. The variant potential to produce neurons and oligodendrocytes but an results in a frameshift near the carboxyl terminus of the increased potential in forming glial cells. RRBS data on predicted protein sequence (codon 311 of 380), producing ESCs and neurons did not reveal any signiﬁcant difference an abnormal protein with a postulated gain of function in the level of DNA methylation of the promoters of the effect. Interestingly the previously described pathogenic affected genes. DNMT1 affects on these genes therefore, variants were in the same location of the primary protein appear to be independent of catalytic activity. Taken sequence p.(Leu311Ser) and p.(Leu312Pro).To our knowl- together, increased DNMT1 levels results in abnormal edge,ourpatientisthefourthdescribedsofar.Inadditionto neurogenesisbyaffectingmultipleSZ-associatedgenesand previously reported symptoms, the phenotype of this child pathways in a DNA-methylation independent manner. also included a choreo-dystonic movement disorder; thus S. Saxena: None. S. Choudhury: None. A. Sampath: the phenotypes related to RNF13 pathogenic variants are None. K. Naga Mohan: None. extended to include a movement disorder. The RNF13 should be added to the panel of candidate genes in patients 
P09 .140.C with abnormal movements, inadditionto those involvedin Two intronic variants in cis in both alleles of the encephalopathy and early-onset epilepsy. POLR3A gene cause progressive spastic ataxia with E. Ranza: None. X. Blanc: None. F. Santoni: None. F. hypodontia Guerry: None. S. Antonarakis: None. C. Korff: None. A.Felner1,2,A.Lossos3,E.Kogan2,Z.Argov3,C.Gonzaga- 
P09 .136.B Jauregui4, A. R. Shuldiner4, N. Lev-El Halabi1, I. DNMT1 overexpression results in dysregulation of Lagovcky1, S. Naftaly Nathan1, L. Bazak1, G. Lidzbarsky1, multiple genes associated with neurological disorders L. Basel-Salmon1,5,6, Y. GOLDBERG1 and abnormal neurogenesis. 1Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical Center, S. Saxena1, S. Choudhury2, A. Sampath1, K. Naga Petah Tikva, Israel, 22. Department of Neurology, Rabin Mohan1 Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel, 3Department of Neurology, Hadassah-Hebrew University 1BITS PILANI HYDERABAD CAMPUS, hyderabad, India, Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Regeneron Genetics 2BITS PILANI HYDERABAD CAMPUS, Hyderabad, India Center, Tarrytown, NY, United States, 5Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 6Felsenstein In the context of DNMT1 overexpression as one of the Medical Research Center, Petah Tikva, Israel etiological factors for schizophrenia (SZ), and abnormal neurogenesis associated with Dnmt1Tet/Tet (Tet/Tet) mouse Background: POLR3A encodes the largest subunit of the embryonic stem cells, we studied the effects of DNMT1 DNA-dependentRNApolymerase-III.Mutationsinthisgene overexpression on neurogenesis. Transcriptome analysis of are associated with dysregulation of tRNA production and Tet/Tet neurons showed dysregulation of a signiﬁcant other non-coding RNAs. Biallelic POLR3A pathogenic var- number of genes associated with neurological disorders. iants are associated with several phenotypes, including DownregulationofShh was themain event associated with Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy, hypogonadism, hypo- dysregulation of genes involved in multiple pathways such dontia, progressive spastic ataxia, and the progeroid disorder asWnt1andWnt3asignaling,extracellularmatrixsynthesis, Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome (WRS). Genotype- homeobox family and other transcription factors required phenotype correlation is unclear, though some variants have for brain development. Transcriptome analysis of Tet/Tet been associated mainly with spastic ataxia and others ES cells to understand earlier events also showed with WRS. dysregulation of a signiﬁcant number of genes associated Methods: Phenotypic analysis and exome sequencing with neurodevelopment and neurological disorders. Speci- were performed in 4 affected siblings, two healthy siblings ﬁcally, Bmp4, an antagonistic molecule to Shh, emerged and their mother. withthehighestnumberofinteractingpartners.InEScells, Results:Allaffectedsiblings(twomen,twowomen;ages high Bmp4 transcript levels were associated with low 45-58) had early childhood-onset hypodontia and transcript levels of Lrp2, Htra1 and Bmper (negative adolescent-onset progressive spastic ataxia. None hadAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 417 dysmorphism or hypogonadism. They all had biallelic the peripheral blood of 48 individuals divided into two POLR3A pathogenic variants. The mother was heterozygo- groups: children with SLI and healthy controls. tous and both healthy siblings had wild-type alleles. Each Results: Mean values of 15,4copies/20mcl was found in mutated allele had two intronic splicing-altering variants in the SLI group and 8,8 - in the control one. The difference cis,leadingtoskippingofexons14and26.Thisallelewas was statistically signiﬁcant - P=0.03, proving that the reported previously in compound heterozygous combina- GIN
S2  gene is up regulated in the SLI group. GIN
S2 , tions in patients with severe progeroid WRS. located in 16q21 is part of the GINS complex which plays Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report addressing the an essential role in the initiation of DNA replication, and clinical consequence associated with a unique homozygous progressionofDNAreplicationforks.Thereareacoupleof pathogenic allele in the POLR3A gene. Our ﬁndings case reportsthatreportspeech delayinpatientswith16q21 indicatethathomozygosityforthispathogenicallelecauses duplications. A recent study found a connection with spastic ataxia with hypodontia, rather than a progeroid GIN
S2  expression and neuroinﬂamation. syndrome, dysmorphism or hypogonadism previously Conclusions: Comparative gene expression analysis is attributed to this allele when found in a compound usefulindiscoveringnovelgeneticmarkersassociatedwith heterozygous state with other alleles. Our ﬁndings con- SLI.ElevatedgeneexpressionofGIN
S2 mightcontributeto tribute to the characterization of genotype-phenotype the elucidation of the pathogenesis of SLI. correlation in POLR3A-related disorders. I.G. Sotkova-Ivanova: None. H. Ivanov: None. A. A.Felner: None.A.Lossos: None.E.Kogan: None.Z. Linev: None. T. Vachev: None. N. Popov: None. I. Argov:None.C.Gonzaga-Jauregui:A.Employment(full Ivanov:None.I.Pacheva:None.R.Yordanova:None.V. or part-time); Modest; Regeneron. A.R. Shuldiner: A. Stoyanova: None. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Regeneron. N. Lev-El Halabi: None. I. Lagovcky: None. S. Naftaly 
P09 .142.B Nathan:None.L.Bazak:None.G.Lidzbarsky:None.L. A357kbduplicationencompassingtheAT
P2 B3genein Basel-Salmon: None. Y. Goldberg: None. Xq28 is associated with X-linked spinocerebellar ataxia (SCAX1) in two males within one family 
P09 .141.A Increased gene expression ofGIN
S2 in patients with Y. Stratis, F. Stock, C. Müller-Hofstede, S. Ledig, J. Speciﬁc Language Impairment Horvath, P. Wieacker, A. Bohring, A. Röpke I. G. Sotkova-Ivanova1, H. Ivanov1, A. Linev1, T. Vachev1, Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany N. Popov2, I. Ivanov1, I. Pacheva1, R. Yordanova1, V. Stoyanova1 X-linkedtransmissionofspinocerebellarataxia(SCAX)is relatively rare. One missense mutation in AT
P2 B3 1MedicalUnivercity Plovdiv,DepartmentofPediatricsand resulting in spinocerebellar ataxia 1 (SCAX1) is reported Medical Genetics, Medical University Plovdiv, Plovdiv, twice in the literature as the cause of SCAX1 in two Bulgaria, 2Psychiatric ward for active treatment, State families. The AT
P2 B3 gene encodes for a member of the Phsychiatry Hospital Pazardzhik,, Plovdiv, Bulgaria calmodulin-activated plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPase family (PMCA3) which extrudes excess calcium from the Introduction: Speciﬁc Language Impairment (SLI) is a cell to maintain neuronal Ca2+-homeostasis, especially in disorder characterized by slow, abnormal language devel- thecerebellum.The46yearoldindexpatientwasreferred opment, despite normal intelligence, adequate social toourinstitutebecauseofearlyonsetcerebellarataxia.He environmentandintheabsenceofanyexplanatorymedical showed a delayed motor development as an infant, conditions. Most children with this disorder do not present impaired gross and ﬁne motor skills, dysarthria, and anyothercognitiveorneurologicaldeﬁcitsandhavenormal hypoplasia of the cerebellum. Intellectual development non-verbalIQ.Thisconditionishighlyheritableandaffects was normal. Kennedy’s disease was excluded and a NGS between 5% and 8% of pre-school children. Lately inves- panel for ataxia related genes showed no pathogenic tigations have begun to uncover genetic factors that may variants. Array-CGH revealed a duplication of 357 kb in contribute to susceptibility to language impairment. In our Xq28. This duplication spans eight genes, including previousstudyweconductedapoolexpressionanalysisand AT
P2 B3 and two more OMIM genes (BGN, FAM38A). GIN
S2  was the most up regulated gene. Furtheranalysisoffemalefamilymembersconﬁrmedthis MaterialsandMethods:Thestudyaimedtoexaminethe duplication in the patient’s mother, her sister and the individual expression proﬁle of GIN
S2  gene by ddPCR in sister’s daughter. Her three year old son also displayed418 J.delPicchia ataxia and a delayed motor development. He was proved 
P09 .145.B to carry the duplication as well. Based on the family Expanding phenotypic spectrum of TAF1 variants: constellation and the known literature for the AT
P2 B3 Report of two novel families gene we highly assume that the duplication in Xq28 comprising AT
P2 B3 is causative for the spinocerebellar J. Pozojevic1, M. G. Pauly1, N. Schell1, H. Pawlack1, C. ataxia within this family, implicating a dysregulation of Klein1, A. Westenberger1, N. Brüggemann1,2 the calcium homeostasis in neuronal cells by the dupli- cation of the AT
P2 B3 gene. 1InstituteofNeurogenetics,Lübeck,Germany,2Department Y. Stratis: None. F. Stock: None. C. Müller-Hofstede: of Neurology, Lübeck, Germany None. S. Ledig: None. J. Horvath: None. P. Wieacker: None. A. Bohring: None. A. Röpke: None. Introduction: Pathogenic variants affecting the TAF1 (TATA-box binding protein associated factor 1) coding 
P09 .144.A region have been shown to cause a complex X-linked Geneticriskfactorsfortendencytosuicidedetectedina neurodevelopmental syndrome that includes intellectual cohort GWAS study disability, dysmorphic features, and neurological manifes- tations. The changes described to date are predominantly A. Haghighatfard1, F. Mohammadpour2 missense and distributed along the entire gene. A non- coding TAF1 variant causes X-linked dystonia-parkinson- 1Islamic Azad university-Tehran medical sciences branch, ism (XDP), an adult-onset neurodegenerative movement Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2University of Guilan, disorder. Rasht, Iran, Rasht, Iran, Islamic Republic of PatientsandMethods:Bywhole-exomesequencing,the genetic cause of X-linked intellectual disability was Suicide is a major public health problem, with almost one investigated in male patients from two families. In other million people victims’ world-wide each year. Psychologi- available family members, the presence of relevant TAF1 cal risk factors for suicidal behaviors are including, psy- variants was investigated by targeted Sanger sequencing. chiatricandmedicalillness,impulsivity,aggression,alcohol Where appropriate, a standard X-chromosome inactivation and drug abuse specially stimulants, and low stress resi- assay was used. lience. Genetic risk factors of suicide are not completely Results: The proband from Family 1 clinically mani- clariﬁed.Our studyaimedtodetectgenetic riskfactorsthat fested with global developmental delay including motor, increasing the vulnerability to committing suicide. DNA speech and cognitive abilities and carried the c.1606G>A was extracted from blood samples of 8240 saved suicide (p.(Asp536Asn)) TAF1 variant and the MT-CO1 victimswithatleastoneattempttosuicideinlast12months m.6054G>A (p.(Asp51Asn)) mitochondrial variant in the that were suffering from psychosis and 5000 healthy sub- heteroplasmic state. In Family 2, the affected male patients jects. Genotyping for the subjects was performed using the presented with early onset spastic paraplegia and mild Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 (Affy- cognitive impairment, all carrying a missense (c.5418G>C; metrix, Santa Clara, CA) according to the manufacturer’s p.(Glu1806Asp)) variant in TAF1. Their mother was a protocol. Several SNPs were detected with genome-wide heterozygous carrier of the same change and developed signiﬁcance. The signiﬁcant association found in 77 SNPs adult-onset parkinsonism, spasticity, and dementia. Her X- involved in dopaminergic pathway and neurodevelopment chromosome inactivation (XCI) was random. ofCNS.56ofsigniﬁcantlyrelatedSNPswerefoundasrisk Conclusions:TwonovelTAF1variantswereidentiﬁedas factors of psychiatric disorders specially schizophrenia; the likely disease causes in our patients. The affected other21SNPswererelatedtothemitochondrialcomplexes, members of Family 2 presented with pyramidal signs, transcription factors and growth factor genes. The study suggestingthattheTAF1variantsotherthanthoserelatedto showedstronggeneticbases ofsuicidal thoughts andcould XDP may cause an affection of additional neurological be used for providing genetic prognostic markers for pre- systems. dictionofsuicideriskespeciallyinsubjectswithpsychosis. J.Pozojevic:None.M.G.Pauly:None.N.Schell:None. Also importance of mitochondrial complexes and growth H. Pawlack: None. C. Klein: None. A. Westenberger: factors in neuorobilogical functions and decision making None. N. Brüggemann: None. processes of brain were showed. A. Haghighatfard: None. F. Mohammadpour: None. 
P09 .146.C Brain lipid proﬁle of early onset Tay-Sachs disease mouse modelAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 419 T. Sengul1, M. Can1, S. Akyildiz Demir1, C. Klose2, M. gene leading to GM2 accumulation which causes neuro- Surma2, V. Seyrantepe1 degeneration. Hexa-/-Neu3-/- mice mimic neuropathologic phenotype of the disease. Oxidative stress has been 1Izmir Institute of Technology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Lipotype demonstrated to be involved in the pathogenesis of many GmbH, Dresden, Germany neurodegenerativediseases.Inthisresearchweinvestigated whether the oxidative stress has an effect on the Introduction: Tay-Sachs disease is one of the lysosomal neuropathology mice. disorders caused by mutation in Hexa gene. HEXA gene Material and Methods: Brain sections and ﬁbroblasts deﬁciencyaffectsthecentralnervoussystemowingtoGM2 fromWT,Hexa-/-,Neu3-/-andHexa-/-Neu3-/-miceaswell accumulation in lysosomes resulting in progressive neuro- as neuroglia were studied. Oxidative stress markers were degeneration in patient. Previoulsy generated Hexa-/- analysed by RT-PCR, western blot and protein carbonyla- Neu3-/- mice mimic neuropathological and clinical tion assay. The intracellular ROS level was measured by abnormalities of early onset Tay-Sachs patients. Lipids are using H DCFDA and analysed by FACScan. 2 important players in the central nervous system function- Results: Signiﬁcant increase in protein carbonyl levels ality. Several studies showed that neurodegenerative dis- was determined particularly in cerebellum of Hexa-/- eases indicate alterations in lipid metabolism. Here, we Neu3-/- mice. Similarly, we determined signiﬁcant change aimed to clarify the secondary accumulation of lipids and in neuroglia but not in Hexa-/-Neu3-/- ﬁbroblast. However, presence of unregulated lipid metabolism in brain of early we found signiﬁcantly high level of catalase and Ttase1 onset Tay-Sachs disease mice model by lipidome proﬁling. mRNA in Hexa-/-Neu3-/- ﬁbroblasts. In addition, oxidized Materials and methods: Cortex and hippocampus of 5- DCFDA was also increased in Hexa-/-Neu3-/- ﬁbroblast month-old of WT, Hexa-/-, Neu3-/- and Hexa-/-Neu3-/- indicating high level of ROS but surprisingly we detected mice were analyzed by mass spectrometry and lipid levels the low level of ROS in neuroglia. Signiﬁcant increase in belongs to glycerolipids, glycerophospholipids, sphingoli- thelevelofAP
E1 /Ref-1proteinwasobservedincerebellum pids, sterol lipids were evaluated by using shotgun and thalamus of Hexa-/-Neu3-/-; however, in ﬁbroblast lipidomics approach. there was no signiﬁcant difference among samples. Results:Inglycerophospholipidclass,highlevelofLPC, Signiﬁcantly decreased level of catalase and increased LPE and PG lipids while low level of PC, PS lipids were Ttase1 mRNA were detected in neuroglia compared to detectedincortexandhippocampusofHexa-/-Neu3-/-mice control. compared to age matched control group. Signiﬁcantly high Conclusions:WesuggestthatabnormalGM2accumula- levelsceramideandsterolipidwerealsomeasuredincortex. tioninlysosomestriggeroxidativestressleadingalterations Alterations in glycerolipid class was detected in both in redox homeostasis in early-onset Tay-Sachs disease regions. pathology. The research was supported by TUBİTAK- Conclusion: Here we report that in addition to abnormal 215Z083 GM2 accumulation in lysosomes, secondary but distinct N.Ates:None.H.Basirli:None.T.Caliskan:None.A. lipid alterations may also contribute to pathophysiology of Nalbant: None. V. Seyrantepe: None. early onset Tay-Sachs disease suggesting the possible dysfunctionality of cellular pathways such as autophagy. 
P09 .149.C Acknowledgement: Research was funded by TUBITAK Neurodegenerative-like phenotype of a TTR mutation 215Z083. deciphered by bioinformatic tools T. Sengul: None. M. Can: None. S. Akyildiz Demir: None. C. Klose: None. M. Surma: None. V. A. Lunati1, C. Delamarche2, P. Diraison3, I. Isabelle Seyrantepe: None. Quintin-Roue4, B. Funalot1, P. Fanen1 
P09 .147.A 1Département de génétique; CHU Henri Mondor, Créteil, RoleofoxidativestressinthepathogenesisofTay-Sachs France, 2Professor - Retired from University of Rennes 1, disease mouse model Rennes, France, 3Service de neurologie, CH de Cor- nouaille, Quimper, France, 4Service d’anatomie et cytolo- N. Ates, H. Basirli, T. Caliskan, A. Nalbant, V. Seyrantepe gie pathologiques, CHRU, Brest, France Izmir Institute of Technology, Izmir, Turkey Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR) leads to a variable phenotype and involve many organs. Here we Introduction: Tay-Sachs disease is one of the lethal lyso- report one patient presenting with central neurological and somal storage disorders caused by mutations on the HEXA ophthalmological signs, amyloid deposits on subarachnoid420 J.delPicchia biopsyandafamilialhistoryofneurodegenerativedisorder. resistant and constitutes the main cause of morbidity and WeidentiﬁedarareheterozygousTTRmutationc.149T>G, disabilityinaffectedindividuals.TheprojectEPIMARKER p.(Val50Gly) at the same aminoacid position as the most is aimed to identify new biomarkers of epilepsy in a group frequent mutation V50M. In order to understand this unu- ofpatientsaffectedwithTSC.Webelieve,theresultsofthis sual phenotype, we used bioinformatic tools including research will become a starting point for further work on structure prediction, estimation of thermodynamic para- new therapeutics and clinical solutions. meters (ΔΔG) to compare models of V50M and V50G Materialsandmethods:Theﬁrststepoftheprojectwas mutants, in relation to WT-TTR and applied a molecular intended to describe an exact molecular cause of TSC in a modeling method to test the self-assembly capacity of a group of 65 affected individuals. We screened TS
C1  and TTR peptide located in the region of the mutated residue. TS
C2  genes with the use of targeted next-generation Our model predicted that the relative stability of tetramers sequencing (NGS) and quantitative PCR (qPCR) for all anddimerswasnotaffectedbybothmutations,ΔΔGvalues exons of both genes. indicated a moderate instability of V50M monomers Results: Testing with targeted next-generation sequen- whereasV50G showed avery high unfolding capacity.We cinggenepanelrevealedpathogenicvariantsin50outof65 also investigated theorical models composed of 4 segments patients, whereas qPCR performed in 15 remaining 
P11 -K35 with a methionine or glycine at position 50. individuals showed intragenic deletions in 5 additional Although in both mutants the structure of each segment cases. Noteworthy, we have found 19 novel and 31 known consists of a β-arch, oligomers were very different. V50M pathogenic variants. 4 β-arches were stacked in a parallel β-sheet structure sta- Conclusions: The diagnostic algorithm presented here is bilized by inter-strand interactions whereas 4 β-arches of asuitableandhelpfulapproachinthemolecularanalysisof V50G associated in a β-barrel structure with intra and inter TSC. Furthermore, the data we have obtained will be used strand interactions. Our data strongly suggest that V50G is inthefurtherpart oftheproject,which isfocused onnovel morecytotoxicthanV50Mduetoitspropensitytobemore therapeuticstrategies.Thisworkwassupportedbythegrant unstable as a monomer and to aggregate as β-barrel struc- fromtheNationalCentreforResearchandDevelopmentno. tures similar to those observe in neurodegenerative dis- STRATEGMED3/306306/4/NCBR/2017. orders such as Alzheimer disease. E. Bukowska-Olech: None. D. Popiel: None. A. A. Lunati: None. C. Delamarche: None. P. Diraison: Dawidziuk: None. G. Koczyk: None. A. Sowinska- None.I.IsabelleQuintin-Roue:None.B. Funalot: None. Seidler: None. S. Jóźwiak: None. K. Kotulska-Jóźwiak: P. Fanen: None. None. J. Strzelecka: None. J. Borkowska: None. A. Jamsheer: None. 
P09 .150.A Molecular screening of patients affected with tuberous 
P09 .151.B sclerosis complex Biallelic missense variant in SVBP causes impaired detyrosination of tubulin leading to complex hereditary E. Bukowska-Olech1, D. Popiel2, A. Dawidziuk2, G. spastic paraplegia without microcephaly Koczyk2,3, A. Sowinska-Seidler1, S. Jóźwiak4, K. Kotulska- Jóźwiak5, J. Strzelecka4, J. Borkowska5, A. Jamsheer1,2 E. Verdura1,2, N. Launay1,2, G. Fernandez Garcia de Eulate3,4,5, J. Ondaro4,5, A. Schlüter1,2, M. Ruiz1,2, S. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University o Medical Fourcade1,2, A. López de Munain3,4,5, A. Pujol1,2 Sciences in Poznan, Poland, Poznan, Poland, 2Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of 1NeurometabolicDiseaseLab,InstituteofNeuropathology, Plant Genetics (PAS), Department of Biometry and IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, Bioinformatics, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of Child 2Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, (CIBERER U759), Ministry of Science, Innovation and Poland, 5Department of Neurology and Epileptology, University, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Neurology, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland Hospital Universitario Donostia, San Sebastián, Spain, 4Department of Neurosciences, Instituto Biodonostia, San Background:Tuberoussclerosiscomplex(TSC)represents Sebastián, Spain, 5Department of Neurosciences, School of a rare genetic multisystem neurocutaneous disorder, that is Medicine and Nursery, University of the Basque Country, caused by pathogenic variants within TS
C1  and TS
C2  UPV-EHU, San Sebastián, Spain genes. The disorder is characterised by multiple hamarto- mas in the brain, heart, skin, and kidney. Another common Introduction: Reversible C-Terminal detyrosination of feature of TSC is epilepsy, which is frequently drug- alpha-tubuliniscrucialformicrotubuleorganization,andisAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 421 strongly linked to neuronal differentiation. VASH1 and regression of skills occurred at 2.5-7 years. Initially motor VASH2, in complex with SVBP, have recently been iden- regression followed by language regression was found. tiﬁed as responsible for intracellular tubulin detyrosination Brain MRI revealed diffuse cortical atrophy of the sub- activity. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in SVBP have cortical white matter. UBFT encodes a transcription factor, much recently been described in patients showing intellec- which facilitate the assembly of the transcription initiation tual disability, microcephaly, ataxia and hypotonia. complex of the RNA polymerase I (PolI), which is crucial Methods: All patients underwent accurate clinical for rRNA synthesis. Functional studies showed that the evaluation and provided informed consent. Whole-exome UBTF variant leads to a stronger binding afﬁnity to the sequencing (WES) was performed using patients’ DNA rDNA promotor and increased 18s rRNA expression. As a samples, and segregation in relatives was conﬁrmed by result the chromatin structure at the rDNA locus was Sangersequencing.Primaryﬁbroblastsweregeneratedfrom decondensed. In rats enhanced PolI activity promotes patients’ skin biopsies, and cultured cells were incubated neurite outgrowth, which can lead to neurodegenerative with paclitaxel to analyze detyrosinated tubulin levels by processes (Edvardson et al., 2017). Here we report on immunoﬂuorescence and western blot. cDNA of VASH1 another patient carrying the de novo p.Glu210Val UBTF and wild-type/mutated forms of SVBP were cloned into a variantidentiﬁedbyWES.Thepsychomotoricdevelopment pCMV-Tag4A vector, and then cotransfected into HeLa of the boy was slightly delayed at ﬁrst. He started walking cells for Western Blot analysis. onhisownwith1½year,andataxicgaitwasnoted.Atthe Results: We report two families with multiple patients age of 5 years, he was unable to walk without assistance, harboring an homozygous missense variant in SVBP (p. and was wheelchair-bound at the age of 7. Subsequently, Leu49Pro). Affected individuals show spastic paraplegia, the boy developed tetraparesis, global retardation, and peripheral neuropathy, verbal apraxia and intellectual severe scolio-kyphosis. Around the age of 1 ½ the boy disability, in absence of microcephaly, broadening the started to use identiﬁable words but his speech deteriorated previously reported phenotype. In vitro experiments in and by the age of 7 he presented with slurred speech, and patients’ ﬁbroblasts demonstrate a signiﬁcant loss of subsequently stopped using words. MRI of the brain per- VASH1/2 detyrosination activity and decreased SVBP formed at the age of 14 years revealed supratentorial levels. Cotransfection studies show that SVBP p.Leu49Pro atrophy. variant reduces both VASH1 and SVBP soluble quantities D.Zengeler:None.H.Gabriel:None.S.Biskup:None. or their stability. C. Schell-Apacik: None. Conclusions: Our results expand the phenotypic spec- trum of SVBP mutations to complex spastic paraplegia 
P09 .154.B without microcephaly, and conﬁrm for the ﬁrst time that a Expanding the spectrum of WDR62 mutations : detyrosination defect is observed in patients’ cell lines, description of new cases enabling functional testing of SVBP variants and extended pathogenetic studies. L. Ruaud1,2, S. Drunat3,2, A. Ernault1, Y. Capri1, L. Van E. Verdura: None. N. Launay: None. G. Fernandez Maldergem4,5, C. Engel4,5, C. Altuzarra6, A. Bayat7, S. Garcia de Eulate: None. J. Ondaro: None. A. Schlüter: Moortgart8, I. Maystadt8, M. Abramowicz9, C. Zweier10, I. None. M. Ruiz: None. S. Fourcade: None. A. López de Lorenz11, D. Haye12, F. Giuliano12, S. Vaessen13, L. Munain: None. A. Pujol: None. Servais14,E.DiMaria15,16,F.Faravelli15,J.Kohlhase17,T. Bast18, N. Miladi19,20, A. Agadr21,22, S. Auvin23, A. 
P09 .152.C Verloes1,2, S. Passemard1,2 Another case with childhood-onset Neurodegeneration due to a UBTF variant identiﬁed by whole-exome 1Service de génétique clinique, AP-HP, Hôpital Robert sequencing (WES). Debré, Paris, France, 2Université de Paris, Neurodiderot, Inserm, Paris, France, 3Service de génétique moléculaire, D. Zengeler1, H. Gabriel1, S. Biskup1, C. Schell-Apacik2 AP-HP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4Centre de génétique humaine, CHRU de Besançon, Besançon, 1Praxis für Humangenetik, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Medi- France, 5Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Besan- cover Human Genetics Berlin-Westend MVZ, Berlin, çon, France, 6Service de pédiatrie, CHRU Besançon, Germany Besançon, France, 7Danish Epilepsy Centre, Filadelﬁa, Denmark, 8Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Recently, Edvardson and collegues identiﬁed the de novo Pathologie et Génétique, Charleroi, Belgium, 9Laboratoire variantc.628G>A;p.Glu210LysinthegeneUBFTincases de Diagnostic Moléculaire et Génomique, Hôpitaux with childhood-onset Neurodegeneration. In these patients, universitaires de Genève HUG, Genève, Switzerland,422 J.delPicchia 10Intitute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Univer- malformation. However, we have concerns regarding the sität Erlanger-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 11Depart- long term neurological outcome. ment of Pediatrics, Division of Neuropediatrics, Friedrich- L. Ruaud: None. S. Drunat: None. A. Ernault: None. Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Ger- Y. Capri: None. L. Van Maldergem: None. C. Engel: many, 12Service de génétique, CHRU Nice, Nice, France, None. C. Altuzarra: None. A. Bayat: None. S. Moort- 1312Centre de génétique humaine, Hôpital de La Citadelle, gart: None. I. Maystadt: None. M. Abramowicz: None. CHUdeLiège,Liège,Belgium,14NeuromuscularReference C. Zweier: None. I. Lorenz: None. D. Haye: None. F. Center, Hôpital de La Citadelle, CHU de Liège, Liège, Giuliano: None. S. Vaessen: None. L. Servais: None. E. Belgium, 15Unit of Medical Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Di Maria: None. F. Faravelli: None. J. Kohlhase: None. Genova,Italy, 16Department ofHealthSciences, University T. Bast: None. N. Miladi: None. A. Agadr: None. S. of Genova, Genova, Italy, 17SYNLAB Center for Human Auvin: None. A. Verloes: None. S. Passemard: None. Genetics, Freiburg, Germany, 18Children’s Hospital, Epi- lepsyCenterKork,Kehl,Germany,19Servicedeneurologie 
P09 .155.C pédiatrique, Magreb Médical, Tunis, Tunisia, 20Université Identiﬁcation of new variants in amyotrophic lateral de Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia, 21Service de pédiatrie, sclerosis patients by whole genome sequencing data Hopital militaire Mohamed V, Rabat, Morocco, 22Faculté de médecine Mohamed V, Rabat, Morocco, 23Service de L.Corrado1,R.Croce1,N.Barizzone1,A.DiPierro1,L.M. neurologie pédiatrique, APHP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Genovese2, F. Geraci2, E. Mangano3, R. D’Aurizio2, R. Paris, France Bordoni3, D. Corà1, F. Favero1, F. De Marchi4, G. De Bellis3, G. Manzini2,5, M. Severgnini3, M. Pellegrini2, L. MCPH2 (MicroCephaly Primary Hereditary 2), caused by Mazzini4, S. D’Alfonso1 WDR62 mutations, is the second most common form of MCPH. WDR62, located on chr19q13.12, encodes WD 1University of Eastern Piedmont UPO, NOvara, Italy, repeat-containing protein 62, playing a role for mitotic 2InstituteofInformaticsandTelematicsofCNR,Pisa,Italy, division, proliferation of neuronal progenitor and neuronal 3National Research Council of Italy, Institute for Biomedi- migration. To date, more 100 patients with pathogenic cal Technologies, Segrate (MILANO), Italy, 4ALS Center homozygous or compound heterozygous variants in AOU Maggiore della Carità, NOvara, Italy, 5University of WDR62 were reported. They have developmental delay eastern Piedmont, UPO, Alessandria, Italy with constant speech impairment, moderate to severe intellectualdisability(ID)andmultiplebrainmalformations Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal motor including hypoplasia of corpus callosum and migration neuron disorder with adult onset. Mutation in over 30 disorders (polymicrogyria, pachygyria, lissencephaly and genesaccountforlessthan65%ofALSfamilialcases.To schizencephaly). Nevertheless, no patient have been prop- explore ALS missing heritability, we performed WGS of erly assessed by appropriated neuropsychological tests. 70 ALS/Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) patients nega- Usingmulti-genepanelorexomesequencing,weidentiﬁed tive for mutations in main known causative genes, 18 cases with WDR62 variants and report clinical, neu- focusing on a panel of 699 genes implicated in 5 neuro- ropsychological assessment and neuroradiological pheno- degenerative disorders(NDDs, ALS,Parkinson’s disease, type. Phenotypic spectrum of our patients is very large FTD, Ataxia and Spastic Paraparesis). We analysed and ranging from severe antenatal presentation leading to pro- prioritized mutations in the coding sequence, repeats found motor handicap, to mild-moderate ID, learning abil- expansions, and structural variants by standard bioinfor- ities and autonomy in daily life. We were surprised to matic tools and we implemented a novel pipeline to discoverthatsomepatientshadaVCIat50andabletoread prioritize non coding-variants with a possible pathoge- and write, similar to what is described with ASPM. Some neticeffect.Weidentiﬁed11pathogenicvariants.Fourof patients had normal brain structure on MRI except micro- them map in genes causative of rare forms of ALS cephaly. Interestingly, some patients develop ataxia with (KIF5A, NEK1, TBK1 OPTN). The remaining 7 variants age,whichwasneverreported.Epilepsyisnotconstantbut map in genes associated with different NDDs and never pharmaco-sensitive for all patients unless one. We report reported in ALS. Among them, ABCA7, TGM6 and here the largest series of WDR62 patients with a very pre- CCD
C88 C genes associated respectively to Alzheimer cise clinical, neuropsychological and neuroradiological diseaseandautosomaldominantspinocerebellarataxia.In characterization.WedemonstratethatWRD62mutationsdo addition, we found the most common causative mutation not always cause severe ID/motor handicap and cortical of PD in LRRK2, in an ALS patient with a PD positive family history. Among the non-coding variants, we prioritized5deepintronicvariantspredictinganeffectonAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 423 splicing mechanism whose functional impact is under Urgencias del Distrito Sanitario Málaga - Coin-Gudalhor- investigationwithinvitrostudies.Wefoundpathogenetic ceedicine, Malaga, Spain, Malaga, Spain, 11Department of variantsinALSpatientsingenesinvolvedinotherNDDs, Experimental Neurology, Division of Neurology, Goethe reinforcing the idea of a shared genetic cause and a pos- University Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany, Frankfurt, Ger- sible overlapping condition between these disorders. We many, 12Isar Amper Klinikum München Ost, kbo, Haar, identiﬁed for the ﬁrst time non-coding variants with a Germany,Haar,Germany,13DepartmentofMentalHealth, possible pathogenic role in ALS University Hospital of Reina Soﬁa, Cordoba, Spain, L. Corrado: None. R. Croce: None. N. Barizzone: Cordoba,Spain,14DepartmentofMentalHealth,University None. A. Di Pierro: None. L.M. Genovese: None. F. HospitalofJaen,Jaen,Spain,Jaen,Spain,15Departmentof Geraci: None. E. Mangano: None. R. D’Aurizio: None. MentalHealth,UniversityHospitalofJerezdelaFrontera, R. Bordoni: None. D. Corà: None. F. Favero: None. F. La Frontera, Spain, La Frontera, Spain, 16Department of DeMarchi:None.G.DeBellis:None.G.Manzini:None. Mental Health, University Hospital of Puerto Real, M. Severgnini: None. M. Pellegrini: None. L. Mazzini: Department of Mental Health, Cádiz, Spain, Cádiz, Spain, None. S. D’Alfonso: None. 17DepartmentofMentalHealth,HospitalPuntadeEuropa, Algeciras, Spain, Algeciras, Spain, 18Department of Psy- 
P09 .156.A chiatry, Carlos Haya Regional University Hospital, A novel bioinformatic approach for the family-based Malaga, Spain, Malaga, Spain, 19Centre for Human genetic analysis of whole-genome sequencing data from Genetics, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany, 8 multigenerational Spanish families with bipolar Marburg, Germany, 20Institute of Neuroscience and disorder MedicineINM-1,ResearchCenterJülich,Jülich,Germany, Jülich, Germany S.B.Fischer1,2,M.Fink3,C.K.Y.Ng4,5,C.S.Reinbold6,1,2, A. Maaser-Hecker7, F. Streit8, S. H. Witt8, J. Guzman- Introduction: Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a complex neu- Parra9, G. Orozco-Diaz10, G. Auburger11, M. Albus12, M. ropsychiatric disorder, with an estimated heritability of 60- Borrmann-Hassenbach12, M. J. González9, S. Gil-Flores13, 80%. Common genetic risk factors identiﬁed by GWAS F. J. Cabaleiro Fabeiro14, F. del Río Noriega15, F. Perez- explain 25-38% of the phenotypic variance. It is assumed Perez16, J. Haro-González17, F. Rivas18, F. Mayoral18, S. that rare variants may also play a substantial role and Herms1,2,7, M. Rietschel8, M. M. Nöthen7, P. Hoffmann1,2,7, explain part of the hidden heritability. One strategy to A. J. Forstner19,7,1, S. Cichon1,2,7,20 identifysuchvariantsisWholeGenomeSequencing(WGS) of large multiply affected families with BD. In the present 1Human Genomics Research Group, Department of Bio- study we conducted WGS of 108 individuals in 8 multi- medicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, Basel, generational affected families of Spanish origin. Switzerland, 2Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, Methods: Sequencing was performed with 30x mean University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, Basel, coverageonanIlluminaHiSeq2500andvariantcallingwas Switzerland, 3Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland, performed using the GATK best practice workﬂow. For Basel, Switzerland, 4Institute of Pathology, University downstream analysis we developed a variant based scoring Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, Basel, Switzerland, model. We combined information on family structure and 5Department of Biomedicine, Hepatology Laboratory, the proportion of allele sharing amongst the affected UniversityofBasel,Basel,Switzerland,Basel,Switzerland, individuals plus the biological impact for each variant 6Center for Lifespan Changes in Brain and Cognition based on different prediction classiﬁers such as CADD or (LCBC), Department of Psychology, University of Oslo, SNPeff. Oslo,Norway,Oslo,Norway,7InstituteofHumanGenetics, Results:Wefocusedontheidentiﬁcationofrarevariants University of Bonn, School of Medicine & University following two analyses pathways for the WGS data: an Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany, 8Depart- “extended exome” analysis, focusing on the high impact ment of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central and protein-coding variants only. Secondly we applied the Institute of Mental Health, University Medical Center model to the full WGS dataset, including also the non- Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, coding part of the genome. On average we identiﬁed 4.4 Mannheim, Germany, 9Department of Mental Health, million variants per individual. In two families, we Institute of Biomedicine IBIMA, University Hospital of identiﬁed stop mutations as the top scored variants in the Malaga, Malaga, Spain, Malaga, Spain, 10Unidad de genesTA
S2 R19andPPEF2.Additionaltopscoringvariants Gestión Clínica del Dispositivo de Cuidados Críticos y were identiﬁed in the non-coding/intronic regions of the genome.424 J.delPicchia S.B. Fischer: None. M. Fink: None. C.K.Y. Ng: None. subsequent trio exome analysisprioritized anapparently de C.S.Reinbold:None.A.Maaser-Hecker:None.F.Streit: novo heterozygous ACTA1 missense variant (c.226G>C,p. None. S.H. Witt: None. J. Guzman-Parra: None. G. Val118Met) in the fetus. A re-examination of the maternal Orozco-Diaz: None. G. Auburger: None. M. Albus: datarevealedalowmosaicism(15%)inthematernalblood None.M.Borrmann-Hassenbach: None.M.J.González: sample for the same variant. None.S.Gil-Flores:None.F.J.CabaleiroFabeiro:None. Conclusions: We postulate that the asymmetric maternal F.delRíoNoriega:None.F.Perez-Perez:None.J.Haro- myopathy is caused by a postzygotic mosaic mutation in González: None. F. Rivas: None. F. Mayoral: None. S. ACTA1. The fetus inherited the ACTA1 variant in a then Herms: None. M. Rietschel: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. non-mosaic state and developed the severe lethal pheno- P. Hoffmann: None. A.J. Forstner: None. S. type. An analysis of the ACTA1 variant in maternal muscle Cichon: None. tissue is intended. U. Grasshoff: None. K. Schoner: None. T. Haack: 
P10  Neuromuscular Disorders None.K.Schaeferhoff:None.P.Mazzola:None.S.Beck- Woedl: None. D. Rating: None. H. Goebel: None. S. 
P10 .01.B Hentze: None. A case of fetal arthrogryposis due to ACTA1-associated myopathy inherited from an affected mosaic mother 
P10 .02.C Whole exome sequencing reveals a novel homozygous U.Grasshoff1,K.Schoner2,T.Haack1,K.Schaeferhoff1,P. mutation in the ADAM22 gene, underpinning its Mazzola1, S. Beck-Woedl1, D. Rating3, H. Goebel4, S. association with severe neurologic morbidity. Hentze5 L. Sagi-Dain1, S. Sagi2, J. Haddad-Halloun1, V. Adir1, O. 1Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tübingen, Sadeh1, A. Peleg1 Germany, 2Institute of Pathology, Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany, 3Pediatric Neurology, Uni- 1Carmel Medical Center,Haifa,Israel,2BneiZionMedical versity Children’s Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, Center, Haifa, Israel 4DepartmentofNeuropathology,CharitèUniversityHospi- tal, Berlin, Germany, 5Human Genetical Practice, Heidel- Background: Numerous genes have been implicated in berg, Germany congenital arthrogryposis and epilepsy. In this report we describe a second reported case of ADAM22 mutations, Introduction: Pathogenic variants in ACTA1 (OMIM associated with severe neurologic manifestations. *102610) have been associated with a spectrum of rare Case presentation: We describe a female infant with myopathies.Inheritanceisdescribedasautosomal-recessive congenital arthrogryposis and severe hypotonia including aswellasautosomal-dominant.Theclinicalphenotypescan diaphragmatic weakness. Intractable seizures appeared in be highly variable regarding age at onset and severity. The the age of several days, and the patient passed away at the severe form of the disorder is characterized by the absence age of one year. Family history evaluation revealed similar of spontaneous movement, arthrogryposis, and respiratory symptomsindaughterofpaternalcousin,whopassedaway failure at birth. attheageof6months.Thispatienthadhypotonia,seizures, Case report: We report on a young woman who respiratory difﬁculty, and her brain MRI showed progres- presented with a congenital non-progressive muscular sive atrophy of the white matter. Consanguinity was noted disease with unilateral paresis of N. facialis, muscular in parents of both patients. hypotonia and non-symmetrical muscular atrophy. A Results:Wholeexomesequencingofthepatientrevealed phenotype-based exome analysis showed no causative a novel homozygous variant c.2077-2A>C in intron 23 of mutation. During her ﬁrst pregnancy a sonogram at ADAM22 gene. The variant was not found in large exome 14 weeks of gestation diagnosed severe arthrogryposis of databases, and several in-silico prediction programs classi- thefetuswithakinesiaofthehipsandulnardeviationofthe ﬁed the mutation as "pathogenic"vs no benign predictions. hands. The pregnancy was terminated. Fetal autopsy Family segregation analysis demonstrated heterozygous documented arthrogryposis multiplex as well as facial carrier state in both parents, their healthy daughter, as well dysmorphism, bilateral talipes equinovarus and extreme as in parents of additional familial case with similar atrophy of muscle ﬁbres. Histological examination was symptoms. Literature search yielded one description of concordant with a severe structural (actin) myopathy. The compound heterozygous mutations in ADAM22 gene,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 425 causing rapidly progressing cerebral atrophy, intractable Variants N° N°patients N°patients N°patients N°patients seizures, and intellectual disability. Previous research linkedto patients(%) with with2 with3 with>3 1variant variants variants variants showed that knockout mice for ADAM22 manifest with lethal seizures during the ﬁrst postnatal weeks. ALS/FTD 81 56 17 5 3 (38,57%) Conclusions: Our case provides valuable information to PD 19(9,05%) 14 7 0 0 the scarce literature evidence describing the association HSP 9(4,29%) 7 2 0 0 between mutations in ADAM22 gene to severe neurologic ALS/FTD 30 -- 9 15 6 +PD (14,29%) morbidity. ALS/FTD 16(7,62%) -- 10 4 2 L. Sagi-Dain: None. S. Sagi: None. J. Haddad- +HSP Halloun: None. V. Adir: None. O. Sadeh: None. A. PD+HSP 4(1,90%) -- 2 1 1 ALS/FTD 16(7,62%) -- -- 5 11 Peleg: None. +PD +HSP No 35 -- -- -- -- 
P10 .03.A Variants (16,67%) ThegeneticarchitectureofAmyotrophiclateralsclerosis and the role of comorbidity in Italian population Conclusions: Our study conﬁrmed that the genetic I. Palmieri1,2, S. Conti3, O. Pansarasa1, L. Diamanti4, S. architecture of ALS is extremely complex, highlighting Gagliardi1, M. Filosto5, C. Cereda1 the importance to screen also genes related to other NDs. Considering a broader genetic spectrum will help in 1Genomic and post-genomic Center, IRCCS Mondino understanding also atypical clinical presentations. Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Molecular I.Palmieri:None.S.Conti:None.O.Pansarasa:None. Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Department L.Diamanti:None.S.Gagliardi:None.M.Filosto:None. of Biology and Biotechnology "L. Spallanzani", University C. Cereda: None. of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 4General Neurology, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 5Center for Neuromus- 
P10 .04.B cularDiseasesandNeuropathies,UnitofNeurology,ASST DifferentlevelsofsolublenuclearSOD1activatespeciﬁc ‘Spedali Civili’, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy pathways in Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells of ALS patients Introduction: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease (ND) characterized by hetero- S. Gagliardi1, M. Garofalo1,2, C. Pandini1,2, M. Bordoni1, geneous clinical manifestations due to both genetic and L. Diamanti3, D. Sproviero1, O. Pansarasa1, C. Cereda1 phenotypic overlapping with other NDs, such as Fronto- temporal dementia (FTD), Parkinson’s disease (PD) and 1Genomic and post-genomic Center, IRCCS Mondino Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) (Elert-Dobkowska Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Biology and et al., 2019; Abramzon et al., 2020). Here, we screened an Biotechnology"L.Spallanzani",UniversityofPavia,Pavia, Italian population of 210 sporadic ALS patients for 95 Italy, 3General Neurology, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, genes related to ALS, FTD, PD and HSP to enlighten the Pavia, Italy genetic burden in ALS clinical spectra. Materials and Methods: Next Generation Sequencing Introduction: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a (NGS) was done using a customized panel of 175 genes fatal neurodegenerative disease caused by loss of motor- (SureSelect, Agilent). The eVai software (https://evai. neurons. SOD1 may have a toxic role in the pathogenesis engenome.com) was used for variant calling and classiﬁca- when the protein aggregates in the cytoplasm; increased tion. Pathogenic, likely pathogenic and uncertain variants accumulation of nuclear SOD1 (nSOD1) represents a pro- wereretainedandvalidatedbySangersequencing.
C9 orf72 tectivecellularreaction(Ceredaetal.,2013;Bordonietal., repeat expansion was assessed using the AmplideX® PCR/ 2019). We investigated pathways activated by nSOD1 in CE 
C9 orf72 Kit (Asuragen). Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) of ALS Results: 81 ALS patients carry one or more variants in patientsbydividingthemdependingonthe“high”or“low” ALS/FTD associated genes. Interestingly, there are also concentration of nSOD1. ALS patients that carry variants in PD (19) or in HSP (9) Methods:SubcellularfractionationfromPBMCsofALS linkedgenesandpatientsthatcarryvariantsingenesrelated patients (18) and healthy controls (12) was performed and either to ALS and other NDs. A summary is listed in the proteinswerequantiﬁedbyWesternblotting.RNAlibraries table below: were prepared by Illumina TruSeq Stranded RNA Library426 J.delPicchia and run on NextSeq (Illumina). Differential expression detectedin17.5%,anegativeresultwasobtainedin50.6%. analysis was performed using R package EBSeq. Mutations in the LAMA2, ATM, MEC
P2 , CAPN3, Results: We obtained two gene expression patterns for KCNQ2, RYR1, SPAST, SCO2, SL
C16 A2, SL
C2 A1, highandlownSODpatients.Differentiallyexpressedgenes SPG11, STXB
P1  genes were most often found in the in patients with high nSOD1 form a cluster similar to investigated group. Copy number variations (CNVs) were controls compared to low nSOD1 group. Pathways determined by coverage analysis in 31 patients (10.4%). activated in high nSOD1 patients are related to the up- Conclusions: In our study NGS-based tests detected regulation of SEMA6B, a semaphorin involved in axon 31.8% clinically signiﬁcant variants in patients with CP. guidance, and HS
P70 , molecular chaperones ensuring the The results of our work show that CP should not be correct protein folding. In low nSOD1 group the up- considered as an independent nosology, but as a key regulation of KDM4C and 
S100 B may be responsible for symptominmanyhereditarydiseases,includinggenetically hyper-demethylation of histone H3 impaired in ALS. heterogeneous. Conclusions: Our ﬁndings highlight the importance of V. Udalova: None. I. Kanivets: None. D. Pyankov: subcellular localization of soluble nSOD1 in ALS patients. None. I. Komarkov: None. K. Gorgishely: None. S. We observeda different behavior ofRNA regulation inthe Korostelev: None. two groups of patients, leading to pathways conferring “protection” where nSOD1 was high, and a general 
P10 .08.C “perturbations” where nSOD1 was low. Unraveling the genetic architecture of autosomal reces- S. Gagliardi: None. M. Garofalo: None. C. Pandini: sive Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies None. M. Bordoni: None. L. Diamanti: None. D. Sproviero:None.O.Pansarasa:None.C.Cereda:None. C.Armirola1,K.Peeters1,E.deVriendt1,S.Amor-Barris1, A. Jordanova1,2 
P10 .06.A Efﬁciency of high-throughput sequencing in the diag- 1VIB-UAntwerp Center of Molecular Neurology, Antwerp, nosis of genetic causes of cerebral palsy Belgium, 2Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochem- istry, Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria V. Udalova1, I. Kanivets1, D. Pyankov1, I. Komarkov1, K. Gorgishely1, S. Korostelev1,2 Introduction: Even though autosomal recessive Charcot- Marie-Tooth neuropathy (ARCMT) represents less than 1LLC GENOMED, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal 10% of CMT patients in Europe, in endogamous popula- State Autonomous Educational Institution of Higher tions it accounts for 30-50% of all CMT cases. The Education I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical pathogenesis of ARCMT is poorly understood. Over 30 University of the Ministry of Health of the Russian ARCMT genes have been identiﬁed so far, yet they only Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russian Fed- explainasmallportionofcases.Theaimofthisprojectisto eration identify novel causative ARCMT genes. Methods: Based on whole exome sequencing data of a Introduction: Cerebral Palsy (CP) is a group of clinically cohort of 135 ARCMT families highly enriched with heterogeneous conditions, data on the genetic causes of consanguineous pedigrees, we perform homozygosity which are currently underrepresented. The aim of our work mapping and focus on the resulting autozygous regions to is to determine the effectiveness of high-throughput do variant ﬁltering and prioritization. The functional effect sequencing in patients with CP. of the variants in candidate ARCMT genes is further Materials and methods: 604 patients, in whose clinical characterized in vitro and in vivo, using Drosophila signswas CP,wereexaminedusingNGS-basedtests (gene melanogaster as our main model of choice. panels, containing up to 2000 genes, whole exome and Results: In 2 siblings with severe axonal CMT we have genomesequencing).Dataanalysiswasperformedusingin- found a homozygous splice-site variant in a mitochondrial house pipeline. nuclear-encoded gene,that works asan assemblyfactorfor Results: Among the provided clinical data, spastic cytochrome c oxidase. Screening for additional cases manifestations were described in 256 patients (39.07%), identiﬁed 5 additional families with 9 different variants. atonic-astatic - in 111 patients (18.38%), mixed form - 45 Thesplicevariantleadstoframerecoveryandexpressionof patients (7.45%). Intellectual developmental disorder, an alternative transcript which lacks one exon. Immuno- speech delay were observed in 380 patients (62.91%), blotting showed that the new isoform is effectively seizures - in 267 patients (44.21%). After testing deﬁnitive translated into protein. The functional characterization of diagnosiscanbemadein31.8%cases,apossiblecausewasAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 427 the mutant protein in patient-derived lymphoblasts and in F. Haarich: None. Z. Aherrahrou: None. J. yeast models is currently ongoing. Erdmann: None. Conclusions: We have established a gene discovery pipelineforARCMTthatcombinesexomesequencingwith 
P10 .12.A homozygosity mapping and functional experiments in Molecular diagnosis of merosin-deﬁcient congenital cellular or in vivo models. The characterization of the muscular dystrophy in Moroccan patients by NGS and latest candidate is underway. identiﬁcation of a novel mutation C. Armirola: None. K. Peeters: None. E. de Vriendt: None. S. Amor-Barris: None. A. Jordanova: None. Y. El Kadiri1,2, I. Ratbi1, A. Zrhidri1,2, N. Birouk3, Y. Kriouile4, A. Seﬁani1,2, J. Lyahyai1 
P10 .10.B CRISPR interference as therapy strategy for COL VI- 1Centre de Recherche en Génomique des Pathologies CMD Humaines (GENOPATH), Faculté de Médecine et de pharmacie, Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco, F. Haarich, Z. Aherrahrou, J. Erdmann 2Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d’Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, 3Service de Neurophysiologie Institute for Cardiogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, clinique, Hôpital des Spécialités, Rabat, Morocco, 4Unité Germany de Neuropédiatrie et maladies neurométaboliques, Service de Pédiatrie PII- Hôpital d’enfant de Rabat, Faculté de Introduction: The spectrum disorder Collagen VI con- Médecine et de pharmacie, Mohammed V University, genital muscular dystrophy (COL VI-CMD) is caused by Rabat, Morocco mutations in CO
L6 A1, CO
L6 A2 and CO
L6 A3. The phe- notypicspectrumconsistsofthemildestandlateonsetform Introduction: Congenital muscular dystrophies (CMDs) Bethlem Myopathy (BM, OMIM #158810), intermediate are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of phenotypes and the most severe and early onset form Ull- neuromuscular disorders. The mostcommonCMD subtype rich congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD, OMIM is laminin-α2 or merosin deﬁcient congenital muscular #254090). There is still no treatment for COL VI-CMD. dystrophy(alsoknownasMD
C1 A),accountingfor30-40% Considering that haploinsufﬁciency is tolerated for of CMD cases. It is characterized by muscle weakness at CO
L6 A2, speciﬁc knockdown of the allele including a birth or within the ﬁrst months of life, delay in motor pathogenicdominant-negativevariantisunderinvestigation milestones, elevated creatine kinase (CK) and white matter as a treatment strategy for COL VI-CMD. The only abnormalities in brain MRI. MD
C1 A is an autosomal approach for CO
L6 A2 so far targeted a variant in intron 9 recessive condition caused by LAMA2 gene mutations. (c.954+17_954+22del28). We focus on a group of patho- Patients and methods: We investigated six unrelated genicvariantsthatleadtosubstitutionsofessentialGlycines Moroccan patients with clinical and paraclinical signs of in triple helical repeats (Gly-X-Y). congenital muscular dystrophy. We performed a molecular Materials and Methods: The aim is to utilize CRISPR analysis of a customized panel of 24 genes involved in interferencetorepressthetranscriptionofthemutatedallele different forms of muscular dystrophies by targeted next andtousecommonvariantstodifferentiatebetweenalleles. generation sequencing. Mutations were conﬁrmed by Aftertheidentiﬁcationofcommonheterozygousvariantsin Sanger sequencing. potential target sites (promotors, enhancers) via Sanger Results: Five known homozygous mutations: c.32T>C sequencing, the target region was enriched using Cas9 (p.Leu11Pro), c.1377delC (p.Tyr460ThrfsTer15), c.6993- enrichment and sequenced with an Oxford Nanopore 2A>C,c.8244+1G>A,c.8244+3_8244+6delAAGT,anda MinION. The data analysis was performed with a script novel homozygous nonsense variant c.2217G>A (p. containing several command line tools. Trp739Ter) were identiﬁed in the LAMA2 gene. Results: A 48kb region including enhancers, promotors Conclusions: Next generation sequencing has improved and 24 exons of CO
L6 A2 was successfully enriched, genetic diagnosis pathway for heterogeneous diseases like sequenced and the found variants were phased with the muscular dystrophies. Our results allowed to provide pathogenic variant. appropriate management of patients and genetic counseling Outlook: Allele-speciﬁc guideRNAs will be used to to families, and to expand mutational spectrum of LAMA2 repress the transfection of the pathogenic allele. gene in Moroccans. TheprojectissupportedbyagrantoftheGermanSociety Y. El Kadiri was supported by an excellence research of Muscular Diseases (DGM). grant from the National Center for Scientiﬁc and Technical Research, Rabat-Morocco.428 J.delPicchia Y. El Kadiri: None. I. Ratbi: None. A. Zrhidri: None. V. Antsupova: None. I. Lastivka: None. L. Khlu- N.Birouk: None.Y.Kriouile:None.A.Seﬁani:None.J. novska: None. M. Ryznychuk: None. L. Lyahyai: None. Hodovaniuk: None. 
P10 .13.B 
P10 .14.C The importance of targeted sequencing in the diagnosis Further delineation of clinical and molecular character- of congenital muscular dystrophy type 1A istics of congenital myasthenic syndromes in Indian families V. Antsupova1, I. Lastivka2, L. Khlunovska2, M. Ryznychuk2, L. Hodovaniuk3 S. Mishra, K. Girisha, A. Shukla 1Bohomolets National medical university, Kyiv, Ukraine, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher 2HSEEofUkraine,“BukovinianStateMedicalUniversity”, Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India Chernivtsi,Ukraine,3BukovynianCenterforRehabilitation and Integrated Rehabilitation of Children, Chernivtsi, Introduction:Congenitalmyasthenicsyndrome(CMS)isa Ukraine clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders characterizedbyaneuromusculartransmissiondefect.They Introduction: Type 1A Merosindeﬁcient congenital mus- are rare and often treatable genetic disorders depending on cular dystrophy (CMD1A) is an autosomal recessive neu- the underlying molecular defect. This study expands the romuscular disease caused by a mutation of the LAMA2 mutational spectrum of CMS in India. gene encoding the laminin α2-chain (merosine). Although Materials and Methods: We performed detailed clinical CMD1A in the European population takes the ﬁrst place evaluation in seven patients with CMS from ﬁve families (50%) in the structure of all CMD, there are difﬁculties in and singleton exome sequencing in ﬁve index patients. diagnosing this pathology. Validationoftheidentiﬁedvariantandsegregationanalysis Materials and Methods: Case CMD1A. Used clinical was done by Sanger sequencing. and genealogical, molecular-genetic, laboratory and instru- Results: All patients had autosomal recessive pattern of mental methods. inheritance.Clinicallysigniﬁcantvariantswereidentiﬁedin Results: A 3-year-old boy with a diagnosis of Werdnig- 4CMSdisease-causinggenesinﬁvefamilies:COLQ(2/5), Hoffmann spinal amyotrophy complicated by arthrogrypo- DOK7(1/5),RAPSN(1/5)andCHRNE(1/5).Weidentiﬁed sis was sent to consult a geneticist. At birth, the child had 2 novel variants (c.930_933delCATG in DOK7 and diffusehypotensionwiththeinvolvementoffacialmuscles, c.1016_1032+2dup in CHRNE) and 2 known variants a weak cry, a decrease in reﬂexes. At the age of 5 months, (c.955-2A>C in COLQ and c.490C>T in RAPSN) in thechilddidnotrollover;whenverticalized,itdidnotrest homozygous state. COLQ variant c.955-2A>C was identi- on its legs. In 1 year appeared ﬂexion contracture of large ﬁed in two unrelated families. Patient with RAPSN variant joints, a delay in motor development. Examination of had a later onset of disease while all others had an early- genetics:thechildhasseverediffusemuscularhypotension, onset of disease. All patients with COLQ variant had weakness of the axial muscles, proximal muscles of the generalized muscle weakness, those with DOK7 and limbs,face.Keeledchestdeformity,contractureoftheknee RAPSN variants had limb-girdle weakness, and with and ankle-foot joints. Blood CPK is 10 times higher than CHRNEvariant hadpredominantocular weakness. Patients normal; ENMG – signs of primary muscle damage; MRI: with COLQ and DOK7 variants showed improvement with damage to the white matter of the brain. Targeted salbutamol and CHRNE with pyridostigmine therapy. sequencing in the LAMA2 gene revealed mutations Conclusions: In CMS, genetic diagnosis is essential to 2049_2050del(pArg683Serfs*21) and c.7732C>T(p. guide pharmacotherapy and avoid adverse reactions to Arg2578*) in a compound heterozygous state. Final acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in COLQ, DOK7, and slow diagnosis: Merosindeﬁcient congenital muscular dystrophy channel CMS (AChR subunit genes). This study adds a type 1A. small but signiﬁcant cohort of patients with CMS Conclusions: The knowledge of the key sign CMD1A from India. allowsyoutoimmediatelyscrapethepatientformolecular- S. Mishra: None. K. Girisha: None. A. Shukla: None. genetic diagnostics. Core diagnosis, more important in predicting seizure; adequate therapy and rehabilitation of 
P10 .15.A the patient. Rare heterozygous DHTKD1 variants in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosisAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 429 I. Gogol1,2, A. Osmanovic2, H. Martens1, M. Widjaja1,2, K. 
P10 .16.B Müller3, O. Schreiber-Katz2, G. Schmidt1, B. Auber1, P. Dystrophinopathy patients with non-contiguous mole- Andersen4,A.Ludolph3,J.Weishaupt3,F.Brand1,S.Petri2, cular alterations: diagnosis and characterization of the R. G. Weber1 genetic mechanisms involved 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical L. Luce1,2, M. Carcione1,2, C. Mazzanti1,2, I. Szijan1, S. School, Hannover, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, Menazzi3,L.Francipane3,J. Nevado4,5,P. Lapunzina4,5,L. Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 3Depart- Rossetti6, P. Radic6, M. Abelleyro6, C. De Brasi6, F. ment of Neurology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany, Giliberto1,2 4Department of Neurosciences, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden 1Universidad de Buenos Aires; Departamento de Micro- biología, Inmunología, Biotecnología y Genética; Cátedra Introduction: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a de Genética; Laboratorio de Distroﬁnopatías, Buenos neurodegenerative disorder characterized by upper and Aires, Argentina, 2CONICET - Universidad de Buenos lower motor neuron loss. Numerous genes regulating Aires; Instituto de Inmunología, Genética y Metabolismo mitochondrial function have been associated with neuro- (INIGEM), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Universidad de degeneration. In a pilot whole-exome sequencing study of Buenos Aires, Hospital de Clínicas "José de San Martín", 27ALSpatients,rareheterozygousvariantsintheDHTKD1 División de Genética, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4Hospital gene were recurrently identiﬁed, including one nonsense UniversitarioLaPaz,IdiPAZ,InstitutodeGenéticaMédica variant. DHTKD1 encodes a dehydrogenase subunit acting y Molecular (INGEMM), Madrid, Spain, 5Centro de in L-lysine degradation in mitochondria. Pathogenic var- Investigaciones Biomédicas en Red para Enfermedades iants in DHTKD1 have been described causative of auto- Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 6CONICET - Academia somal recessive 2-aminoadipic and 2-oxoadipic aciduria Nacional de Medicina, Instituto de Medicina Experimental and autosomal dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type (IMEX), Buenos Aires, Argentina 2. Here, we aimed to investigate the frequency and clinical implications of rare DHTKD1 variants in an ALS cohort. Introduction: Dystrophinopathies are neuromuscular X- Methods: We performed whole-exome (n = 46) and linked recessive diseases caused by DMD mutations. targeted (n = 179) sequencing of 225 unrelated ALS Molecular alterations in this gene are large deletions/ patients of central European ancestry. All patients were duplications in 80% of cases and small mutations in the diagnosed according to the El Escorial criteria by a remaining. Several authors reported the occurrence of non- specialized neurologist. Clinical (e.g. age and region of contiguous rearrangements within the same DMD allele, onset, ALS subtype, and disease progression) and diag- with frequencies up to 4%. The present work aims to nostic (e.g. electrophysiological, biochemical) characteris- characterizetheincidenceofcomplexrearrangements inan tics are being analyzed to discover genotype-phenotype Argentinian dystrophinopathy cohort and unravel the relations. causing molecular mechanisms. Results:Fivemissenseandonenonsensevariant,allrare Materials and Methods: We analyzed 437 boys with (MAF < 0.5%) or novel and predicted to be pathogenic, clinical diagnosis of Dystrophinopathy. The following were identiﬁed in10 of225patients. Twoof these variants techniques were implemented: MLPA, WES, WGS, PCR- were previously described in patients with 2-aminoadipic SangerSequencing,CGHArrayandHUMARAassay.In2 and 2-oxoadipic aciduria. Preliminary clinical correlations cases, breakpoints were precisely determined, so we indicate a slightly later ALS onset in DHTKD1 variant performed a bioinformatic screening of microhomologies, carriers (median: 71 years) compared to non-carriers interspersed repeats, secondary structures and recombino- (median: 63 years). genic motifs 50pb surrounding each breakpoint. Conclusions: We identiﬁed rare heterozygous DHTKD1 Results: We detected 6 patients carrying complex variantsin4.4%ofcentralEuropeanALSpatients.Potential rearrangements in DMD: 2 deletions-duplications, 3 non- phenotype-genotype correlations and frequency of rare contiguous duplications and 1 large deletion plus a 20pb DHTKD1variantsinotherALScohortsarecurrentlybeing insertion. These accounted for 1.4% of our cohort. In a assessed. deletion-duplicationcase,familialsegregationandbioinfor- I. Gogol: None. A. Osmanovic: None. H. Martens: matics analysis suggested that the duplication was the ﬁrst None.M.Widjaja:None.K.Müller:None.O.Schreiber- mutagenic event caused by Fork Stalling and Template Katz: None. G. Schmidt: None. B. Auber: None. P. Switching (FoSTeS), while the deletion occurred secondly Andersen:None.A.Ludolph:None.J.Weishaupt:None. by Non-homologous end joining. Furthermore, bioinfor- F. Brand: None. S. Petri: None. R.G. Weber: None. matic screening of the deletion plus insertion propose that430 J.delPicchia the deletion was due to Microhomology-mediated end 4813 genes, no pathogenic variants were detected in 4M joining, while the insertion arose by FoSTeS. and 1F (persistent extremely elevated CK levels). Conclusions: Our ﬁndings widen the understanding of Conclusions: This study shows a diagnostic yield of the molecular events that may take place in DMD and almost 80% and lists the variants associated with myody- characterize the occurrence of complex rearrangements in strophies, underling the limitation in establishing the our dystrophinopathy cohort. This study was supported by diagnosis in patients with increased CK levels. PTC Therapeutics and University of Buenos Aires. C.L. Serban: None. N. Andreescu: None. I. Jurca- L. Luce: None. M. Carcione: None. C. Mazzanti: Simina: None. A. Corches: None. A. Chiriță Emandi: None.I.Szijan:None.S.Menazzi:None.L.Francipane: None. M. Puiu: None. None.J.Nevado:None.P.Lapunzina:None.L.Rossetti: None.P.Radic:None.M.Abelleyro:None.C.DeBrasi: 
P10 .21.A None. F. Giliberto: None. The ﬂoppy child syndrome is not only caused by mutations in genes related to neuromuscular disorders. 
P10 .17.C Elucidating myopathies with high creatine-kinase- from M. Gos1, E. Dębek1, A. Madej-Pilarczyk2, A. Potulska- unsolved cases to common diagnosis Chromik3,J.Pilch4,R.Śmigiel5,J.Wierzba6,7,R.Posmyk8, J.Fijak-Moskal9,A.Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1,A.Jakubiuk- C. L. Serban1,2, N. Andreescu1,2, I. Jurca-Simina1,2, A. Tomaszuk10, B. Wojtaś11, B. Gielniewski11, A. Kostera- Corches1,2, A. Chiriţă Emandi1,2, M. Puiu1,2 Pruszczyk3, J. Bal1, M. Jędrzejowska12,2 1Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Timisoara, Romania, 2Louis Turcanu Clinical Emergency Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital for Children, Timişoara, Romania TheChildren’sMemorialHealthInstitute,Warsaw,Poland, 3Department of Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Background: One of the most common causes for myo- Warsaw,Poland,4DepartmentofPediatricsandNeurology pathies are related to X-linked DMD gene, including forChildrenandAdolescents,MedicalUniversityofSilesia, DucheneMuscularDystrophy(DMD)andBeckerMuscular Katowice, Poland, 5Department of Paediatrics and Rare Dystrophy(BMD). Other autosomal recessive myopathies Disorders,Wroclaw Medical University, Wrocław, Poland, affect males(M) and females(F) consisting of limb-girdle 6Department of General Nursery, Medical University of myopathies. Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland, 7Department of Pediatrics, Method: 42 patients with high levels of creatine-kinase Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of Gdansk, addressed the Regional Center of Medical Genetics Timis Gdańsk,Poland,8DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,Medical County, Romania (October 2017-September 2019), either University of Białystok, Białystok, Poland, 9Department of having suggestive symptoms of myodystrophy (23M and Medical Genetics, Polish-Amercian Institute of Pediatrcs, 1F) or for verifying carrier (6M and 10F). Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland, 10Department of Results: DMD was diagnosed in 13M, with hemizygous PediatricNeurologyandRehabilitation,MedicalUniversity variantsinDMDgene(usingMPLA)withfollowingexons of Białystok, Białystok, Poland, 11Laboratory of Molecular deletion: 10-11;13-17;22-41;39-43;46-53;51;58,exon 3-7 Neurobiology, Neurobiology Center, Nencki Institute of duplication and variants (using NGS): c.7174dupG; Experimental Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, War- c.8608C>T; c.8688_8689delAG; c.10738delG. BMD was saw, Poland, 12Neuromuscular Department, Mossakowski diagnosed by MLPA in 6M: deletions in exons 45-47 and Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, 45-51.Twomalecousinshadapreviouslyunreportedsplice Warsaw, Poland siteNM_004009.3:c.175-1G>TpathogenicvariantinDMD gene. After negative testing for DMD gene, limb-girdle Introduction: The, ﬂoppy child syndrome” is one of the muscular dystrophy was conﬁrmed using NGS in com- most unambiguous clinical manifestations. Neonatal or poundheterozygosityinFKRPgenein3patients,ofwhich childhoodhypotonia canpresentwithother symptoms,like 2 were siblings(M/F): c.148A>G/c.985G>A, and one decreased muscle tone, arthrogryposis or developmental unrelated (c.826C>A/c.935G>C). Pompe disease was delay making a deﬁnite clinical diagnosis challenging. We diagnosed in two brothers showing pathogenic variants in aimed to assess the genetic causes of this condition, with GAA gene (exon 18 deletion) and in one unrelated patient interest in neuromuscular disorders (NMD). with c.784G>A/?.Carrier status for DMDwas identiﬁedin Patients and methods: For 124 patients with excluded 6 out of 10F. Using MLPA for DMD and a NGS panel of common genetic causes of early hypotonia (e.g. SMA, PWS,MTM1andACTA1mutations),anexomesequencingAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 431 have been performed. The ﬁrst-tier analysis of exome data Results: We validated the qPCR-based approach on 26 has been done towards the identiﬁcation of pathogenic individuals with at least one allele of chromosome 4 D4Z4 variants in NMD-, arthrogryposis- or connective tissue array contracted up to 10-1 repeats, and on 19 individuals disorder-related genes. without the contraction. In 96% of the cases, qPCR-based Results: Mutations in genes related to neuromuscular results were concordant with the Southern blotting and disorders(NMD)wereidentiﬁedin42patients.In21(32%) molecular combing references. Remaining 60 individuals and 18 (27%) probands, we have found mutations in genes wereanalyzedonlybyqPCR-basedapproach.Inagroupof related to congenital myopathies or muscular dystrophies, 64affectedindividuals,FSHDdiagnosiswasconﬁrmedfor respectively. The commonly affected genes included 36 (56.3%) patients. In 69% of the conﬁrmed cases, LMNA, RYR1 and TTN with 5, 4 and 3 patients with pathogenic alleles had number of D4Z4 repeats in range pathogenic variants, respectively. In 13 patients, mutations between 3-6. We deﬁned 13 carriers in a group of 39 in non-NMD genes were found, including 2 cases with healthyrelatives(33.3%).Amongthem,76.9%ofcaseshad mutation in FKB
P14  (Ehlers-Danlos syndrome), PIEZO2 thepermissiveallelewithnumberoftheD4Z4repeatsfrom (distal arthrogryposis) and NALCN (hypotonia with psy- 6to8.Therewerenosigniﬁcantprevalencebetweensexin chomotordelay).MutationsinDDX3X,CO
L9 A3,NEXMIF, any observed groups. PP
P2 R1A, CTB
P1 , SL
C16 A2 and GRIA3 were found in Conclusions: In this work we present newly developed single cases. FSHD diagnostics approach based on qPCR and ﬁrst study Conclusions:Thegeneticcauseofﬂoppychildsyndrome of the FSHD genotyping in Russian patients. We observed was identiﬁed in 55/124 (44.3%) patients. Although the enrichment of the permissive alleles in the range of 3-6 most commonly mutated genes are related to NMD, other D4Z4 units among affected individuals, whereas among genes involved in etiology of connective tissue disorders carriers permissive alleles were enriched in the range 6-8 and syndromic hypotonia should be also considered. D4Z4 units. The study was supported from National Science Centre N. Zernov: None. M. Skoblov: None. A. grant no. UMO-2015/17/B/NZ5/01368 Guskova: None. M. Gos: None. E. Dębek: None. A. Madej-Pilarczyk: None. A. Potulska-Chromik: None. J. Pilch: None. R. 
P10 .24.A Śmigiel: None. J. Wierzba: None. R. Posmyk: None. J. Molecular -genetic study of hereditary spastic para- Fijak-Moskal: None. A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: plegia in Russian patients None. A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk: None. B. Wojtaś: None. B. Gielniewski: None. A. Kostera-Pruszczyk: None. J. V.A.Kadnikova,O.P.Ryzhkova,G.E.Rudenskaya,A.V. Bal: None. M. Jędrzejowska: None. Polyakov 
P10 .22.B Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Diagnostic of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy Federation in Russian patients based on newly developed qPCR approach Introduction: Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is highly heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative dis- N. Zernov, M. Skoblov, A. Guskova eases that is characterized by progressive spasticity and weakness of the lower limbs and mild sensory dysfunc- Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian tion,duetotheaxonaldegenerationinthepyramidaltract. Federation Mutations in about 80 different loci and 60 genes have been associated with HSP pathogenesis. Thus the appli- Introduction: Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy cation of NGS technologies can enable the enhanced (FSHD) is one of the most prevalent congenital myody- molecular diagnosis of HSP because multiple loci can be strophies. FSHD molecular-genetic diagnostics requires analyzed simultaneously. Herein we characterize a cohort expensiveandlaborious methods. Herewepresentanewly ofRussianHSPpatientsusingNGStechniquesalongwith developed simpliﬁed qPCR-based diagnostic approach and the routine diagnostics. obtained results. Materials and Methods: We screened DNA samples Materials and Methods: Blood-derived DNA samples from198unrelated probandswithHSP.Sanger sequencing from64FSHDpatientsand39theirphenotypicallyhealthy of SPAST gene was performed in 60 DNA samples, and relatives were examined by Southern blotting, molecular AT
L1  was analyzed in 24 of partially overlapping samples. combing, and a newly developed qPCR-based approach. DNA with unidentiﬁed mutations and non-tested samples432 J.delPicchia wereexaminedbyMLPA-analysisandbytargetgenepanel ZFYV
E26 , GJ
C2 , CAPN1, ZFYV
E26 , KIF1B, SPG11 (four containing 63 HSP related genes. families), AT
L1  (two families), MFN2, 
C19 orf12, and one Results: We diagnosed the genetic type of HSP for 97 novel candidate-HSP gene were identiﬁed. (49%) patients (SPG4–54.6%,SPG3A –14.4%, SPG30 – Discussion: HSP-causing genes were detected in 26 6.2%,SPG11–6.2%,SPG8–3.1%,SPG17–3.1%,and9 probands(52%). Also, a novel candidate-gene that is more forms less than in 3% each). We ﬁnd 88 mutations exclusively expressed in the brain and directly involved in across diagnosed patient, whereas 39 mutations were new. axonogenesiswasidentiﬁed.GiventhattheHSPisalength- Remarkably, 85.2% of mutations were discovered by NGS dependent, “dying-back” axonopathy, the candidate-gene and Sanger sequencing; and 14.8% of larger genomic can be an important HSP-causative gene. The research rearrangements - by MLPA-analysis. presented the powers of WES for facilitating gene- Conclusions: Our data show that combination of NGS discovery and identiﬁcation of causative genes for diseases and routine methods allows for effective HSP diagnostics. with genetic heterogeneity.The precise mechanismsunder- This isthe ﬁrst overview of theHSP mutations frequencies lying the HSP are unknown. Identiﬁcation of novel genes in Russian population that have to be further expanded. andmolecular-pathwayswillenhanceourknowledgeofthe V.A. Kadnikova: None. O.P. Ryzhkova: None. G.E. cellular pathways that are involved in the disease Rudenskaya: None. A.V. Polyakov: None. pathogenesis. 
P10 .25.B Grant-Reference:no.963846(NIMAD) Genetic analysis of 50 unrelated cases affected with R. Hajati: None. A. Davarzani: None. S. Hashemi: hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP): a novel candidate None. M. Rahimi Bidgoli: None. L. Javan Parast: None. gene M.Pashaei:None.F.DanaeeFard:None.H.Najmabadi: None. M. Rohani: None. F. Fatehi: None. S. Naﬁssi: R. Hajati1, A. Davarzani1, S. Hashemi1, M. Rahimi None. A. Alavi: None. Bidgoli1, L. Javan Parast1, M. Pashaei1, F. DanaeeFard1, H. Najmabadi1, M. Rohani2, F. Fatehi3, S. Naﬁssi3, A. 
P10 .26.C Alavi1 GWAS on hand grip strength: new insights into the genetics of muscular strength support a strong genetic 1Geneticsresearchcenter,UniversityofSocialWelfareand component at different ages. Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of Neurology, Iran University of Medical F. Abbondanza, S. Paracchini Sciences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Department of Neurology, Tehran University University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Introduction: Hand grip strength (HGS) is a widespread Introduction: Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a proxy for muscular strength and a predictor of cardiovas- genetically heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorder is cular disease and poor health outcomes. Genetic studies in characterized by lower-limb spasticity and weakness. To adult cohorts (e.g. UK Biobank) found multiple genes date, more than 70 genes have been identiﬁed that con- associated with HGS and showed a modest heritability tribute to the cause of HSP. Despite the use of next- (h2~24%). However, the genetics of HGS remains largely generation sequencing-based methods, genetic-analysis has elusive and has never been explored in a cohort of young failed in the ﬁnding of causative-genes in ~50% of HSP individuals. patients,indicatingasigniﬁcantgeneticheterogeneityinthe MaterialsandMethods:WeperformedGWASanalyses disease and emphasizing that the majority of HSP-genes on three measures of HGS in the ALSPAC dataset have remained unknown. (N~5,400, mean age = 11.8 years), namely HGS for the Materials and Methods: To identiﬁcation of HSP- rightandlefthandandgripstrengthmaximal,i.e.bestresult causing genes, whole-exome sequencing (WES) was regardless of the hand used. Analyses were performed in performed in 50 unrelated-Iranian probands. Candidate PLINK and functional mapping with FUMA. Genetic variants were conﬁrmed and co-segregated in the family correlations and SNP-heritability were computed with LD members.FunctionalstudiesincludingRNAseqforafamily Score Regression using summary statistics from UK harboringavariationinanovelcandidate-genearecurrently Biobank. in progress. Results:Wereportedanovelgenome-widesigniﬁcanthit Results: Variations in 18 known HSP-causing genes forHGS(rs2968991,p<1.75E-08)withtherighthandand including SPEG, ERLIN1, ERLIN2, ATAD3A, SPAST (four wereplicatedacommonassociationinUKBiobankforthe families),ENTPD1,SPG7(twofamilies),KIF5A,CY
P7 B1, three traits (p < 1E-06). We reported a higher SNP-Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 433 heritability than previous studies and highlighted a father also reported milder and similar weakness in his moderate-to-high genetic correlation between HGS in the childhood and carried the same mutation. current study and in the UK Biobank. Conclusions:Thepresentexperiencedemonstratesthata Conclusions: In addition to a novel association, our genotypeﬁrstapproachcanbehelpfulindiscoveringnovel analysis replicated some of the associations previously mutation in rare diseases even with atypical clinical reported both at pathway (skeletal muscle ﬁbres and presentations or negative WES results. neurological disorders pathways) and gene-speciﬁc M. Shariati: None. R. Jafarzadeh Esfehani: None. R. (HOXB3) level. This, together with the modest-to-high Boostani: None. M. Soudyab: None. A. Sadr- geneticcorrelationwithHGSintheUKBiobanksuggestsa Nabavi: None. stable genetic component of HGS at different ages. This work was funded by the Royal Society. 
P10 .29.C F. Abbondanza: None. S. Paracchini: None. A case of Neuromyotonia associated to a 
C9 ORF72 CCCGG expansion 
P10 .27.A newmutationcausinghypokalemicperiodicparalysisin G. Bonapace1, R. Gullace1, R. Procopio2,3, M. Gaglardi3, a young child, a practical example for helpfulness of F.Fortunato2,A.Gambardella2,3,P.Valentino2,G.Annesi3 genotype ﬁrst approach 1University Magna Graecia, Faculty of Medicine, Pedia- M. Shariati, R. Jafarzadeh Esfehani, R. Boostani, M. trics, Catanzaro, Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Soudyab, A. Sadr-Nabavi "Magna Graecia" of Catanzaro, Department of Medical Sciences, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Neuroimaging Research Unit, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, IBFM/CNR; Institute of Neurology, Catanzaro, Italy Islamic Republic of Introduction: Neuromyotonia is a peripheral nerve hyper- Introduction: Hypokalemic periodic paralysis(HOKPP) is excitability (PNH) syndrome that presents as continuous a rare disorder usually manifesting by episodes of muscle motor activity. Mutations in the KCNA1 gene, which weakness or paralysis. However in some cases, clinical encodes the voltage-gated potassium channel, presentationmaybeatypicalandmaybemisdiagnosedwith Kv1.1 subunit, have been found to be associated with this other possible progressive neurological diseases. The pre- syndrome. sent report describes a case of HOKPP which was ﬁrst Materials and Methods: Thepatient was a 56-year man misdiagnosed as a case of distal spinal muscular atrophy presenting cramps painful stiffness of calves, undulating (DSMA). wave-like rippling of left thigh muscles. The neurological Materialandmethods:A5yearsoldmalechildreferred examination showed visible myokymias of left thigh. becauseofvariabledistallimbweakness.Thepatienthada Electromyography revealed spontaneous continuous single historyofhypotoniaatbirth,evidenceofirritablemyopathy motor unit discharges ﬁring at a high intraburst frequency on electro-diagnostic study and elevated creatine- (>150 Hz)compatible with neuromyotonic discharges, on phosphokinase. The whole exome sequencing(WES) vastus medialis of the left tight. Single needle electromyo- revealed a variant with unknown signiﬁcant(VUS) in graphy and nerve conduction studies were unremarkable. IGHMB
P2  gene(c.403A>G) causing DSMA. However, Brain MRI and laboratory test excluded autoimmune or the VUS was not conﬁrmed in segregation analysis and paraneoplastic conditions. The Molecular analysis revealed thepatient’sWESdatawasreanalyzedwithagenotypeﬁrst no point mutation on the KCANA1 gene. Based on the approach. recentlyidentiﬁedrolefor
C9 ORF72protein,inmodulating Results: The FASTQ ﬁles were reanalyzed by Seam- the membrane channel subunits maturation, an Amplicon- lessTMsoftwareandthepathogenicityof112variantswhich length analysis on the 
C9 ORF72 gene, was performed. were pathogenic or likely pathogenic were checked in Results: Capillary electrophoresis analysis of the patient VarsomeTM and Sixteen pathogen and likely pathogen amplicon revealed the presence of a 94 pathological variants were remained checked in OMIMTM database. CCCGG expansion. Only 1 candidate variant in CACNA1S gene(c.3724A>G) Conclusions: The Kv1.1 subunit recycling processes is causingHOKPPwasremained.Afterabriefhistorytaking, driven by speciﬁc Rab proteins and regulated by the prolonged episodes of muscle weakness after exercises in 
C9 ORF72 protein acting both as Rab effector and school was reported. Our segregation study on patient’s component of the GTP ase exchange factor GEF. We familyconﬁrmedthediagnosisofHOKPPandthepatient’s hypothesizethatthelossoffunctionofthec9orf72protein, due to the CCCGG expansion can affect the trafﬁcking of434 J.delPicchia the Kv1.1 monomers leading to a reduction in the channel prenatalorpreimplantationgenetictestinginthefamily.At subunits correctly allocated into the plasma membrane, the same time, it underscores the importance of whole- altering the normal ﬂows of potassium during the action exome sequencing. potential generation. D.Musalkova:None.L.Noskova:None.V.Stranecky: G. Bonapace: None. R. Gullace: None. R. Procopio: None. P. Melenovska: None. R. Dobrovolny: None. H. None. M. Gaglardi: None. F. Fortunato: None. A. Treslova: None. K. Hodanova: None. H. Hartmannova: Gambardella: None. P. Valentino: None. G. None. A. Gregorova: None. T. Honzik: None. S. Annesi: None. Kmoch: None. 
P10 .30.A 
P10 .31.B Identiﬁcation of two rare homozygous frameshift InvestigatingthepathogenicityofCAPN3c.1746-20C>G variantsinLBX1 and PAPD5/TENT4B genesinsiblings splicing variant and its association with LGMD R1 with chronic respiratory insufﬁciency calpain3-related D. Musalkova1, L. Noskova1, V. Stranecky1, P. M.Mroczek1,J.Hudson2,A.Töpf1,R.Barresi1,J.Duff1,E. Melenovska1,R.Dobrovolny1,H.Treslova1,K.Hodanova1, England3, K. Chao3, M. Sobalska-Kwapis4, D. Strapagiel4, H. Hartmannova1, A. Gregorova2, T. Honzik1, S. Kmoch1 D. MacArthur3, V. Straub1 1Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Department of Pedia- 1Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle trics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Highly Specialized Service Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department (HSS)forLGMDs,NewcastleuponTyne,UnitedKingdom, ofMedicalGenetics,UniversityHospitalOstrava,Ostrava, 3Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts Czech Republic GeneralHospital,Boston,MA,UnitedStates,4TheBiobank Lab, Department of Molecular Biophysics, Lodz, Poland We report a case of two siblings with chronic respiratory insufﬁciency, psychomotor retardation, and suspected con- Limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) R1 calpain3- genital myopathy. The children were born to con- related is the most common autosomal recessive form of sanguineous parents of Roma ethnicity. LGMD. The CAPN3 c.1746-20C>G variant has a popula- Exome sequencing identiﬁed two rare homozygous tion frequency of above >1% and there is conﬂicting frameshift variants in LBX1 and PAPD5 genes. These information regarding its pathogenicity in the literature. In variants were present in heterozygous state in the parents. approximately 2.000 exome sequenced patients included in LBX1 is a transcription factor that affects migration of the MYO-SEQ project we identiﬁed c.1746-20C>G 26 muscleprecursorcellsandithasbeenassociatedwithadult times in heterozygosity and 1 time in homozygosity. We idiopaticscoliosis.Identicalframeshiftvariant(p.Val236A- recruited further centres from Poland, Estonia, Latvia and lafsTer59) was described in a recent publication (Hernan- UK.Weidentiﬁedthec.1746-20C>GtogetherwithCAPN3 dez-Miranda et al., 2018) as a variant that interferes only c.598_612del, c.550delA, p.Arg39Cys, p.Gly234Arg and with a subset of Lbx1 functions, speciﬁcally, with the other pathogenic heterozygous CAPN3 variants. One indi- ability to cooperate with Phox2b. This disturbance leads to vidual affected with LGMD was homozygous for c.1746- congenital central hypoventilation. The variant was present 20C>G. Most of the patients were of Polish or Eastern inoneindividualofRomaethnicityinourinternaldatabase European origins. In all these cases there was reduced cal- but is absent from GnomAD database. Ethnicity-speciﬁc pain3 expression on Western Blots and muscle MRI in genomic databases would be useful tools to estimate available cases was suggestive for LGMD R1 calpain3- population frequency of candidate variants. related. The phenotype of these patients was keeping up The effect of the homozygous frameshift variant in with mild calpainopathy with characteristic hypertrophies. PAPD5/TENT4B gene (p.Ser610ArgfsTer56) is not clear. Population studies suggest allele frequency of 0.017 in The gene is classiﬁed as intolerant to the loss of function Poland and 0.015 in Estonia. No homozygous healthy (pLI=0,999)butitisnotassociatedwithanydisorder.The individualswereidentiﬁedsofarinourpopulationalstudies TENT4Benzymewasrecentlydescribedasanoncanonical and according to gnomAD there are 3 homozygous indi- poly(A)polymerasethatgeneratesmixedpoly(A)tailswith viduals (out of 282.874). In some populations the variant intermittent guanyl residues that shield mRNA from was rare or nearly absent. Functional studies are ongoing. degradation (Lim et al., 2018). Population frequency data suggest that c.1746-20C>G may Two homozygous candidate variants in siblings born to be a hypomorphic variant. Preliminary haplotype analysis consanguineousparentssubstantiallycomplicateapotential of a patient homozygous for c.1746-20C>G revealed aAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 435 haplotypeblock,indicatingthismightbeafounderallelein Conclusions: The result of the cohort led to better Polish population. CAPN3 c.1746-20C>G variant may be understandingoftherelativeprevalenceofdifferentLGMD often missed as many tests include only 10bp of ﬂanking subtypes and genotype-phenotype correlation in Turkish intronic region. population. M. Mroczek: None. J. Hudson: None. A. Töpf: None. D.Mortazavi:None.E.VanlıYavuz:None.E.Borklu R. Barresi: None. J. Duff: None. E. England: None. K. Yucel: None. S. Avcı: None. S. Eraslan: None. P. Chao: None. M. Sobalska-Kwapis: None. D. Strapagiel: Oﬂazer: None. H. Kayserili: None. None. D. MacArthur: None. V. Straub: None. 
P10 .34.B 
P10 .33.A Expanding of mutation spectrum in Muscular Dystro- Genetic variability and clinical spectrum of limb-girdle phies: A Turkish Cohort muscular dystrophy in a cohort of Turkish patients C. Alavanda1, H. Polat1, A. Ilker1, E. A. Ates2, M. A. D. Mortazavi1, E. Vanlı Yavuz2, E. Borklu Yucel3, S. Avcı3, Soylemez1,B.B.Geckinli1,A.I.Guney1,P.Ata1,A.Arman1 S. Eraslan3, P. Oﬂazer2, H. Kayserili3 1MarmaraUniversitySchoolofMedicine,MedicalGenetics 1Koç University, Graduate School of Health Science, Department,Istanbul,Turkey,2MarmaraUniversityPendik Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Neurology, Koç Univer- ResearchandTrainingHospital,MedicalGeneticsDepart- sity School ofMedicine, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, ment, Istanbul, Turkey 3DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,KoçUniversitySchoolof Medicine, Genetic Diagnostics Center Istanbul, Turkey, Muscular dystrophies are heterogeneous group of disorder. Istanbul, Turkey More than40 geneswere identiﬁed and genotype-phenotype correlationisnotclearformostofcases.Theaimofthisstudy Background: Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies is to improve the genotypic features of muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are clinically and genetically heterogeneous otherthanDuchenne-BeckerMuscularDystrophywithnovel group of neuromuscular disorders affecting hip and mutations. Thirty-three patients who were suffering from shoulder muscles. Features include hypertrophy of calf muscular dystrophy were referred to our clinic. Sixteen muscles and elevated level of serum CK. Age of onset, patientsweremaleandseventeenpatientswerefemale.Mean progression and distribution of weakness vary according to agewas22,06yearsandmeanageofdiseaseonsetwas11,48 genetic subtypes which are related to more than 30 genes. years. Creatinine kinase levels were between 27.000 and 90 We aimed to correlate the clinical manifestations and clin- U/L(mean 2.964). Next-Generation Sequencing(NGS) panel ical exome sequencing results of 29 patients with LGMD which has 33 muscular dystrophy related genes were from Turkey. sequenced for all patients. Reported pathogenic mutations in Method: 29 patients with clinical diagnosis of LGMD fourteenpatientsandnovelmutationsintwelvepatientswere were recruited to NGS-based clinical exome screening of identiﬁed. One patient’s biopsy had shown megaconial 4811 genes, we performed during 2017-2019, at tertiary changes, NGS panel revealed homozygous c.1031G>A(p. health center, Istanbul/Turkey. Arg344Gln) known mutation in CHKB gene. Another Results:In28patients,34variantswereidentiﬁed,seven mutation in CHKB gene which was novel homozygous of variants are novel. In 28 patients, the most common c.1130G>T(p.Arg377Leu) mutation was detected in eleven- subtypes were LGMD R1 calpain3-related in eleven year-old patient. Novel homozygous c.195+3A>T mutation (39.28%), LGMD R2 dysferlin-related in nine (32.14%), inSGCGgenewasidentiﬁedinpatientwhosebiopsyshowed Sarcoglycanopathies in four [14.28%; LGMD R3 α-sarco- pathogenic staining with gamma-sarcoglycan. In thirty-four- glycan-related in three (10.71%), LGMD R5 γ -sarcogly- year-old patient and her sibling who had same clinic novel can-related in one(3.57%)], LGMD R14 POMT2-related, homozygous c.3666delA(p.Asp1223Thefs*24) mutation in LGMD R20 ISPD-related, LGMD R7 telethonin-related DYSF gene were identiﬁed. In CAPN3 gene two novel and LGMD R10 titin-related, each in one patient (3.57%) homozygousmutationsweredetected,whichwerec.691T>C and one patient with no variant related to the phenotype. (p.Phe231Leu) and c.632+2T>G. In one patient, CNV ana- Rare clinical presentationswere observed, one LGMD R10 lyses revealed SYN
E2  gene exon 65-66 deletion. Homo- titin-related patient with cognitive/psychomotor retardation zygous SGCA c.850C>T(p.Arg284Cys) mutation in two and a LGMD R14 POMT2-related patient with distal unrelated patients were detected, which indicates this muta- weakness.Increasedliveraminotransferases(ALT/AST)led tionmayhave founder effect. Hereinwe present33patients’ to diagnosis of neuromuscular diseases in seven patients. genetic test results with recurrentandnovel mutationswhich contribute the literature.436 J.delPicchia C.Alavanda:None.H.Polat:None.A.Ilker:None.E. None. R. Taheri: None. A. Keramatipour: None. M. A. Ates: None. M.A. Soylemez: None. B.B. Geckinli: Keramatipour: None. None.A.I.Guney:None.P.Ata:None.A.Arman:None. 
P10 .36.A 
P10 .35.C Usefulness of studying myopathies and muscular dys- Genetic analysis of 309 Iranian patients with muscular trophies through Exome Sequencing: an experience of dystrophy and congenital myopathy by next generation 73 cases sequencing Y. Moreno-Saez1, A. Romera-López1, A. Andújar1, A. M. Asadollahi1, A. Karamzade1, M. Taghizadeh2, Z. López2, T. Otero1, M. D. Ruíz1, S. Valverde1, C. Casañ- Golchehre1, P. Nourmohammadi2,3, N. Nourpour2,3, M. Martínez1,N. Serrano1, J.L. Díaz1,J.García1, A.Gómez1, Jamshidifar2,3, R. Taheri2,3, A. Keramatipour3, M. C. Collado1, A. Arilla1, C. M. Moya1, A. Matilla-Dueñas3, Keramatipour1,2,3 S. Santillán1 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, 1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna (Valencia), Spain, 2SIGEN- Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, Bogotá (Colombia), Islamic Republic of, 2Watson Genetic Laboratory, North Colombia, 3Health Sciences Research Institute Germans Kargar Street, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3NGS Trias i Pujol, Badalona (Barcelona), Spain Department, Pishgam Biotech Company, North Kargar Street, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Muscle weakness and hypotonia usually suggest a clinical diagnosis of myopathy or muscular dystrophy. However, Muscular dystrophies and congenital myopathies are a large these pathologies include more than 50 subtypes and are group of heterogeneous muscle disorders. Here, next associated with more than 250 genes, making an accurate generation sequencing (NGS) was used to investigate diagnosis challenging. genomic variants including copy number variants (CNV) to Genetic testing through NGS has a huge impact on determine causative variants behind clinical presentations in diagnosis due to its ability to analyze, in parallel, large patients.DNAsampleswereextractedfrom309patientswith number of genes and due to the possibility of reanalyzing presentationofmusculardystrophyandcongenitalmyopathy non-conclusive cases including new disease-causing genes. who were referred to our laboratory. NGS was performed to Such potential has been proven to be even useful for the investigate genes associated with muscular disorders. NGS diagnosis of families with a strong history of hereditary ﬁndings were validated using other molecular methods such diseasewhennoaffectedmembersareavailableandhealthy asMLPA,QPCR,longPCR,andPCR-Sangersequencing.In relatives must be tested. 275 out of 309 patients, variants with pathogenic or likely Here, we applied NGS to a cohort of 73 patients with pathogenic classiﬁcations (88.9%) were detected. Based on clinical or familial suspicion of myopathy or muscular genetic ﬁnding and other clinical and para-clinical data, dystrophy. Samples were analyzed using SureSelect XT diagnosis wasconﬁrmed in these275patients. Totalnumber Human All Exon kit (Agilent) and a HiSeq sequencer ofknownornoveldetectedpathogenicandlikelypathogenic (Illumina). An in-house pipeline was used for the bioinfor- variantsis303variantsin51genes.Themostfrequentgenes matic analysis. Fifty-four out of 73 individuals were causing the disease in this study were DMD (68/309, 22%), analyzed using a whole clinical exome approach while the LAMA2 (36/309, 11%), and SGCB (31/309, 10%). More- others were analyzed through virtual panels. Variant over, the most common mutations detected in our patients ﬁltering was performed based on variant effect, familial weregrossdeletion/duplicationvariantsinDMDgene,SGCB pattern of inheritance, allele frequency and information deletions and deletion of exon 7 in SMN1 gene. Detailed available in databases. analysis of data will bepresented in the meeting. In addition Genetic diagnosis was achieved in 23 out of 73 patients toobtainingvaluabledata regardinggeneticepidemiology of (31,5%) including a patient with a complex phenotype of hereditarymuscular diseases in Iran, this studyshowed great tricuspid insufﬁciency with structural heart disease and value of NGS for deﬁning causative variants in patients with ﬁbromyalgia. In 39 patients only VOUS were detected muscular diseases. High frequency of CNVs detected as the (53,4%). In 11 out of 73 patients (15,1%) no candidate causative variants in patients shows the necessity of variants were found. These results conﬁrm exome sequen- developing efﬁcient tools for CNV analysis on NGS data. cing as an effective strategy to study myopathies and M. Asadollahi: None. A. Karamzade: None. M. muscular dystrophies. Taghizadeh: None. Z. Golchehre: None. P. Nourmo- Y. Moreno-Saez: None. A. Romera-López: None. A. hammadi: None. N. Nourpour: None. M. Jamshidifar: Andújar: None. A. López: None. T. Otero: None. M.D.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 437 Ruíz: None. S. Valverde: None. C. Casañ-Martínez: requiringacombinationofexome-scaleNGSandthorough None. N. Serrano: None. J.L. Díaz: None. J. García: data analysis. None. A. Gómez: None. C. Collado: None. A. Arilla: M. Ampleeva: None. E. Tolmacheva: None. I. None. C.M. Moya: None. A. Matilla-Dueñas: None. S. Komar’kov:None.N.Shcherbakova:None.D.Khmelk- Santillán: None. ova: None. E. Surkova: None. O. Ryzhkova: None. V. Kaimonov: None. I. Mironova: None. E. Pomerantseva: 
P10 .37.B None. A. Isaev: None. E. Dadali: None. D. Pyankov: NGS-based testing in diagnostics of hereditary neuro- None. A. Antonets: None. I. Kanivets: None. S. musculardisorders:observationsonalargecohortfrom Korostelev: None. F. Konovalov: None. a clinical bioinformatician’s perspective 
P10 .38.C M. Ampleeva1, E. Tolmacheva1, I. Komar’kov2, N. Myotonia congenita: a series of familial cases with Shcherbakova3,D.Khmelkova4,E.Surkova2,O.Ryzhkova5, causative pathogenic variants in both CLCN1 and V. Kaimonov4, I. Mironova4, E. Pomerantseva4, A. Isaev4, SCN4A E. Dadali5, D. Pyankov2, A. Antonets2, I. Kanivets2, S. Korostelev2, F. Konovalov1 K. Šiaurytė1,2, A. Matulevičienė3,2, L. Cimbalistienė3,2, A. Morkūnienė3,2, A. Vaitkevičius4, A. Utkus3 1IndependentClinical BioinformaticsLaboratory,Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Genomed Ltd., Moscow, Russian 1FacultyofMedicine,VilniusUniversity,Vilnius,Lithuania, Federation, 3Veltischev Research and Clinical Institute for 2CentreforMedicalGeneticsatVilniusUniversityHospital Pediatrics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Center for Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Department of GeneticsandReproductiveMedicine“Genetico”,Moscow, Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Russian Federation, 5Research Centre for Medical Genet- Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, ics, Moscow, Russian Federation Lithuania,4ClinicofNeurologyandNeurosurgery,Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Uni- Next generation sequencing (NGS) is a powerful tool for versity, Vilnius, Lithuania accuratediagnosticsin geneticallyheterogenoushereditary disorders. From 2015 till 2020 our variant analysis team Introduction: In cases of non-dystrophic myotonias interpreted NGS data for 837 patients with myopathy or (NDM) phenotype-genotype correlations are difﬁcult to myasthenia, mostly from Russia and other Russian- discern due to the overlap of nosologic entities caused by speaking countries. The set included 271 clinical exomes, mutations in CLCN1 (17q23.3) and SCN4A (7q34) genes. 176 WES, 16 WGS, and 374 custom panels of several Patients may exhibit phenotypes including dominant and types comprising in most cases >2000 genes. After pro- recessive myotonia congenita (MC), paramyotonia con- cessing via an automated pipeline, the variants were genita(PC)andsodiumchannelmyotonia(SCM).Herewe uploaded into a custom database-driven software and reportonafamilialcaseserieswherememberswithMCof assessed by clinical bioinformaticians, with subsequent varying severity harbour different combinations of patho- reviewofthereportsbymedicalgeneticists,whenpossible. genic variants in these two genes. As a result, 336 patients (40%) had deﬁnitive molecular Materialsandmethods:Fiveoutofsixfamilymembers diagnostic ﬁndings explaining the phenotype (mostly display the classical spectrum of MC features. Proband mutations in LAMA2, CAPN3, DMD, RYR1, NEB, SEPN1, (aged57),hertwodaughters(aged37and24),hergrandson DYSF, CHRNE, TTN) and 123 patients (15%) had a pos- (aged 17), and a cousin (aged 45) have similar complaints sible diagnosis based on variants of unknown signiﬁcance of muscle rigidity in the extremities and face, provoked by withaneedforadditionalevidence.Maximumsuccessrate cold or potentially elicited by percussion of muscles. The was in infants who were less than 1 year old at the time of youngest grandson (aged 8) does not exhibit symptoms test (59%; 53/90 cases) and minimum success rate was in representativeofhisage.EMGofthreeindividuals(mother, adults 18 years and older (33%; 56/170 cases). In 59 suc- older daughter, cousin) showed classical excessive myo- cessful cases (18% of 336; 7% of total) the result was due tonic discharges. to detection of CNVs, and this was not limited to DMD Results: Sanger sequencing revealed heterozygous pre- deletions/duplications. The CNV ratio here is higher than viously reported missense mutation NM_000083.3: in our other patient cohorts, indicating high importance of c.2680C>T (NP_000074.3: p.(Arg894Ter)) in exon 23 of CNV analysis step in myopathy/myasthenia cases. Mole- the CLCN1 gene of every family member excluding the cular diagnostics of neuromuscular disorders is complex due to their clinical variability and genetic heterogeneity,438 J.delPicchia cousin.Anotherheterozygouspreviouslyreportedmissense affected children. The causative variant was reported to be mutation NM_000334.4:c.4343G>A (NP_000325.4:p. more frequent in the Roma population of the Czech (Arg1448His)) in exon 24 of the SCN4A gene was found Republic (considered a founder mutation). Based on the in every family member except for the youngest grandson. close connection of the populations of Slovakia and the Conclusions: In cases when NDM phenotype severity is Czech Republic, we hypothesize, these two alleles may varied in members of the same family, molecular genetic havea common origin. Therefore, weare still investigating analysis of both CLCN1 and SCN4A genes should be their haplotype background. Funding: APVV-18-0319; considered. MZSR_2018/46-SAV-5; VEGA_2/0167/20. K. Šiaurytė: None. A. Matulevičienė: None. L. Z. Kubiritova: None. E. Radvanska: None. F. Bauer: Cimbalistienė: None. A. Morkūnienė: None. A. Vaitke- None.J.Barosova:None.M.Hyblova:None.T.Szemes: vičius: None. A. Utkus: None. None. L. Kadasi: None. J. Radvanszky: None. 
P10 .41.C 
P10 .42.A Molecularlyconﬁrmedpontocerebellarhypoplasiainan Biallelic mutations in neurofascin cause neurodevelop- extensive family with four affected children mental impairment and peripheral demyelination Z. Kubiritova1,2,3, E. Radvanska4, F. Bauer4, J. Barosova5, S.Efthymiou1,V.Salpietro1,N.Malintan1,M.Poncelet2,Y. M.Hyblova6,7,T.Szemes2,3,8,L.Kadasi1,2,J.Radvanszky1,3 Kriouile3, S. Fortuna4, R. de Zorzi4, K. Payne5, L. Henderson6,A.Cortese1,S.Maddirevula7,N.Alhashmi8,S. 1SlovakAcademyofSciences,BiomedicalResearchCenter, Wiethoff1, M. Ryten1, J. Botia1, V. Provitera9, M. Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Schuelke10, J. Vandrovcova1, L. Walsh5, E. Torti6, V. Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bra- Iodice1, M. Najaﬁ11, E. Karimiani12, R. Marooﬁan1, K. tislava, Slovakia, 3Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, Siquier-Pernet13, N. Boddaert13, P. De Lonlay13, V. 4Department of Neonatology, Faculty Hospital Nove Cantagrel13, M. Aguennouz14, M. El Khorassani3, M. Zamky,NoveZamky,Slovakia,5GenetLtd.,Nitra,Slovakia, Schmidts11, F. S. Alkuraya15, S. Edvardson16, M. Nolano9, 6Trisomy Test Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 7Medirex Inc., J. Devaux2, H. Houlden1 Bratislava, Slovakia, 8Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia 1UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 2INSERM U1051, Institut de Neurosciences de Montpellier Introduction: Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) is a rare (INM), Montpellier, France, 3University Mohammed V of and heterogenous group of neurodegenerative disorders Rabat, Rabat, Morocco, 4University of Trieste, Trieste, having typically prenatal onset. Patients present with Italy,5RileyHospitalforChildren,Indianapolis,IN,United hypotoniaandsevereatrophyofvariouspartsoftheirbrain, States, 6GeneDx, Gaithensburg, MD, United States, 7King resulting in slow development, movement problems and Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, intellectual disability, even death. Saudi Arabia, 8College of Medicine, Sultan Qaboos Material and Methods: In our family, we identiﬁed the University, Oman, Oman, 9Istituti Clinici Scientiﬁci Mau- causative mutation by massively parallel sequencing, using geriIRCCS,Naples,Italy,10Charite´Universita¨tsmedizin, a clinical-exome kit (Illumina) in three affected patients Berlin, Germany, 11Radboud University Medical Center, (post-mortem,fromarchivedDNAsamples).Followingthe Nijmegen, Netherlands, 12St George’s University of Lon- initial ﬁnding, wescreenedtherespectivegenomicposition don, London, United Kingdom, 13Paris Descartes - intheremainingfamilymembersusingSangersequencing. Sorbonne Paris, Paris, France, 14University of Messina, Results: In the affected family members we identiﬁed a Sicily, Italy, 15Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, rare homozygous pathogenic variant c.92G>C in the 16Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel EXOS
C3  gene, causing an autosomal recessive PCH type 1B. Unaffected parents and four siblings are heterozygous Axon pathﬁnding and synapse formation are essential carriers, one healthy sibling has a wild type genotype and processes for nervous system development and function. three affected siblings were homozygous and died soon TheassemblyofmyelinatedﬁbresandnodesofRanvieris afterbirth(2-6monthsofage).Twoothersiblingswerenot mediated by a number of cell adhesion molecules of the analyzed, however, one of them also died soon after birth immunoglobulin superfamily including neurofascin, and suffered most probably from the same disorder. encoded by the NFASC gene, and its alternative isoforms Conclusions: We report detailed clinical ﬁndings of the Nfasc186, Nfasc140 and Nfasc155. We identiﬁed 10 largestPCHtype1Bfamilypublisheduptodate,withfour individuals from six unrelated families, exhibiting a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized with aAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 439 spectrum of central and peripheral neurological involve- 3Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts ment, who were found by NGS to carry frameshift and General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Program in non-synonymous variants. Expression studies using Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT immunostaining-based techniques identiﬁed absent and Harvard, Boston, MA, United States expression of the Nfasc155 isoform as a consequence of the frameshift variant and a signiﬁcant reduction of Background: Dystroglycanopathies are a clinically and expressionwasalsoobservedinassociationwithtwonon- genetically heterogeneous group of disorders characterised synonymous variants affecting the ﬁbronectin type III by limb-girdle muscle weakness (LGMW) often in combi- domain. Cell aggregation studies revealed a severely nationwithbrainabnormalities.Todate,18disease-causing impairedNfasc155-CNTN1/CASPR1complexinteraction genes have been identiﬁed, all encoding for proteins as a result of the identiﬁed variants. Immunoﬂuorescence involved in the glycosylation of α-dystroglycan and thus staining of myelinated ﬁbres from two affected indivi- affecting its binding to the extracellular matrix. duals showed a severe loss of myelinated ﬁbres and Methods: As part of the MYO-SEQ project, detailed abnormalities in the paranodal junction morphology. Our clinicalandhistologicalinformationwascollectedfor1,803 results establish that recessive variants affecting the patients with unexplained LGMW. Whole-exome sequen- Nfasc155 isoform can affect the formation of paranodal cingwascarriedoutandgenesknowntobeassociatedwith axoglial junctions at the nodes of Ranvier. The genetic dystroglycanopathies were analysed to identify likely disease caused by biallelic NFASC variants includes pathogenic variants. neurodevelopmentalimpairmentandaspectrumofcentral Results: Suspected disease-causing variants in 8 genes and peripheral demyelination as part of its core clinical weredetectedin47patients:DPM3andISPDinonepatient phenotype. Our ﬁndings support possible overlapping each, FKTN, POMK and POMT1 in two patients, GMPPB molecular mechanisms of paranodal damage at peripheral in four patients, POMT2 in 14 patients and FKRP in 21 nerves in both the immune-mediated and the genetic patients. The overall frequency for the disease group was disease. Wellcome Trust strategic award (Synaptopathies 2.6%. The phenotypes were highly variable, generally WT093205 MA and WT104033AIA) presenting with progressiveproximal muscleweakness and S. Efthymiou: None. V. Salpietro: None. N. Malintan: high CK, yet cognitive impairment was not always None.M.Poncelet:None.Y.Kriouile:None.S.Fortuna: observed. Muscle biopsies were available for 21 cases; None.R.deZorzi:None.K.Payne:None.L.Henderson: reported results of α-dystroglycan labelling were incon- None. A. Cortese: None. S. Maddirevula: None. N. sistent, indicating that standardised immunohistochemical Alhashmi: None. S. Wiethoff: None. M. Ryten: None. J. protocol and training in its interpretation are crucial. In Botia: None. V. Provitera: None. M. Schuelke: None. J. addition,welookedatundiagnosedpatientscarryingtwoor Vandrovcova:None.L.Walsh:None.E.Torti:None.V. more heterozygous pathogenic variants in two different Iodice: None. M. Najaﬁ: None. E. Karimiani: None. R. dystroglycanopathy genes, however we did not ﬁnd Marooﬁan:None.K.Siquier-Pernet:None.N.Boddaert: evidence of digenic inheritance in this pathway. None. P. De Lonlay: None. V. Cantagrel: None. M. Conclusions: Given their genetic and phenotypic hetero- Aguennouz: None. M. El Khorassani: None. M. geneity, here we highlight the advantage of using next- Schmidts: None. F. S. Alkuraya: None. S. Edvardson: generation sequencing in combination with traditional None. M. Nolano: None. J. Devaux: None. H. histopathological analysis to improve the diagnosis of Houlden: None. dystroglycanopathies as a rare disease group. A.Topf:None.A.B. Casasus: None. R.Barresi:None. 
P10 .43.B K.Johnson:None.M.Mroczek:None.J.Duff:None.L. Detection and interpretation of variants in Phillips: None. E. England: None. L. Xu: None. E. dystroglycanopathy-causing genes in a cohort of 1,803 Valkanas: None. D.G. MacArthur: None. V. patients with unexplained limb-girdle muscle weakness Straub: None. A. Topf1, A. B. Casasus1, R. Barresi1,2, K. Johnson1, M. 
P10 .44.C Mroczek1, J. Duff1, L. Phillips1, E. England3,4, L. Xu3,4, E. A treatable hereditary polyneuropathy due to impaired Valkanas3,4, D. G. MacArthur3,4, V. Straub1 Vitamin B6 metabolism 1John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, P. N. Torbati1, E. G. Karimiani2,3, N. M. Ferreira4, R. Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle Marooﬁan2, V. Chelban5, Y. Khalil6, P. B. Mills6, R. University, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 2Muscle Immu- noanalysis Unit, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,440 J.delPicchia Boostani7, H. Thiele8, H. Houlden2,5, B. Wirth4, M. P.N. Torbati: None. E.G. Karimiani: None. N.M. Karakaya4 Ferreira: None. R.Marooﬁan: None. V. Chelban:None. Y.Khalil:None.P.B.Mills:None.R.Boostani:None.H. 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Next Generation Thiele: None. H. Houlden: None. B. Wirth: None. M. Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad, Iran, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Karakaya: None. Republic of, 2Molecular and Clinical Sciences Institute, St. George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 
P10 .45.A 3Department of Molecular Genetics, Next Generation Novel HINT1 variant identiﬁed in Lithuanian patients Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, with autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with 4Institute of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular neuromyotonia Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Institute of Genetics, and Center for Rare Diseases Cologne, University of Cologne, B. Burnyte1,2, A. Morkuniene1,2, K. Grigalioniene1,2, Cologne, Germany, 5Department of Neuromuscular Dis- L. Ambrozaityte1,2, R. Buneviciute3,2, A. Vaitkevicius3,2, eases, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, Uni- E. Preiksaitiene1,2, A. Matuleviciene1,2, L. Cimbalistiene1,2, versity College London, London, United Kingdom, A. Utkus1,2 6Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of London, United Kingdom, 7Neurology Dept., Ghaem Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Uni- Hospital, Medical School, Mashhad University of Medical versity, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius University Hospital Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 8Cologne Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Institute of Clinical Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Cologne, Cologne, Germany Lithuania Introduction:PDXKencodesforapyridoxalkinase,which Aim: Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuro- converts inactive B6 vitamers to the active cofactor pyr- myotonia (ARAN-NM) is a rare subtype of hereditary idoxal 5’-phosphate (PLP), which is an essential co-factor neuropathy. HINT1 gene c.110G>C, (p.Arg37Pro) variant involved in vital metabolic pathways, including neuro- already reported in the literature as the most common transmitter production and amino acid biosynthesis. pathogenicvariant[P.Laššuthová,2016].Here,wedescribe Recently, biallelic pathogenic variants in PDXK were genetic and phenotypic characteristics of patients with shown to cause axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with ARAN-NM in Lithuania. optic atrophy that responds to PLP supplementation. Materialsandmethods:ByusingmultigeneNGSpanel, Methods: We performed whole exome sequencing and we identiﬁed 8 patients with recessive variants in HINT1 segregation analysis using Sanger sequencing in order to gene from 2014 to 2019. uncoverthepathogenicvariant(s)inafamilyaffectedbyan Results: Eight patients showed homozygous or com- undiagnosed autosomal recessive peripheral neuropathy. pound heterozygous variants in HINT1 gene, including Pathogenicity of the variant was conﬁrmed via enzymatic previouslyreportedpathogenicvariantc.110G>Cp.(Arg37- assaysandmassspectroscopyondriedblood-spotsamples, Pro) and a novel variant c.299A>G p.(Glu100Gly): i) ﬁve derived from all members of the family. patients harboured a homozygous pathogenic variant Results: Here, we report two affected individuals, aged c.110G>C, ii) two patients had compound heterozygous 17 and 14 years old, from a consanguineous Iranian family variants(c.110G>Candc.299A>G),andiii)onepatienthad presenting with a childhood-onset sensorimotor axonal a homozygous novel variant, which was also identiﬁed in neuropathyandﬁrstsignsofopticatrophy.Geneticanalysis affected brother. Co-segregation of these variants in identiﬁed a segregated novel homozygous missense variant affected sibs or healthy relatives conﬁrmed a recessive in PDXK, (NM_003681.4); c.225T>A, p.(Asn75Lys). We inheritance.Patientswithhomozygousnovelandpreviously show that the variant leads to reduced PDXK enzymatic reported HINT1 variants shared pure axonal motor activity with low PLP. The relatively early diagnosis and neuropathy. PLP replacement restored the PLP plasma levels with Conclusions:NovelvariantinHINT1hasbeenidentiﬁed observable clinical improvement. fromthreeunrelatedpatients.Ourdataexpandthespectrum Conclusions: We recommend that patients presenting of pathogenic variants in HINT1 and its signiﬁcance in with autosomal recessive childhood-onset axonal neuro- moleculardiagnosis.Additionally,ourﬁndingssupportthat pathy and optic atrophy should be screened for PDXK previously reported variant c.110G>C may result from a mutations, as this is a rare opportunity for treatment. founder mutation in European populations.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 441 B. Burnyte: None. A. Morkuniene: None. K. Griga- 
P10 .47.C lioniene: None. L. Ambrozaityte: None. R. Buneviciute: Identiﬁcation of a novel PRUN
E1  gene mutation in a None. A. Vaitkevicius: None. E. Preiksaitiene: None. A. patient with severe neurodevelopmental disorder char- Matuleviciene: None. L. Cimbalistiene: None. A. acterized by hypotonia and epileptic encephalopathy Utkus: None. L. Lazaros1, D. Palaiologou1, A. Romito2, A. Pantou1, A. 
P10 .46.B Marais2, E. Kanavakis1 The result of NGS disease speciﬁc panel for practical genetic diagnostics of neuromuscular disorders. 1Genesis Genoma Lab, Genetic Diagnosis, Clinical Genet- ics & Research, Athens, Greece, 2Centogene AG, Rostock, I. Haiboniuk1, H. Makukh1, O. Semeriak2, M. Dushar1, H. Germany Akopyan1 Introduction: The application of whole exome sequencing 1Institute of Hereditary Pathology NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, (WES) has revealed the genetic basis of an autosomal Ukraine, 2Lviv Regional Clinical Hospital, Lviv, Ukraine recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by microcephaly, hypotonia and variable brain anomalies Introduction:The genetic determined neuromuscular dis- (NMIHBA).Inthecurrentstudy,wedescribeaseverecase ease are characterized by broad spectrum of clinical dis- of NMIHBA due to the compound heterozygosity of a orders and clinical polymorphism. missense and a novel frameshift variant in the Materials and Methods:We analyze the results of using PRUN
E1  gene. NGS for practical genetic diagnostics. Genetic testing was Materials and Methods: The affected proband is a 3.5- performed among 65 person (55% male), 1 to 56 y.o with year-old girl characterized by generalized muscular hypo- clinicaly unexplained progressive neuromuscular pathol- tonia, drug-resistant epilepsy (10-15 myoclonic seizures ogy. DNA samples was extracted from blood leucocytes daily) and severe swallowing problems. Serious develop- andcommonmutilationsforDMDandSMAwereexcluded mental and speech delay is also present. The clinical by target testing. The Illumina technology for 289 genes examination of the patient has detected scoliosis and associated with muscular dystrophies, myopathies, neuro- kyphosis,highmyopia,frequentrespiratorytractinfections, pathies was performed at INVITAE laboratory, USA. All tooth enamel loss and severe constipation. WES was clinically signiﬁcant observations were additionally performed in three family members (proband & parents) conﬁrmed. using SureSelect Human All Exon V6 kit in a HiSeq4000 Results:Thepositiveresults-identiﬁcationofatleastone instrument.ThedetectedvariantswereconﬁrmedbySanger pathogenic variant in the gene panel, were received for 35/ sequencing analysis. 65(54%)ofcases.TheconformationofCAPN3autosomal Results: WES analysis detected two heterozygous recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy was the most PRUN
E1  gene variants in the affected proband, frequent, 9.2%: three patients c.550del homozygous and c.316G>A (p.Asp106Asn) and c.181_185delTCTGA (p. two compound with other mutations. Charcot-Marie-Tooth Ser61Thrfs*6), the ﬁrst of paternal and the second of disease was diagnosed in association with mutations in maternalorigin,conﬁrmingthecompoundheterozygosityin PM
P22 , MFN2, GJB1, GDA
P1  genes in 6.2%. The other the index patient. than deletion DMD genetic variants were identiﬁed in 4 Conclusions:GiventhatPRUN
E1 genehasrecentlybeen males. The interesting ﬁnding of this study: TCF4 deletion associated with neurodevelopmental disorders and conse- of entire coding sequence associated with Pitt-Hopkins quentlyitisnotincludedinoldercustomNGSgenepanels, syndrome; copy number gains for X-chromosome genes WESapplicationconstitutedthemostefﬁcientapproachfor and after cytogenetic testing 47, XXY karyotype in boy the molecular investigation of the speciﬁc case. These with SMA- like clinical phenotype. In 40% of patients the results highlight the utility of WES in order to reveal the diagnosisofmonogenicdisorderwasconﬁrmedwithuseof geneticetiologyofcomplexphenotypes,allowingthebetter NGS disease speciﬁc panel. The clinical treatment of VUS classiﬁcation of the patients and the design of personalized is challenging. therapeutic strategies. Conclusions:The collaboration between molecular L. Lazaros: None. D. Palaiologou: None. A. Romito: geneticist, clinical geneticist and neurologist guarantee the None. A. Pantou: None. A. Marais: None. E. correct diagnosis for patients with orphan neuromuscular Kanavakis: None. disease. I. Haiboniuk: None. H. Makukh: None. O. Semeriak: None. M. Dushar: None. H. Akopyan: None.442 J.delPicchia 
P10 .48.A instead of gene panels, in order to address the extreme Variantscausingmitochondrialdysfunctionarenotrare heterogeneity of the causal pathomechanisms. in non-5q SMA: Re-evaluation of thirty families by Grant reference: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft exome sequencing (Wi945/19-1) M. Karakaya: None. N. Keller: None. J. Altmueller: M.Karakaya1,N.Keller1,J.Altmueller2,S.Motameny2,H. None. S. Motameny: None. H. Thiele: None. G. Thiele2, G. Wunderlich3, J. Kirschner4, B. Schrank5, R. Wunderlich: None. J. Kirschner: None. B. Schrank: Marooﬁan6, C. Paketci7, U. Yis7, P. Nuernberg2, B. Wirth1 None. R. Marooﬁan: None. C. Paketci: None. U. Yis: None. P. Nuernberg: None. B. Wirth: None. 1UniversityHospitalCologne,InstituteofHumanGenetics, Cologne, Germany, 2Cologne Center for Genomics, 
P10 .49.B Cologne, Germany, 3University Hospital Cologne, Depart- Comparison of gene panel and alpha-glucosidase activ- ment of Neurology, Cologne, Germany, 4University Hospi- ityondriedbloodspotinpatientswithsuspectedmuscle tal Bonn, Department of Neuropediatrics, Bonn, Germany, disease in order to screen and diagnose Pompe disease 5DKD HELIOS Kliniken, Department of Neurology, Wiesbaden, Germany, 6Molecular and Clinical Sciences F. Thuriot1,2, K. Hodson3, E. Gravel1,2, C. Buote2, S. Institute, St. George’s University of London, London, Gravel1,2, S. Lévesque1,2 United Kingdom, 7Dokuz Eylül University, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Izmir, Turkey 1Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, 2Sherbrooke Genomic Medicine, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) without 3Dynacare, Laval, QC, Canada deletions/mutations in SMN1 (non-5q-SMA) is genetically very heterogeneous. Due to the strongly overlapping phe- Pompediseaseisanautosomalrecessivedisordercausedby notypes, the differential diagnosis of non-5q-SMAs is alpha-glucosidase (GAA) deﬁciency, leading to a pro- challenging. gressivelimb-girdleweaknessandrespiratoryinsufﬁciency. Materials/Methods:52patientsanalysedbyalargegene Limb-girdle weakness is the most common form of muscle panel with 479 neuromuscular disease-causing genes weakness and Pompe disease is hard to differentiate, received no conclusive results. We re-evaluated 21 delaying diagnosis and administration of treatment. Enzy- unsolved cases by trio whole-exome sequencing (trio- matic activity of GAA is wildly used to screen patients but WES), in addition to nine families without previous panel sequencing of GAA is required to conﬁrm the diagnosis. In analysis. order to investigate if potential Pompe cases could be Results:In10/21individualswithnegativepanelresults, missed by using a gene panel approach alone, we screened trio-WES revealed the pathogenic variant (48%). Of these 876patientswithasuspectedmuscledisease,andcompared ten identiﬁed genes, ﬁve (50%) were associated with genes GAA enzymatic activity on dried blood spot with an 89- involved in mitochondrial function and stability (FDXR, gene panel. Eight patients were diagnosed with Pompe NDUF
S6 ,ECH
S1 ,MPV17,VP
S13 D).Theremaininggenes disease; enzymatic activity and sequencing results were encoded for proteins of diverse functions, with one variant concordant. Of the 36 patients carrying a single hetero- in the lysosomal enzyme-encoding gene ARSA, one in a zygous GAA variant, only one patient harboring a patho- generequiredforaminoacidsynthesis(SEPSECS)andone genic heterozygous variant had low enzyme activity in the muscle protein-coding TTN. Additionally, we overlappingwithlevelsseeninPompecasessuggestingthat identiﬁed a variant in a gene relevant for cellular stress a second variant could have been missed. RNA studies are response (ADPRS) and one encoding an enzyme essential pending. Finally, nine patients had low or borderline for vitamin B6 metabolism (PDXK). Among nine patients enzymeactivity,butnovariantwasdetected.Thesepatients withnopriorgenepaneltesting,wediagnosedfourpatients have a low risk of having Pompe disease since enzymatic (4/9) with pathogenic variants in known neuromuscular activity is close to the threshold and does not overlap with disease genes. conﬁrmed Pompe cases. With gene panels being increas- Discussion: Inborn errors of organelle metabolism might ingly performed as a ﬁrst-tier test for patients with sus- primarily manifest with neuropathic features in childhood. pected muscle disorders, our study emphasizes the need to Ourpreliminaryanalysisshowsthatmutationsinmitochon- perform reﬂex enzymatic activity in patients with a single drialproteinsaretheleadingcauseinthisspectrum.Dueto GAAvariant.RNAsequencingshouldbeconsideredifitthe abundance and high number of the associated genes, and enzymatic result is compatible with Pompe. *Supported by high clinical variability, we recommend performing WES Sanoﬁ-Genzyme.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 443 F. Thuriot: None. K. Hodson: A. Employment (full or and ataxia. Since 2014, the identiﬁcation of additional part-time); Signiﬁcant; Dynacare. E. Gravel: None. C. patients has documented a clinical heterogeneity, and Buote: None. S. Gravel: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria expanded the clinical spectrum of pathogenic PTRH2 var- (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; iants. They are now known as the cause of infantile mul- Sanoﬁ-Genzyme. S. Lévesque: B. Research Grant (princi- tisystem neurologic, endocrine and pancreatic disease pal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending (IMNEPD). grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; S.Seneca:None.L.Régal:None.M.Becker:None.K. Sanoﬁ-Genzyme. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers Stouffs: None. A. Gheldof: None. E. Scalais: None. bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Sanoﬁ- Genzyme. 
P10 .51.A Geneticanalysisofrecessiverhabdomyolysis-mutations 
P10 .50.C in LPIN1 (Lipin-1) A homozygous frameshift mutation in PTRH2 gene Y. Jelting1, A. Zaum1, S. Spranger2, S. Rost1 S. Seneca1,2, L. Régal3, M. Becker4, K. Stouffs1,2, A. Gheldof1,2, E. Scalais5 1University of Würzburg, Institute for Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany, 2Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, 1UZ Brussel, Center for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Germany Belgium, 2Neurogenetics Research Group, Reproduction – Genetics and Regenerative Medicine Research Cluster, Lipin-1, a protein coded by the LPIN1 gene, plays an Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 3Divi- importantroleinthehumantriglyceridesynthesis.Mutations sionofPediatricNeurology,UZBrussel,Brussels,Belgium, in LPIN1 lead to recurrent rhabdomyolysis with myoglobi- 4PediatricDepartment,CentreHospitalierdeLuxembourg, nuria, myalgia and generalized weakness in childhood. We Luxembourg City, Luxembourg, 5Division of Pediatric investigated two independent cases with rhabdomyolysis. Neurology, Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg, Luxem- Patient 1 is a six-year-old Turkish boy with healthy con- bourg City, Luxembourg sanguineousparents.Hissisterdiedofarespiratoryinfection at the age of 3. He showed massively increased creatinine The identiﬁcation of the genetic defect of a neurological kinase (CK) levels (up to 400.000 U/l) and myoglobinuria. disease is complex, and many patients are still without a Patient 2 is a German 36-year-old women with myalgia, molecular diagnosis. With massive parallel sequencing and increased CK values and a history of kidney failure after a laboratory developed Mendeliome gene panel, we iden- gastrointestinal infection in early childhood. The DNA was tiﬁed a truncation mutation in the PTRH2 gene in two processed by next-generation sequencing (NGS) after affected siblings. This multifunctional and evolutionary enrichment of a custom-made myopathy panel (65 genes). wellconservedenzymeencodesthemitochondrialpeptidyl- Data analysis was done by GensearchNGS. Three different tRNA hydrolase 2 protein (Ptrh2), and prevents the accu- variants in LPIN1 could be identiﬁed, a large recurrent dele- mulation of peptidyl-tRNA. It is also a key determinant in tion including exon 18, a nonsense variant and a single base cell survival, growth and apoptosis processes. The precise pair duplication. Patient 1 carries the deletion and the dupli- role of the protein in muscle disease has still to be deli- cation, each in homozygous state. The duplication has not neated. Our index patients are the 15- and 13-year-old son beendescribedbefore,isnotpresentingnomADandleadsto and daughter of non-consanguineous healthy Nepalese a frameshift with a premature stop codon at position 769. parents. Both patients had multiple neurological symptoms Patient 2 carries the same deletion of exon 18 and a known including sensorineural deafness, psychomotor and lan- nonsense variantleading to a stop codon at position 19. The guage delay, epilepsy and behavioral disturbances, subse- breakingpointsofthedeletioncouldbeidentiﬁedexactlyby quentlymotorregressionwithataxia,peripheralneuropathy NGS. Our ﬁndings revealed a novel and already known andlater,inoneofthem,diabetesmellitus.Inbothpatients, mutations in LPIN1 and veriﬁed the breakpoints of the pancreatic echography disclosed hyper-echogenicity. A recurrentdeletion. This conﬁrmsthecausativerole of LPIN1 homozygous pathogenic 1 base pair insertion c.127dupA mutations in patients with muscular disorders. was revealed in the PTRH2 gene of both siblings, and Y. Jelting: None. A. Zaum: None. S. Spranger: None. conﬁrmedwithSangersequencing.Thisframeshiftcausesa S. Rost: None. prematuretranslationstopp.(Ser43Lysfs*11),andispresent inheterozygosityinbothparents.Originally,ahomozygous 
P10 .52.B deletion variant in the PTRH2 gene was identiﬁed as the Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia 20: a novel molecularcauseofglobaldevelopmentaldelay,hearingloss insertion in the SNX14 gene444 J.delPicchia A. Harari-shaham1, L. Shemer1, V. Adir1, O. Sadeh1, H. Kapetanovic4, C. Høi-Hansen5, E. García-Arumí1, I. Baris-Feldman2, A. Mory3, L. Sagi-Dain1, A. Peleg1 Cuscó1, E. F. Tizzano1 1Carmel medical center, Haifa, Israel, 2Rambam medical 1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and center, Haifa, Israel, 3Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Medicine Genetics Group, VHIR, University Hospital Vall Israel d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Servei de Genètica, Hospital delaSantaCreuiSantPau,Barcelona,Spain,3ClínicaLas Background: Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia Condes, Santiago de Chile, Chile, 4Hospital Universitario 20 (SCAR20) is a rare disorder, mainly characterized by de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, 5Copenhagen University Hospi- intellectual disability, ataxia, coarse facial features, pro- tal, Copenhagen, Denmark gressive loss of Purkinje cells in the cerebellum and often hearing loss and skeletal abnormalities. Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuro- Case report: We describe a 3.5 years old boy, fourth muscular disorder caused by loss of function of both copies child to consanguineous parents, double ﬁrst cousins from of SMN1. SMA patients are classiﬁed into different clinical Druze origin. groups.CopynumberofSMN2,thehighlyhomologouscopy Prenatal sonographic examination demonstrated periven- of SMN1, is considered the most important phenotypic tricularpseudo-cyst,mildunilateralventriculomegaly,small modiﬁerofthediseasebutthiscorrelationisnotabsolute.In anddysmorphiccorpuscallosum,dysmorphicsmallcaveof the present therapeutic scenario with SMN2 splicing modi- septumpellucidumandshortenedlongbonesofthelegs(5th ﬁers patients receive expensive treatments and there are dif- percentile). Amniocentesis for chromosomal microarray ferent degrees of responses (responders, slow responders, analysis yielded normal results. Magnetic resonance non-responders).AllSMN2copiesarenotalwaysequivalent. imaging (MRI) demonstrated hypogenesis of corpus Thus, indeepanalysisofthe SMN2 genotypecould provide callosum and delayed myelination of the white matter. useful information to further characterize SMA patients. Examination of the 3.5 year old boy at our genetics clinic Materials and Methods: We study 53 SMA patients demonstrated global severe developmental delay, vision with homozygous SMN1-deletion to determine their SMN2 impairment, severe hypotonia, lower motor neuron lesion sequences. DNA samples were sequenced by Long-PCR characteristics and some dysmorphic signs. and NGS. The ampliﬁed region includes the complete Results: Two bioinformatics analyses of exome sequen- SMN2gene(promoter,5’UTRand3’UTRregions).Variant cing did not reveal any pathogenic ﬁndings. However, the analysis was performed using a bioinformatic pipeline third exome re-evaluation raised suspicion of about 200bp adapted to the complexity of the region. deletion in the SNX14 gene, including part of exon 13 and Results:Wefoundpreviouslydescribedmodiﬁervariants intron 14. The approximated boundaries were Chr6 c.859G>C, c.835-44A>G, c.835-1897C>T in 5 patients, (GRCh37) g.86252986_86253202del. and 10 new candidates, being two of them recurrent. SangersequencingandaPCRfragmentanalysisrevealed Additionally we have detected SMN1-SMN2 hybrid in two a homozygote 142bp insertion. Chr6 (GRCh37) patients. g.86252986_86252987ins[142], the insertion interrupted Conclusions: our technique was useful to accurately the coding region of the SNX14 gene, NM_153816.5; characterize the SMN2 copies, identifying described and c.1320_1321ins[142]. new modiﬁer variants. Further functional analysis of those Conclusions: We report a novel SNX14 gene mutation, candidates should be essential for categorization. In the causing a severe phenotype of a recently described current framework of new therapies it is extremely SCAR20. Our ﬁndings emphasize the limitation of the important to characterize historical and new patients that exome analysis and the importance of the use of different receivefurtheradvancedtreatments.FundedbyBiogenand analysis platforms. FIS PI18/00687 A. Harari-shaham: None. L. Shemer: None. V. Adir: L. Blasco-Pérez: None. I. Paramonov: None. L. None. O. Sadeh: None. H. Baris-Feldman: None. A. Iranzo: None. D. Martinez-Cruz: None. L. Alias: None. Mory: None. L. Sagi-Dain: None. A. Peleg: None. S. Bernal: None. C. Castiglioni: None. S. Kapetanovic: None. C. Høi-Hansen: None. E. García-Arumí: None. I. 
P10 .53.C Cuscó: None. E.F. Tizzano: None. SMN2genes study by NGS in spinal muscular atrophy: towards identiﬁcation of new SMA modiﬁers 
P10 .54.A Distinguishing SMN1 and SMN2: nanopore sequencing L. Blasco-Pérez1, I. Paramonov1, L. Iranzo1, D. Martinez- as a powerful tool to assign variants Cruz1, L. Alias2, S. Bernal2, C. Castiglioni3, S.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 445 K. Eggermann, T. Pﬁster, I. Kurth, F. Kraft Molecular Genetics and Rare Diseases Unit, Hospital Vall d’Hebrón, Barcelona, Spain Institute of Human Genetics RWTH University Hospital, Aachen, Germany Background: Homozygous absence of SMN1 is the major genetic cause of SMA (90%), the remaining cases are Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA)-5q is an autosomal- hybridSMN2-SMN1 genes (4.6%)andrare pointmutations recessive neuromuscular disorder with a frequency of app. (5%). When a patient has no homozygous deletion, SMA 1:4,900 in the European population. Mutations in the Sur- moleculardiagnosticisofutmostimportancetoincludehim vival Motor Neuron (SMN) 1 gene are responsible for the in a speciﬁc advanced treatment considering the current disease while the copy number of SMN2 modiﬁes the SMA landscape. patient’s phenotype. Both genes are located in a highly MaterialsandMethods:TheSMNgeneswerequantiﬁed homologous, duplicated and inverted region on chromo- by MLPA in 931 unrelated Spanish SMA patients. Sanger some 5q. The majority of patients carry a homozygous sequencing was usefully to detect point mutations in the deletion of SMN1 but 3-4% of patients are compound SMN1 gene. 
C212  and 
C272  molecular markers were heterozygous for the deletion on one and single nucleotide analysed to establish the familial haplotype. variants(SNV) ontheother allele. Therearenotmore than Results: From our SMA cohort: 834 (89.6%) showed ﬁve unique sequence differences between SMN1 and homozygous absence of the SMN1; 42 (4.5%) showed SMN2,onlyoneofthose,c.840C/T,inthecodingsequence homozygous absence of only exon 7, harbouring at least and the others in intronic or non-coding regions. When a one SMN2-SMN1 hybrid gene; 46 (4.9%) showed a point patient suspected of having SMA carries a heterozygous mutationintheSMN1gene,beingthec.399_402delAGAG deletion of SMN1, direct sequencing of the SMN1 gene to inexon3andthec.770_780dup11inexon6responsibleof detect a second pathogenic SNV is necessary. Due to the the 65.2% of the cases (20 and 10 respectively), other 11 nearly 100 % sequence identity it is almost impossible to known and 3 novel (missense:c.808A>C, nonsense: distinguish SMN1 and SMN2 sequences with standard c.188C>A and splicing:c.724-1G>C) point mutations were sequencing approaches and a SNV cannot be assigned detected. Interestingly, just one SMN1 deleted allele was unequivocally to one of the genes. Several sequencing found in 9 symptomatic patients but any other pathogenic strategies to overcome this problem have been introduced, variant in the other allele has been currently identiﬁed. all of them being rather laborious. We have established a Conclusions: Although the vast majority of Spanish long-range Nanopore sequencing protocol that allows SMA cases present an homozygous deletion of the SMN1 unequivocalassignmentofvariantstoSMN1orSMN2,and gene,aminorityofcasescanbeexplainedduetootherrare therebyimprovesthediagnosticsforthepatientandgenetic mutations that are necessary to discover by Sanger or Next counsellingforthefamily.Intimesofpromisingtherapeutic Generation Sequencing. Genetic conﬁrmation of these approaches for SMA-5q, it is crucial to make a fast and patients is crucial in order to include them in therapeutic unambiguous diagnosis of the disease. protocols. FIS-PI18/00687 K.Eggermann:None.T.Pﬁster:None.I.Kurth:None. L. Alías: None. S. Bernal: None. F. March: None. I. F. Kraft: None. Cuscó: None. L. Blasco: None. S. Quero: None. M. Simón: None. E. Martínez-Sánchez: None. P. Fuentes- 
P10 .55.B Prior: None. P. Gallano: None. E. Tizzano: None. Update on SMN1 mutations in Spanish SMA patients: description of new rare missense, nonsense and splicing 
P10 .56.C mutations Analytical validation of a multiplex PCR/CE assay for simultaneous determination of SMN1/SMN2 exon 7 L. Alías1, S. Bernal1, F. March2, I. Cuscó3, L. Blasco3, S. copy number and variant status Quero2, M. Simón2, E. Martínez-Sánchez2, P. Fuentes- Prior4, P. Gallano1, E. Tizzano5 W.Laosinchai-Wolf,J.L.Larson,J.Janovsky,K.Jefferson, D.Patel, M. Church, H.Zhu, G.J.Latham,J. N.Milligan 1Genetics Department. Hospital Sant Pau, CIBERER U- 705, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genetics Department. Hospital Asuragen, Austin, TX, United States Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Medical Genetics Group, VHIR,Barcelona,Spain,4MolecularBasesofDisease,IIB- Introduction: Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 5Dept. Of Clinical and autosomal recessive neuromuscular disease commonly caused by homozygous loss of function deletions in SMN1446 J.delPicchia exon7, frequently resulting in infant mortality. SMN2, a of lower motor neurons. All types of SMA are caused by paralog of SMN1, modulates SMA severity. Recent break- homozygouslossoftheSMN1gene,resultinginlowlevels throughtherapiesrelyonquantiﬁcationofSMN1andSMN2 of the survival motor neuron protein, insufﬁcient to protect copies to inform treatment, and early detection is critical. motor neurons. Homozygous deletions of exon 7 in SMN1 Additionally, detection of c.859G>C in SMN2 is linked to gene in clinically asymptomatic individuals are extremely reduced disease severity and prognosis while gene dupli- rare, involving less than 30 described cases. These patients cation variants c.*3+80T>G and c.*211_*212del in SMN1 usually have several copies of the SMN2 gene, which can inform carrier risk in several populations. compensates for the loss of SMN1 product. ® Methods: We validated the AmplideX PCR/CE SMA Case presentation: An asymptomatic 31-years old woman Plus Kit, which quantiﬁes 0 to ≥4 SMN1 and SMN2 exon7 wasreferredforpregestationalgenetictestingwithintheIsraeli copy numbers and the three informative variants. Auto- national genetic carrier-screening program for reproductive mated analysis with AmplideX PCR/CE Reporter software purposes. Carrier screening was performed using Multiplex incorporatesbatchandsampleQCcheckstoqualifyresults. ligase-dependentprobeampliﬁcation(MLPA)Probemix
P060 . We assessed single-site precision and accuracy of SMN1 Results: The patient was diagnosed with homozygous and SMN2 copy number and variant detection against absence of exon 7 in the SMN1 gene. The deletion was referencemethodsusingDNAsamplesisolatedfromwhole validated using MLPA Probemix 
P021  and Real Time- bloodwithoverﬁvepuriﬁcationmethods.Wealsoassessed Polymerase Chain Reaction. MLPA testing revealed three analytical speciﬁcity, reagent stability, and other perfor- copiesofSMN2exon7and8.Genetictestingofthespouse mance factors. revealed three copies of exon 7 in SMN1. ResultsandConclusion:SMN1andSMN2copynumber Discussion: Carrier testing for reproductive partner of and variant measurements were concordant with reference SMA requires SMN1 dosage analysis. If an individual is methods for all isolation methods. Further, results were found to have at least two SMN1 copies, the probability of precise across 200 sample measurements generated with being a carrier is approximately 1/670 (mainly taking into three reagent lots and two operators over multiple runs/ considerationthe2%frequencyoftwoSMN1copiesonthe days.Theassaywasspeciﬁcforallgenesandvariants.The same chromosome). However, in our unique and pretty AmplideX PCR/CE SMA Plus Kit is in development for fortunatecoupletheriskforSMAdiseaseintheprogenyis in vitro diagnostic use for carrier screening and disease very low due to the spouses’ extra copy. diagnosis, and provides accurate and reliable results in M. Echar: None. L. Sagi-Dain: None. V. Adir: None. under four hours. O. Sadeh: None. A. Peleg: None. W.Laosinchai-Wolf:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. J.L. Larson: A. Employment (full 
P10 .58.B or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. J. Janovsky: A. Proﬁling of the oculomotor nucleus and spinal cord in Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. K. amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using single-nuclei RNA Jefferson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; sequencing (snRNA-seq) Asuragen. D. Patel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant;Asuragen.M.Church:A.Employment(fullor P. Alipour1,2, J. P. Ross1,2, D. Spiegelman1,3, D. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. H. Zhu: A. Employment Rochefort1,3, P. A. Dion1,3, G. A. Rouleau1,2,3 (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. G.J. Latham: A. Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Asuragen.J.N. 1Montreal Neurological Institute, and Hospital, McGill Milligan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; University,Montréal,QC,Canada,Montreal,QC,Canada, Asuragen. 2Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Depart- 
P10 .57.A ment of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, The <"fortunate"> couple Montréal, QC, Canada, Montreal, QC, Canada M. Echar1, L. Sagi-Dain1,2, V. Adir1, O. Sadeh1, A. Peleg1 Introduction: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressiveneurodegenerativedisorderwhichinvolvesloss 1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2The Ruth and of upper and lower motor neurons (MNs) in the central Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel nervous system (CNS). While both upper and lower MNs Institute of Technology, Hifa, Israel are affected, some subtypes of lower MNs are resistant to degeneration such as oculomotor nuclei located in the Introduction: Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an midbrain. The molecular mechanism underlying this dif- autosomal recessiveneuromusculardisorder caused by loss ferential vulnerability among MNs is currently unknown.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 447 Using snRNA-seq to proﬁle expression in ALS tissues will variant of uncertain signiﬁcance (c.1779+5G>C). Prediction explainthechangesincelltypeproportionsassociatedwith tools calculated a decreased probability for the usage of the neurodegeneration. donor splice site adjacent to the second variant. However, Materials & Methods: Postmortem brain tissues have RNA analysis conﬁrmed the usage of a cryptic splice site been collected from 30 tissue samples from oculomotor (c.1779+42) thatleads to the inclusion of 14 amino acids in nucleus,medulla,andspinalcordofALScasesandhealthy the protein. The insertion is in frame, but occurs in a controls. Nuclei isolation and library preparation using the functionally important peptidase domain of the protein. ChromiumSingleCell3′ReagentKitsv2(10XGenomics) Conclusions: In summary, we present the case of a new hasbeenperformedaimingfor6,000nucleipersample.The SPG7 splice site variant, with conﬁrmed effect on RNA averagesequencingdepthpersamplewas360Mreadsusing splicing. Together with the second variant, it conﬁrms and theNovaSeq6000(Illumina).Cellrangersoftwarewasused speciﬁestheclinicaldiagnosis.Therefore,WESisapowerful for alignment and generation of feature-barcode matrices. tool to diagnose heterogeneous neurological disorders. TheRpackageSeuratwasappliedfordownstreamanalysis A. Zaum: None. F. Zimmer: None. N. Pluta: None. E. such as differential gene expression and cell clustering. Kunstmann: None. S. Rost: None. Preliminary Results: We have identiﬁed differences in surviving cell types between severely affected and spared 
P10 .60.A regions of the CNS. Further, we identiﬁed cell population Detection of cis duplication of SMN1 in healthy carrier, differencesandcell-speciﬁcdysregulationofgenesbetween a droplet digital PCR method to improve genetic ALS patients and controls, as well as between different counselling regions of the CNS. Conclusions:Knowingthemechanismsunderlyingtissue- C. VEREBI, C. Vignal, S. Drunat speciﬁc neurodegeneration could helpunderstandwhysome cell types are resistant to degeneration and how it could be Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France possible to simulate this resistance in vulnerable regions. P. Alipour: None. J. P. Ross: None. D. Spiegelman: Introduction: The c.*3+80T>G and c.*211_*212del None. D. Rochefort: None. P. A. Dion: None. G. A. SMN1 variants had been initially associated with SMN1 cis Rouleau: None. duplication in the Ashkenazi population (Luo et al. Genet Med.2014). Ourstudyfallswithinimprovementofgenetic 
P10 .59.C counselingforcarriersofSMAasalreadydoneforSpanish New splice site mutation in SPG7 population (Alías et al. EJHG. 2018). Materialsandmethods:Weusedapreviouslypublished A. Zaum, F. Zimmer, N. Pluta, E. Kunstmann, S. Rost ddPCR design for the variant c.*3+80T>G detection (Vidal-Folch et al. Clin Chem. 2018) and a custom made Institute of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany design for the variant c.*211_*212del. Carrier status was established after familial studies around SMA cases. Introduction: SPG7 encodes paraplegin, a protein that is Results:SeeTable;SMAforSpinalMuscularAtrophy; part of a metalloprotease of the inner mitochondrial mem- *Corresponding to the same individuals ; &27 individuals brane. Mutations in SPG7 cause an autosomal recessive carried the two variants, the last individual only carried the formofhereditaryspasticparaplegia(SPG),aclinicallyand c.*3+80T>G variant. genetically heterogeneous group of neurological diseases. Conclusions: The variants were absent in 1/0 healthy Due to the heterogeneity of SPGs and other neuropathies, carriers which corroborate the high association with multi- genetic diagnostics by whole exome sequencing (WES) is ple and furthermore cis duplicate SMN1 genes. We can beneﬁcial and performed successfully in our laboratory for assumethatthepercentageofvariantscarriersin2/0carriers different (virtual) gene panels. individualisabout43%inourpopulationwhichplaceitself Methods: We present the case of a patient with clinical between the average 20% and 46% in Spanish and suspicion of SPG. For molecular diagnosis, we used WES Ashkenazi population respectively(Luo et al. Genet Med. and analysed a (virtual) SPG-panel consistent of 13 genes. 2014,Alíasetal.EJHG.2018).Thevariantstudyleadedto To validate one variant’s effect on splicing, we isolated the estimation of 11.48% of cis duplication carrier in our RNA from whole blood and retranscriped it into cDNA, generalpopulation,allowingustoincreasethesensitivityof followed by Sanger sequencing. our SMA carrier detection test. Results:WeidentiﬁedtwoheterozygousvariantsinSPG7: one recurrent pathogenic variant (p.(Ala510Val)) and a448 J.delPicchia CisduplicationSMN1variantsinSMApatients,inSMAcarriersandingeneralpopulation detected with qPCR and long amplicon sequencing. Our SMApatientswith SMA General results suggest that bi-allelic loss of SMN1 by gene hSoMmNo1z(yng=ous48d)eletionof c=ar7ri6e)rs(n p(nop=ul1at9io1n) conversion is not necessarily indicative of disease. Genotype 0SMN1 1SMN1 2 3 2SMN1 3 4 5 (0/1) SMN1 SMN1 SMN1 SMN1 SMN1 H. Muallem: None. J. Harting: A. Employment (full or (0/2) (0/3) c.3*+80T>G 0 0 (1463*.2%) 2(1*00%) 1*(0.8%) 2(483&.8%) 5(8*3.3%) 1(1*00%) part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. C. Heiner: c*.211_*212del 1(2.1%) 0 1(463*.2%) 2(1*00%) 1*(0.8%) 2(472.1%) 5(8*3.3%) 1(1*00% None. S.Y. Scher: None. J. Ekstein: None. D.A. Zeevi: T(not=al3s1tu5d)ied 48 37 37 2 120 64 6 1 None. C. Verebi: None. C. Vignal: None. S. Drunat: None. 
P10 .64.B Possible X-linked genetic and epigenetic modiﬁers of 
P10 .62.C proximal spinal muscular atrophy Long-read amplicon sequencing detects a bi-allelic SMN1>SMN2 gene conversion allele that does not A. Yurchenko1, E. Patskun2, S. Kravchenko3, N. guarantee a spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) phenotype Hryshchenko3 H. Muallem1, J. Harting2, C. Heiner2, S. Y. Scher3, J. 1EducationalandScientiﬁcCenter“InstituteofBiologyand Ekstein3, D. A. Zeevi1 Medicine” of Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Municipal Non-Proﬁt Enterprise 1DorYeshorimCommitteeforPreventionofJewishGenetic "Transkarpathian Clinical Regional Hospital named after Diseases, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Andrii Novak", Uzhgorod, Ukraine, 3Institute of Molecular Park, CA, United States, 3Dor Yeshorim Committee for Biology and Genetics NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine Prevention of Jewish Genetic Diseases, New York, NY, United States Introduction: Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuromuscular autosomal recessive disease, mostly Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is caused caused by a homozygous deletion in SMN1 gene. Despite primarily by bi-allelic loss of SMN1 exon 7 via deletion SMAisaclassicmonogenicdisease,theclinicalphenotype and/or gene conversion to SMN2. Here we show that bi- of patients varies from the most acute infantile type to a allelicSMN1>SMN2geneconversionpresentswithmild,or relatively mild chronic juvenile type. Some genetic modi- completely absent, disease phenotype. ﬁers of SMA are already known, such as a type of SMN1 MaterialsandMethods:Aconsanguineouscoupleand4 mutation and SMN2 copy number variation. It was shown childrenwereselectedforinvestigation.Twochildrenwere that the female SMA phenotype was signiﬁcantly differing asymptomatic and the other two children were diagnosed from the phenotype of the male patients. The aim of our with mild Type 3 SMA (at ages 13 and 28, respectively). investigation is to study an association of SMA phenotype For each sample, SMN1 exon7 dosage was measured by with X-linked genetic and epigenetic factors. qPCR and SMN1/2 alleles were determined by long read Materials and Methods: The study groups consisted of amplicon Single Molecule, Real-Time (SMRT) sequencing female (n = 103) and male (n = 75) patients with on the Sequel System (Paciﬁc Biosciences) followed by determined SMN1 and SMN2 genotypes. The analysis of segregation analysis. X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) was done by methyl- Results: The qPCR assay identiﬁed a carrier state in speciﬁc CAG-genotyping of AR gene. The rs2070169 and bothparents,non-carrierstateinoneunaffectedchild,and rs4339766 of UBA1 were analyzed by RFLP-method. complete absence of SMN1 exon 7 in 2 affected children Spearman’s correlation, regression analysis and Mann- and 1 unaffected child. Long-read amplicon analysis Whitney test were used for the statistical analysis. identiﬁedidenticalgenotypesintheparents,includingone Results:Thecorrelationbetweenthepatients’SMN1and normalSMNchromosome(bearing1copyofSMN1and1 SMN2genotypesandSMAphenotypeswasstrongerinthe copy of SMN2) and one gene conversion SMN chromo- malegroup.SkewedXCIwasdetectedin45.5%offemales, some (bearing one normal copy of SMN2 and one these patients signiﬁcantly more often (p <0.05) had differ SMN1>SMN2 gene converted copy). The non-carrier phenotype than expected. It was demonstrated that unaffected child was homozygous for the normal SMN rs2070169 and rs4339766 had no signiﬁcant effect on chromosome, while the 2 affected children and 1 SMA phenotype. unaffected child were each homozygous for the gene Conclusions: It was conﬁrmed that a XCI skewing may conversion SMN chromosome. inﬂuence on SMA phenotype. The skewed XCI in SMA Conclusions: SMN1>SMN2 gene conversion, which is patients lead both to milder and severer phenotypes. fairly common in the general population, was readilyAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 449 A. Yurchenko: None. E. Patskun: None. S. Krav- individuals of two unrelated, consanguineous families chenko: None. N. Hryshchenko: None. caused by biallelic loss-of-function mutations in SVIL. Material and Methods: Patients were comprehensively 
P10 .66.A investigated clinically, and whole exome sequencing on Loss of costameric supervillin causes myopathy with genomic DNA was performed in all affected individuals. myoﬁbrillar disorganization and autophagic vacuoles Skeletal muscle biopsies were morphological analyzed by enzyme and immunohistochemical techniques and electron C.Hedberg-Oldfors1,R.Meyer2,K.Nolte3,Y.A.Rahim1,C. microscopy. Lindberg4, K. Karason5, I. J. Thuestad6, K. Visuttijai1, M. Results: Affected patients share a distinctive phenotype Geijer7,8, M. Begemann2, F. Kraft2, E. Lausberg2, L. that includes a wide neck, anteverted shoulders, and a Hitpaß9, R. Götzl10, E. J. Luna11, H. Lochmüller12,13, S. prominent trapezius muscle together with variable contrac- Koschmieder14, M. Gramlich15, B. Gess16, M. Elbracht2, J. tures besides further skeletal and mild heart muscle Weis3, I. Kurth2, A. Oldfors1, C. Knopp2 involvement. Muscle biopsies of both families demon- strated complete loss of supervillin in muscle tissue by 1Department of Pathology and Genetics, Sahlgrenska western blot and immunohistochemical analyses. Compre- Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, hensive light and electron microscopical investigations of 2Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH muscle biopsies showed striking similarities between Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 3Institute of Neuro- patientsandrevealedastructuralmyopathywithprominent pathology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, lobulatedtype1ﬁbers,myoﬁbrillardisintegrationandsigns Aachen, Germany, 4Department of Neurology, Neuromus- of altered proteostasis and impaired autophagy. cular Centre, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothen- Conclusions: The results underline the importance of burg, Sweden, 5Department of Cardiology and Transplant supervillin for the structural integrity of muscle ﬁbers in Institute, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, humans and show that recessive loss-of-function mutations Sweden, 6Department of Pediatrics, Skane University in SVIL cause a novel myopathy with distinct histological, Hospital, Malmo, Sweden, 7Department of Radiology, ultrastructural and clinical ﬁndings. Funding: This study Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothen- was supported by the Swedish Research Council to AO burg, Sweden, 8Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund (grant number 2018-02821) and by the German Research University, Lund, Sweden, 9Department of Diagnostic and Foundation (DFG) to IK (KU1587/4-1). Interventional Radiology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen C.Hedberg-Oldfors:None.R.Meyer:None.K.Nolte: University, Aachen, Germany, 10Department of Plastic None. Y.A. Rahim: None. C. Lindberg: None. K. Surgery, Hand and Burn Surgery, Medical Faculty, RWTH Karason: None. I.J. Thuestad: None. K. Visuttijai: Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 11Division of Cell None. M. Geijer: None. M. Begemann: None. F. Kraft: BiologyandImaging,DepartmentofRadiology,University None. E. Lausberg: None. L. Hitpaß: None. R. Götzl: of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United None. E.J. Luna: None. H. Lochmüller: None. S. States, 12Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Koschmieder:None.M.Gramlich:None.B.Gess:None. Institute, Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, M. Elbracht: None. J. Weis: None. I. Kurth: None. A. The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 13Brain and Oldfors: None. C. Knopp: None. Mind Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 14Depart- ment of Hematology, Onkology, Hemostaseology and Stem 
P10 .68.C Cell Transplantation, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen Unexpected identiﬁcation of a novel 11 bp deletion University, Aachen, Germany, 15Department of Invasive mutation in TARDBP causing a slowly progressive Electrophysiology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen Uni- autosomal dominant myopathy versity, Aachen, Germany, 16Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, P. Ervilha Pereira1,2, N. Schuermans1,2, A. Meylemans3,4, Germany S. Roy1,2, P. Leblanc1,2, J. Aalders5, E. Debackere1,2, O. Vanakker1,2, J. Van Hengel5, S. Symoens1,2, J. De Introduction: Archvillin, the muscle speciﬁc isoform of Bleecker3,4, B. Dermaut1,2, E. Bogaert1,2 supervillin encoded by the SVIL gene, is a large sarco- lemmal protein. Despite an important role of supervillin in 1Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Faculty of Medi- muscle cell physiology has been suggested, no muscular cineandHealthSciences,GhentUniversity,Gent,Belgium, diseaseassociatedwith SVILmutationshasbeendescribed. 2Center for Medical Genetics, Gent University Hospital, We here report a new structural myopathy in four Gent, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, Ghent Uni- versity Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 4Department of Head and450 J.delPicchia Skin, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent R. A. Mein1, A. Sarkozy2, J. McCauley1, K. Stone1 University, Gent, Belgium, 5Department of Human Struc- ture and Repair, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 1Genetics Department, Viapath, London, United Kingdom, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium 2The Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, London, United Kingdom Background: In Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD), TDP-43 proteinopathy Recessive TTN gene variants cause congenital myopathy occurs in 97% of ALS cases and 45% of FTD patients. (CM) with variable presentation, progression and patholo- Furthermore,missensemutationsintheC-terminusofTDP- gical features. Implementation of Next generation sequen- 43areageneticcauseofALS,emphasizingthecrucialrole cing (NGS) has enabled screening of the TTN gene in of this protein in the disease’s pathogenesis. routine diagnostic testing and is highlighting the consider- Objective:Toidentifyandcharacterizethegeneticcause able prevalence of this myopathy. The UK Highly Specia- of an autosomal dominant slowly progressive neurogenic lisedServiceforCMstartedTTNanalysisin2016aspartof myopathy in a large Belgian family. a panel of genes associated with congenital myopathy. We Methods: Whole exome sequencing and segregation presentresultsfrom99patientswithTTNsequencevariants. analysis of candidate causal variants. InmostcasesotherpotentiallyrelevantCMgeneshadbeen Results:Weidentiﬁedanovelcausal11bpdeletioninthe excludedeitherpriortooratthesametimeasTTNanalysis. TARDBP gene (c.1152_1162del) segregating with the 23 patient have homozygous/compound heterozygous disease (2-point LOD-score of 2.4). The disease presented (likely) pathogenic variants which were conﬁrmed to be in as a slowly progressive neurogenic myopathy with an trans in 13 patients. 21 patients had one or more missense average age-of-onset of 32 years (range: 18-40) and a variants of uncertain signiﬁcance in addition to a (likely) disease duration of >45 years. No family members showed pathogenic TTN variant, conﬁrmed to be in trans in 16 classical ALS or FTD pathology. Unlike previously patients. A further 13 patients had a heterozygous patho- described classical ALS-causing mutations in TARDBP, genic variant but a second causative variant was not iden- this mutation causes a frameshift that leads to an entirely tiﬁed. The remaining 42 patients had one (n = 18), two novel C-terminus. This region of the protein is key for the (12), or more than three (4) variants of uncertain sig- formation of TDP-43 aggregates, therefore this novel niﬁcance. The high number of missense variants with mutation provides a unique opportunity to dissect the insufﬁcient evidence to classify as likely pathogenic, even pathogenic role of TDP-43. in patients with strong clinical, pathological and MRI fea- Conclusions: Since the molecular mechanisms respon- tures, means that functional characterisation of missense sible for TDP-43 pathology remain fairly unknown, variants is required and further investigation such as tran- unravelling the biophysical properties of TDP-43 aggrega- scriptome analysis is necessary to identify additional tion isofutmost importance.Functional analysisthisnovel pathogenic variants in in those patients with a single het- and unusual TARDBP 11 bp deletion (c.1152_1162del) erozygous pathogenic variant. usingpatientiPSC-derivedneuronsandDrosophilamodels R.A. Mein: None. A. Sarkozy: None. J. McCauley: are ongoing. None. K. Stone: None. Funding was obtained through following grants: Odysseus Type I grant (G0H8318N), Research Foundation 
P10 .70.B Flanders (FWO) and Starting grant (01N10319), Ghent Preferential X chromosome inactivation in women with University Special Research Fund myasthenia gravis P. Ervilha Pereira: None. N. Schuermans: None. A. Meylemans: None. S. Roy: None. P. Leblanc: None. J. V. Nicolì1,2, S. Tabano3, P. Colapietro3, M. Miozzo3, R. Aalders:None.E.Debackere:None.O.Vanakker:None. Ricciardi4, M. Maestri4, F. Coppedè1, L. Migliore1 J.VanHengel:None.S.Symoens:None.J.DeBleecker: None. B. Dermaut: None. E. Bogaert: None. 1Department of Translational Research and of New Surgical and Medical Technologies, University of Pisa, 
P10 .69.A Pisa, Italy, 2Doctoral School in Genetics, Oncology and TTN gene analysis in UK patients with congenital ClinicalMedicine,DepartmentofMedicalBiotechnologies, myopathies University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, Department of Pathophysiology & Transplantation,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 451 University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Clinical Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4University of Minnesota Medical and Experimental Medicine, Neurology Unit, University of Center, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 5Department of Pisa, Pisa, Italy Neurology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 6GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, Introduction: Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune 7CENTOGENE AG, Rostock, Germany, 8King Abdullah disease characterised by female prevalence (3:1). Several University of Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi mechanismswereproposedasexplanationofgenderbiasin Arabia, 9Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotter- autoimmune diseases, including skewed X chromosome dam, Netherlands inactivation (XCI) and X chromosome dosage, sex hor- mones, and variants of genes involved in autoimmunity YIF1B, an intracellular transmembrane protein, involves in development. Normally, XCI is a biological event that trafﬁcking of molecules from the endoplasmic reticulum to occurs randomly, and females are thus functional mosaics the Golgi apparatus in eukaryotic cells. Errors in such fortheX-linkedgenes.AskewedXCIpatterncanleadtoan transportation between the organelles can lead to human unbalanced expression of certain X-linked alleles, for this diseases and implicated in nervous system disorders. Here, reason it has been hypothesized that females may be more we describe 6 patients from 5 unrelated families presenting prone to certain diseases. Indeed, a high frequency of with progressive encephalopathy with various degrees of skewed XCI pattern has been observed in several auto- mixed movement disorder, dysphagia, hypotonia, micro- immune disorders characterized by female predominance. cephaly, and epilepsy. Common genetic errors found in all No data are yet available concerning myasthenia gravis, so these patients are homozygous truncating variants that we investigated the XCI pattern in MG females with (c.186dupT:p.Ala64fs; c.360_361insACAT:p.Gly121fs; this autoimmune disease. c.598G>T:p.Glu200*) in YIF1B. The genetic analysis was MaterialsandMethods:XCIanalysiswasperformedon carried out using whole exome sequencing. All affected blood samples of 84 myasthenic women and 111 healthy individuals shared a similar phenotypic features. The resi- age-matched female controls. XCI was analysed by human dues in the variants are highly conserved among different androgen receptor (HUMARA) assay. speciesandwereabsentinpubliclyavailabledatabasessuch Results: In 72 MG informative patients the frequency of as GnomAD. YIF1B is ubiquitously expressed molecule in skewedXCIpattern(≥75%)was35,0%,whichwashigher various tissues including neuronal cells and speciﬁcally in than in healthy controls (14,4%; p =0.002). Furthermore, raphe neurons. We performed computational structural the prevalence of skewed pattern was observed mostly in analysis of the variants. The modeling predicted that the youngest patients (<50 years; p = 0.008), suggesting an variants lead to unstructured molecules with loss of func- age-independent effect. tion. Our network and functional analyses revealed co- Conclusions:Inthisstudy,weobservedpreferentialXCI regulation of 171 genes with YIF1B in over 46,000 human inMGfemalepatients,thiscouldsuggestapotentialroleof RNAseq samples (r≥0.9). Our data indicates that disease thismechanisminthediseaseetiology,andintheincreased causing variants in YIF1B in humans lead to a novel neu- prevalence of autoimmune disorders in females. rogenetic disorder. Additional studies are required to dis- V.Nicolì:None.S.Tabano:None.P.Colapietro:None. entangle the precise pathobiological mechanisms of this M.Miozzo:None.R.Ricciardi:None.M.Maestri:None. autosomal recessive novel disease entity. F. Coppedè: None. L. Migliore: None. We are grateful to the patient families for their participation. This research received intramural funds from 
P10 .71.C KFSHRC, grants from NSTIP/KACST (NK, DC), KSCDR Truncating mutations in YIF1B cause a progressive (NK), KAUST (STA), NARSAD (TSB). We extend our encephalopathy with various degrees of mixed move- special thanks to the funding agencies. ment disorder, microcephaly, and epilepsy N. Kaya: None. M. AlMuhaizea: None. R. AlMass: None.A.AlHargan:None.A.AlBader:None.E.Medico N. Kaya1, M. AlMuhaizea1, R. AlMass1, A. AlHargan1, A. Salsench: None. J. Howaidi: None. J. Ihinger: None. P. AlBader1,E.MedicoSalsench2,J.Howaidi3,J.Ihinger4,P. Karachunski: None. A. Begtrup: None. M. Castell: Karachunski5, A. Begtrup6, M. Castell7, P. Bauer7, A. Other; Modest; CENTOGENE. P. Bauer: Other; Modest; Bertoli-Avella7, I. Kaya1, J. AlSufayan3, L. AlQuait3, A. CENTOGENE. A. Bertoli-Avella: Other; Modest; CEN- Chedrawi1, S. Arold8, D. Colak1, T. Barakat9 TOGENE. I. Kaya: None. J. AlSufayan: None. L. AlQuait: None. A. Chedrawi: None. S. Arold: None. D. 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Colak: None. T. Barakat: None. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3AlFaisal University,452 J.delPicchia 
P11  Multiple Malformation/Anomalies Syndromes duplication phenotypes will be done in detail. This study highlightstheclinicalusefulnessofaCGHasaﬁrst-tiertest for evaluation of patients with neurodevelopmental dis- 
P11 .01.A orders and malformation syndromes. 1q21.1 CNVs A. Grangeia: None. J. Pinto: None. M. Leão: None. S. Guimarães:None.C.Ramalho:None.R.Oliveira:None. A. Grangeia1,2, J. Pinto3,2, M. Leão1,3, S. Guimarães4, C. S. Dória: None. Ramalho5,6,2, R. Oliveira1, S. Dória3,2 
P11 .02.B 1Medical Genetics Service, Centro Hospitalar e Universi- Phenotypic heterogeneity in22q11.2deletion syndrome: tárioSãoJoão(CHUSJ),Porto,Portugal,2I3S-Institutode CNVsasgeneticmodiﬁersforcongenitalheartdiseasein Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, University of Porto, a Brazilian cohort Porto, Portugal, 3Department of Genetics, Faculty of M. Zamariolli1, A. G. Dantas1, N. Nunes1, M. Moysés- Medicine (FMUP), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, Oliveira1, I. C. Sgardioli2, D. C. Q. Soares3, V. L. Gil-Da- 4Pathological Anatomy Service, Centro Hospitalar e Silva-Lopes2, C. A. Kim3, M. I. Melaragno1; Universitário São João (CHUSJ)/Faculty of Medicine 1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, UniversityofPorto(FMUP),Porto,Portugal,5Department 2Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil, of Obstetrics, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário São João 3Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (CHUSJ), Porto, Portugal, 6Department of Obstetrics, Introduction: The clinical heterogeneity in 22q11.2 Gynecology and Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine (FMUP), deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) might be caused by Porto, Portugal complex mechanisms including variants in other regions of the genome, known as genetic modiﬁers. Congenital Introduction:The1q21.1deletion/duplicationsyndromeis heartdisease(CHD)isoneofthemostrelevantphenotypes associatedtoavariableclinicalphenotype,characterizedby andpreviousstudieshaveshownthatcopynumbervariants neurodevelopmental disorder, craniofacial dysmorphisms (CNVs) outside the 22q11.2 region could play a role in its and heart defects. The Thrombocytopenia Absent Radius variable expressivity. However, those described loci (TAR) syndrome is characterized by hypo-megakaryocytic account for a small proportion ofthe variability. Therefore, thrombocytopenia,radiusagenesiswith thumbs. Thisstudy CNVanalysisinnewcohortsfromdifferentancestry-based describes ten patients with 1q21.1 CNV including one populationareavaluableresourcetoidentifyawiderrange clinical TAR syndrome. of modiﬁers. Material and Methods: An array-CGH (Agilent Materials and Methods: We performed SNP-array 4x180K) was performed in 1508 patients with different (CytoScanHD) in 77 Brazilian patients with 22q11.2DS indications. (55 with CHD and 22 with normal cardiac phenotype). Results: Ten CNVs in 1q21.1 region were identiﬁed, 6 Genome-wide CNV analysis was performed by two pathogenic and 4 probably pathogenic. Nine patients algorithms (PennCNV and Rawcopy) and the overlapping showed a variable clinical phenotype, autism spectrum CNVswereconsideredfordownstreamanalysis.TheCNVs disorders (ASD), intellectual disability (ID), developmental content was annotated using AnnotSV and compared delay and craniofacial dysmorphisms, and a fetus with between patients with and without CHD using Gene Set radius agenesis; three CNVs included the deletion of Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). RBM8A gene, but only the fetus had clinical TAR. Results: We identiﬁed 407 CNVs (308 deletions and 99 Discussion/Conclusion: The presence of a CNV in the duplications). CNV-affected genes in patients with CHD 1q21.1 region could represent a contiguous gene deletion/ were enriched for pathways related to transition metal ion duplication syndrome (autosomal dominant inheritance) or binding, cytoskeleton and stabilization of membrane TAR syndrome (autosomal recessive inheritance).In the potential. Some of these genes have been previously fetus with absent radius, the RBM8A gene sequencing associated to cardiac alterations (OTUD7A, DNAH5, revealed no pathogenic coding variants, so further studies KIF6, EVC, KCNK17). will be performed to identify a second variant (intronic or Conclusions: Further exploration of the genes in these promotorregions)thatcouldexplaintheTARphenotype.In pathways could reveal new modiﬁers to the cardiac 1q21.1deletion patients the most common psychiatric phenotype in 22q11.2DS patients. This study will leverage manifestation includes internalizing disorders. In 1q21.1- new insights to the understanding of genetic modiﬁers duplications, ASD, attention deﬁcit-hyperactivity disorder involved in the expressivity of cardiac alterations in andIDarethemostcommonfeatures.Ourpatients´clinical 22q11.2DS. Financial support: CAPES, FAPESP, Brazil. characterization and a comparison of the deletion versusAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 453 M. Zamariolli: None. A.G. Dantas: None. N. Nunes: 
P11 .06.C None. M. Moysés-Oliveira: None. I.C. Sgardioli: None. Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of Alkuraya- D.C.Q.Soares:None.V.L.Gil-Da-Silva-Lopes:None.C. Kucinskas syndrome: deﬁning the mildest end A. Kim: None. M.I. Melaragno: None. E. Çepni1, U. Altunoğlu2,3,4, S. Avcı3, S. Eraslan3, H. 
P11 .05.B Kayserili1,2,3 Modelling Rho GTPase dysregulation in Adams-Oliver syndrome: a disorder of vasculogenesis? 1Institute of Health Sciences, Koç University School of Medicine,Istanbul,Turkey,2MedicalGeneticsDepartment, C. E. Benson, D. P. Osborn, G. S. Whitley, L. Southgate Koç University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Diagnostic Center for Genetic Diseases, Koç University St George’s University of London, London, United King- Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Medical Genetics Department, dom Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey Introduction: Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a debili- Alkuraya-Kucinskas syndrome (ALKKUCS, OMIM tating disorder of limb, scalp and vascular birth defects, #617822) is a recently described, ultra-rare autosomal providing a unique window into the regulation of human recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by embryogenesis. AOS is considered to be a disorder of structural, cortical and parenchymal brain abnormalities, vasculogenesis;however,thisremainstobedetermined.We global developmental delay/intellectual deﬁcit and joint have previously identiﬁed pathogenic mutations ofthe Rho contractures. The phenotypic spectrum of 15 previously GTPase regulators ARHGA
P31  and DOCK6, implicating reported cases range from mild-to-moderate intellectual Rho dysregulation in AOS aetiology. Gain-of-function deﬁcit with microcephaly to a phenotype characterized by ARHGA
P31  mutations and DOCK6 loss-of-function severe ventriculomegaly and/or brainstem dysgenesis with impact cytoskeletal dynamics through abnormal inactiva- intrauterine or neonatal death. Only three children survived tion of Cdc42 and Rac1. Nonetheless, their role in human till childhood. We here report two new ALKKUCS cases blood vessel formation requires further exploration. Here, from two unrelated consanguineous families. The ﬁrst we sought to generate in vitro and in vivo models of Rho patient was presented with antenatal ultrasound ﬁndings of dysregulation to investigate the mechanism of vascular severe hydrocephaly, interhemispheric cyst, hydropic disruption in AOS. changes with cystic hygroma and joint contractures. Pedi- MaterialsandMethods:RhoGTPasedysregulationwas gree analysis showed two similarly affected siblings and modelled in zebraﬁsh embryos (Danio rerio) and human four affected cousins. Postmortem examination was com- vascular smooth muscle cells. Gene expression patterns patible with a lethal contracture phenotype. Whole exome wereassessedbyquantitativePCRandwhole-mountinsitu sequencing (WES) revealed a ‘likely pathogenic’ homo- hybridisation. Gene knockdown was conducted using zygous variant in the KIAA1109 gene. The second patient splice-blocking morpholino oligonucleotides. wasconsultedat9yearsofage.ShehadahistoryofNICU Results: Both genes were expressed in human vascular care due to poor sucking/weak swallowing reﬂex and car- smooth muscle cells and early stages of vascular develop- diac arrest in early neonatal period. Clinical ﬁndings ment in zebraﬁsh. Whole-mount in situ hybridisation in included mild myopathy of the neck muscles, pes equino- zebraﬁsh embryos indicated arhgap31 and dock6 are varus, scapula alata and camptodactyly. Identiﬁcation of a localised to the vasculature, ocular and cranial regions, homozygous variant in the KIAA1109 gene, segregating highlighting a correlation with the human phenotype. with the phenotype, made the diagnosis of ALKKUCS Furthermore, dock6 morphant embryos displayed vascular possible, placing the case to the mildest end of the pheno- defects and microphthalmia, analogous to the clinical typic spectrum. Cases we here report highlights the power features observed in DOCK6-related AOS. of WES in identifying genetic etiopathogenesis of rare Conclusions: Our preliminary results support a role for disorders; and expand the phenotypic spectrum of ARHGA
P31  and DOCK6 during vascular development. ALKKUCS. Further interrogation of these models will broaden our E.Çepni: None.U.Altunoğlu:None.S.Avcı:None.S. understanding of Rho GTPase biology in the vasculature Eraslan: None. H. Kayserili: None. and the mechanisms driving AOS pathogenesis. C.E.Benson:None.D.P.Osborn:None.G.S.Whitley: 
P11 .11.B None. L. Southgate: None. Severe scoliosis in the patient with a novel variant p. Pro237ArgfsTer7 in the WDR45 gene454 J.delPicchia N. Maric1, J. Luna2, M. Codina2, L. Armengol2 4Abdullah Gul Universitesi, Doga Bilimleri Fakultesi, Sumer Kampusu, 38090, Kocasinan, Kayseri, Turkey., 1University Clinical Centre of the Republic of Srpska, Kayseri, Turkey, 5Pediatric Genomics Discovery Program, Banjaluka, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2Quantitative Geno- Department of Pediatrics and Genetics, Yale University mic Medicine Laboratories SL, Barcelona, Spain School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA., New Haven, CT, United States, 6Pediatric Genomics Discovery Introduction: Mutations in the WDR45 gene have been Program, Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Yale described as the cause of beta-propeller protein-associated University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New neurodegeneration(BPAN), anX-linkeddominant disorder Haven,Connecticut06510,USA.,NewHAVEN,CT,United with brain iron accumulation. It typically presents in early States childhood with global developmental delay, seizures and autistic-like behavior. Following an initial static phase, Normal 0 false false false EN-US JA X-NONE /* Style these symptoms progress to dystonia, parkinsonism and Deﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"- dementia inearly adulthood. We report acase with anovel Table Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-col- pathogenic variant in the WDR45 gene that exhibited an band-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-priority:99; early progression of symptoms and severe scoliosis which, mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt; to our knowledge, has not been previously reported mso-para-margin:0in; mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt; in BPAN. mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font-size:12.0pt; font- Case report: A 10-year-old girl is the second child of family:Cambria; mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; mso-ascii- healthy unrelated parents. At 14 months, developmental theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; delaywasnoted.Shehadautistic-likebehavior,didn’twalk mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;}Ciliaareorganellesthat until the age of 3-year and was mute. Seizures were never protrude from the apical aspect of the cells. They can be noticed but EEG was abnormal. Her condition was stable either motile or immotile-sensory and play many distinct until the age of 7-year when her cognitive skills further rolesinhumandevelopment.Defectivecilialeadtoagroup declined. In that time, scoliosis was noted together with of inherited, monogenic disorders referred as ciliopathies, bradykinesia,rigidityandposturalinstability.Scoliosiswas including disorders such as Bardet-Biedl syndrome, poly- severely progressive and needed surgical treatment. At the cystic kidney disease, Joubert syndrome, and nephro- age of 9-year she lost the ability to walk. Whole exome nophthisis. Here, we present homozygous C
C2 D1A sequencing revealed a novel heterozygous frameshift c.1186C>T (p.Arg396*) variant identiﬁed in our proband pathogenicvariantintheWDR45genep.Pro237ArgfsTer7, with left renal cysts, autistic features and Mental Motor veriﬁedby Sanger sequencing,that wasn’tpresentin either Retardation (MMR), his sibling has also austictic features, parent. No other variants of studied genes associated with obesity and MMR, as a candidate ciliopathy gene. To scoliosis were identiﬁed. analyze the effect of C
C2 D1A in ciliogenesis, we utilized Conclusions: Our case is a very rare example of BPAN the frog Xenopus and C.Elegans model systems. Xenopus withseverescoliosisthatmightbeduetoanovelvariantin tadpole epidermis harbor numerous multiciliated cells that the WDR45 gene and thus expands the knowledge of the generate head-to-tail polarized ﬂuid ﬂow. When we phenotype-genotype correlation of BPAN. knocked down C
C2 D1A in frog Xenopus tropicalis using N. Maric: None. J. Luna: None. M. Codina: None. L. CRISPR/CA
S9  system, and analyzed epidermal ﬂow using Armengol: None. Optical CoherenceTomographyImaging,weobservedloss of epidermal ﬂow in F0 mutant tadpoles. When we further 
P11 .14.B examined the epidermal surface in these tadpoles using C
C2 D1A AS A NOVEL CILIOPATHY GENE immunoﬂuorescence, we detected the loss of multiciliated cells. In parallel, we also showed the loss of cilia in C. I. SAKIN1, G. TUNCE
L2 , S. OZEMRI SAG3, O. I. Elegans C
C2 D1A knock-out model utilizing the CRISPR/ KAPLAN4, M. K. KHOKHA5, M. C. ERGOREN2, E. Cas9 system. Together, this work demonstrates that DENIZ6, S. G. Temel3, MarmaRare Group C
C2 D1Aisrequiredforproperciliogenesisinmulticiliated cells, providing a plausible mechanism for its role in our 1Medical Student, School of Medicine, Acibadem Mehmet patient phenotype. <!--EndFragment--> Ali Aydınlar University, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, I.Sakin:None.G.Tuncel:None.S.Ozemrisag:None. 2DepartmentofMedicalBiology,FacultyofMedicine,Near O.I.Kaplan:None.M.K.Khokha:None.M.C.Ergoren: East University, 99138 Nicosia, Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, None. E. Deniz: None. S.G. Temel: None. 3Bursa Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart- ment of Medical Genetics, Bursa, Turkey., Bursa, Turkey,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 455 
P11 .15.C A.Garde1,2,F.TranMau-Them2,S.Nambot1,2,M.Fradin3, Chitayat syndrome: a rare but potentially underdiag- S.Odent3,Y.Duffour2,S.Banka4,C.Philippe2,C.Thauvin- nosed condition ? Robinet1,2, L. Faivre1,2 C. Mueller-Hofstede1, A. Tewes1, J. Horvath1, F. Rutsch2, 1Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et A. Bohring1 SyndromesMalformatifs,FHUTRANSLAD,CHUdeDijon, Dijon, France, 2Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des 1Institut für Humangenetik, University Hospital, Muenster, Anomalies du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Germany, 2Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Allge- Dijon, France, 3Service de Génétique Clinique, IGDR meinePädiatrie,UniversityHospital,Muenster,Germany (Institut de Génétique et développement de Rennes) (S.O.), CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 4Division of Evolution We report on a ten months old boy, third child of non- and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, consanguineousparents.Thepregnancywasuncomplicated FacultyofBiology,Medicine,andHealth,TheUniversityof withoutultrasoundabnormalities.Bodymeasurementswere Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom in the normal range. Bowed hands and feet with bilateral shortened and ulnar deviated index ﬁngers, additional bone Introduction: Loss of function variants in KMT2D can be nuclei of digits II / III of both hands and clinodactyly of responsible of Kabuki syndrome type 1 (K
S1 ). Recently, digiti II, III, IV were noticed. The feet showed bilateral missense variants in exon 38 or 39 in KMT2D have been hallux valgus. Neonatal respiratory distress required initi- foundinpatientspresentinganewphenotypewithmultiple ally high-ﬂow oxygen therapy. malformations distinct from K
S1 , including choanal atresia At presentation the boy showed a pectus excavatum and and absence of intellectual disability. Choanal atresia (CA) mild facial dysmorphism (hypertelorism, broad nasal is a congenital disorder characterized by a bony or mem- bridge, short columella) in addition to the above- branousseptumbetweenthenoseandnasopharynx.CAcan mentioned abnormalities. The general development was occur as an isolated form or in syndromic presentations. age-appropriate. Patients and Method: A newborn girl was referred to Due to the combination of the symptoms Chitayat our medical department because of choanal atresia. Given syndromehasbeenconsidered.Sequenceanalysisidentiﬁed the fact that 8 members of the family spreading across 3 thedenovoheterozygousvariantc.266A>G(p.(Tyr89Cys)) generationshadnon-syndromicchoanalatresia,wedecided in the ERF-gene. to perform exome sequencing (ES) in our patient and one Chitayat et al. ﬁrst described 1993 a patient with cousin, the most distant affected relative. hyperphalangism,brachydactyly,bronchomalaciaandfacial Results: In 2014, ES was ﬁrst concluded as negative. anomalies. Since then, only 6 other patients have been Followingthepublicationentitled“Arestrictedspectrumof described in literature. In 2016 the recurrent variant missense KMT2D variants cause a multiple malformations c.266A>G (p.(Tyr89Cys)) in the ERF-gene was identiﬁed disorder distinct from Kabuki syndrome” (Cuvertino et al., as the underlying molecular cause. 2020),weinterrogatedourdatabaseformissensevariantsin Heterozygous mutations (predominantely loss-of-func- exons 38-39 of KMT2D. We identiﬁed a p.Glu3569Gly, in tion) in the ERF-gene are described in syndromal exon38,segregatingwithchoanalatresiainthefamily.One craniosynostosis 4. The above-mentioned variant has not obligate carrier did not present choanal atresia, suggesting yet been described in this context. This could indicate, that incompletepenetrance.Predictionscoresareinfavorofthe the variant may have a different inﬂuence on protein pathogenicity and functional analyses have been proposed. function and potentially leads to a gain-of-function. Conclusions: Considering these results and the recent We suggest that the rare condition of Chitayat syndrome literature, we suggest that missense variants in exon 38 of should always be considered in children with the combina- KMT2Dcanberesponsibleofevenmilderphenotypessuch tionofcharacteristicskeletalabnormalitiesofthehandsand as isolated choanal atresia. feet especially hyperphalangism with respiratory distress. A. Garde: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. S. C. Mueller-Hofstede: None. A. Tewes: None. J. Nambot: None. M. Fradin: None. S. Odent: None. Y. Horvath: None. F. Rutsch: None. A. Bohring: None. Duffour: None. S. Banka: None. C. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None. 
P11 .16.A Isolated familial choanal atresia: a new entity in the 
P11 .17.B phenotypic spectrum of KMT2D gene Chromatinopathies:clinicalhypothesisversusmolecular diagnosis456 J.delPicchia C. Cesario, M. Gnazzo, E. Pisaneschi, R. Capolino, L. A. Engwerda1, S. E. Meijer1, P. Bouman2, N. F. Simoes de Sinibaldi, M. Dentici, M. Digilio, A. Novelli Souza1,B.Frentz3,B.C.T.Flapper4,N.Corsten-Janssen1, E.H.Gerkes1,M.A.Swertz1,M.Plantinga1,T.Dijkhuizen1, Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Medical Genetics, Bam- W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij- bino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy Arts1 Introduction: Defects of the structural or regulatory com- 1University of Groningen, University Medical Centre ponents of cohesin lead to various multisystem malforma- Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Nether- tion syndromes described as “cohesinopathies”, that share lands,2Facebookcontactparent,Chromosome6Facebook clinical ﬁndings such as distinctive facial features, growth group, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Vanboeijen, Assen, Nether- retardation, intellectual disability and limb abnormalities. lands,4UniversityofGroningen,UniversityMedicalCentre Moreover, inpatients presenting classical and non-classical Groningen,DepartmentofPaediatrics,Groningen,Nether- features of cohesinopathies were identiﬁed pathogenic lands variations in key chromatin-associated factors, genetically differentfromcohesin,butwithoverlappingfunctions,such Chromosome6qdeletionsarerareandlittleisknownabout as transcriptional regulation, chromatin remodeling and their phenotypical consequences. Parents of children with epigenetic modiﬁcations; these conditions could be con- suchadeletionsearchtheinternetanduniteininternational sidered part of a larger disease family categorized as social media platforms. A successful collaboration with the “chromatinopathies”. Chromosome 6 Facebook group allowed us to collect data Materials and Methods: Between 2017 and 2018, 40 of 109 newly identiﬁed individuals. cohesinopathies/chromatinopathiespatientscarryinghetero- Families can sign up for the study via the secured zygous pathogenic variants have been diagnosed at the project’s website by uploading the proband’s array report. Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, with initial clinical Phenotype data is collected directly from the individuals or hypothesis of KBG syndrome, CHARGE association, parents via an online multilingual questionnaire. Literature Kabuki syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome and case reports are added to the database using the same Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome. A custom Chromatinopathies NGS questionnaire.UptillJanuary2020thisresultedinatotalof panel was used to analyze genes associated with these 250 individuals. syndromes. Subgroups are made based on the predicted haploinsufﬁ- Results: In 22.5% of cases molecular defects causing ciency genes within the deletions, leading to detailed phenotypic conditions different from the initial clinical phenotype descriptions for 18 subgroups thus far. hypothesis were identiﬁed in other genes coding for Gastroesophageal reﬂux, trachea/laryngo/bronchomala- cohesin, transcriptional regulators, chromatin-associated cia, congenital heart defects, cerebral defects, seizures and protein complex and its interactors, such as MBD5 vision and respiratory problems are predominant in (OMIM:611472), BRD4 (OMIM:608749), SOX11 6q14.2q15 deletions. In contrast, 6q11q14.1 deletions (OMIM:600898), SMARCA2 (OMIM:600014), KDM5C present less severe clinical characteristics. (OMIM:314690), KMT2A (OMIM:159555) and MEC
P2  Deletions including the gene TAB2 (6q25.1) are char- (OMIM:300005). acterized by facial dysmorphisms, short stature, heart Conclusions: Because of phenotypic overlap among defects and connective tissue problems and resemble a chromatin disorders, clinical diagnosis of these patients is Noonan-like syndrome. often challenging or rather impossible without genetic Within the 6q25.2q25.3 region ARID1B plays a promi- evidence. In our cohort, the high rate of positive cases not nent role, resulting in a Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome phenotype matching with the ﬁrst clinical suspect suggests that broad when deleted. spectrum molecular analysis is crucial to reach accurate Terminal 6q26q27 deletions are characterised by micro- diagnosis and will probably led to the identiﬁcation of cephaly, hypotonia, balance problems, vision problems, additional genotype-phenotype associations. seizures and brain abnormalities. Deletions including C. Cesario: None. M. Gnazzo: None. E. Pisaneschi: PARK2 presented with more severe developmental delay. None.R.Capolino:None.L.Sinibaldi:None.M.Dentici: In conclusion, social media are instrumental in collecting None. M. Digilio: None. A. Novelli: None. large numbers of detailed data on rare chromosome aberrations, resulting in a more precise description of the 
P11 .18.C phenotypic spectrum. Phenotype-genotype analysis in a large cohort of 250 A. Engwerda: None. S.E. Meijer: None. P. Bouman: individuals with a chromosome 6q deletion None. N.F. Simoes de Souza: None. B. Frentz: None. B. C.T. Flapper: None. N. Corsten-Janssen: None. E.H.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 457 Gerkes: None. M.A. Swertz: None. M. Plantinga: None. M.M. Oud: None. R. van Beek: None. C. van Manen: T. Dijkhuizen: None. W.S. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. None.D.Lugtenberg:None.E.M.H.F.Bongers:None.R. C.M.A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts: None. Roepman: None. H. Yntema: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. 
P11 .19.A Cilium Phenotyping using patient-derived cells to 
P11 .20.B accurately diagnose ciliopathies Clinical and diagnostic implications of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of 42 patients affected by rare M. M. Oud1,2, R. van Beek1,2, C. van Manen1,3, D. diseases: the ﬁrst Italian experience on a diagnostic Lugtenberg1, E. M. H. F. Bongers1, R. Roepman1,3, H. basis. Yntema1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1,2 F.Sirchia1,D.Carli2,E.Giorgio2,L.Sorasio3,F.Faletra1, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University A. Fabretto1, F. Guidolin4, V. Antona5, J. Belmont6, J. MedicalCentre, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2DondersInstitute Ortega6,R.Taft6,A.Scocchia6,G.Ferrero2,P.Gasparini1, for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University A. Brusco2 MedicalCentre,Nijmegen,Netherlands,3RadboudInstitute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical 1IRCCS Burlo Garofalo di Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Univer- Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands sity of Turin, Torino, Italy, 3Santa Croce e Carle Hospital, Cuneo, Italy, 4University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 5Uni- Introduction: Cilia are small signaling organelles pro- versity of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 6Illumina Inc., San truding from the cell membrane of nearly every vertebrate Diego, CA, United States cell. Ciliary dysfunction leads to rare recessive multiorgan disorders, collectively termed ciliopathies, which have We report the collaboration between the Medical Genetics overlapping genotype-phenotype correlations, making UnitsinTorinoandTriestewiththeIlluminaCompanyina accurate diagnosis challenging. Our aim is to develop a diagnostic setting by trio-WGS. We selected 42 complex novel cell-based functional assay to improve accurate pediatric patients <16 years with normal CGH/SNP-arrays diagnosis of ciliopathies on the basis of the underlying without recognizable genetic disorders. We found a certain mechanism of disease. molecular diagnosis in 26 (62%; ultrarare genes in the lit- Materials and Methods: Skin-ﬁbroblasts from 10 eraturewereASX
L1 ,ASX
L3 ,CSNK2A1,DDX3X,DYRK1A, ciliopathy patients (from 3 different subgroups) and 8 FLNA, HIPEV2, LMNA, NFIX, PAC
S1 , PD
E4 D, PDHA1, controlswereculturedinvitroandimmunoﬂuorescencewas PIGA, PIEZO2, PIGO, RRM2B, SATB2, SETB
P1 , SRCAP applied to determine cilium phenotype parameters; 1) and TUBB3). Three cases (3/26, 11.5%) had two diseases, ciliogenesis, based on presence or absence of cilium and 3 further could potentially be double diagnoses. A markers, 2) cilium length, measured by the combined mosaic chr 9 trisomy (not previously identiﬁed by array- signal of an axonemal and a cilium membrane marker, and CGH)andamat-UPD1werealsoidentiﬁed.In21/26(81%) 3)intraﬂagellartransport(IFT),quantiﬁedbytheareaofthe the disease was associated with a de novo, highlighting the ciliary tip using the IFT88 signal. importance of trio analysis; in 1 patient the disease was Results: Cilium phenotypic data from skin-ﬁbroblasts of inherited from the affected mother (ANKRD11, KBG syn- eight controls yielded comparable and reproducible results: drome). One or more VUSs were found in 5/43 (11.5%) 88% cells were ciliated, the cilium length was patients. SNVs were in the coding region/nearby intron 3.30 ± 0.251μm, and the IFT88 ciliary tip area was suggestingourhighdiagnosticratemayberelatedtoamore 0.13±0.02μm2.Analysisoftheciliumphenotypeinthe10 complete coverage of WGS versus exome, and/or our patients for three clinical subgroups not only showed intertwined bioinformatics and clinical prioritization of signiﬁcant differences in cilium length and IFT results, but variants. The diagnosis changed the management of all also allowed to distinguish the three ciliopathy subgroups positive cases, including referral to palliative cures from one another. (RRM2B; mtDNA depletion syndrome), referral for a spe- Conclusions: In summary, standardized analysis of the ciﬁc follow-up, or cancer surveillance program (ASX
L1 ). cilium phenotype can lead to identiﬁable clusters for Weprovidedacorrectrecurrenceriskforfuturepregnancies different ciliopathies. Therefore, we believe that standar- for parents, including a consanguineous couple with a de dized tests based on cilium phenotypic data can provide novo causative variant in their child. In conclusion, we additional proof for conclusive diagnosis of ciliopathies, show how WGS can dramatically increase our ability to which is essential in routine diagnostic care. reach a genetic diagnosis in undiagnosed cases.458 J.delPicchia F. Sirchia:None. D.Carli: None. E. Giorgio: None. L. G. VERA, A. Goldenberg, F. Lecoquierre, N. Drouot, K. Sorasio: None. F. Faletra: None. A. Fabretto: None. F. Cassinari, F. Charbonnier, S. Coutant, O. Quenez, T. Guidolin: None. V. Antona: None. J. Belmont: None. J. Frebourg, G. Nicolas, P. Saugier-Veber Ortega: None. R. Taft: None. A. Scocchia: None. G. Ferrero: None. P. Gasparini: None. A. Brusco: None. Rouen University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F 76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized 
P11 .21.C Medicine, Reference Center for Developmental Disorders, A case with complex small supernumerary marker and Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, Rouen, chromosome consisting 19p and 22q France S. Altiner, N. Yürür Kutlay Introduction: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a multisystem disorder characterised by growth retardation, Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of microcephaly,dysmorphism,hypertrichosis,limbandorgan Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey malformations, feeding difﬁculties, and neurodevelop- mental disorder. Clinical heterogeneity is illustrated by Introduction: Complex small supernumerary marker variable severity and atypical cases overlapping with some chromosomes (sSMC) consist of chromosomal material other syndromes. Mutations in 6 genes from the cohesin derived from more than one chromosome (Liehr et al., complexcancauseCdLS:NIPBL,SM
C1 A,HDA
C8 ,SM
C3 , 2013). Here, we describe a complex sSMC derived from a RAD21 and BRD4. We present results from a retrospective maternal translocation between chromosomes 19p and 22q study of 202 cases referred between 2011 and 2019. in a patient with intellectual disability and short stature. Methods: Clinical data were reviewed by an expert Materials and Methods: G-banding, FISH, and micro- clinician before molecular testing. Phenotypes were classi- array were performed in order to deﬁne sSMC. ﬁedastypical/mild/atypicalCdLSoranotherdiagnosis.We Results: The patient presented with a complex sSMC applied a clinical score for all suspected CdLS cases, and derived from a 3:1 segregation of a maternal balanced t compared values per molecular outcome and phenotype. A (19;22)(p13;q11) reciprocal translocation and resulting in gene panel sequencing assessed 5/6 CdLS and 17 tertiary trisomy of 19p13.3 and 22q11.1q11.21. differential diagnoses genes (~700x depth of coverage on Conclusions: Genotype-phenotype correlation and average). assigning a speciﬁc feature to an aberration are often Results: Differential diagnoses were suspected for 23 difﬁcult in cases with combined partial trisomies. Besides, individuals. CdLS was suspected for 179 individuals: 66 numerical and structural abnormalities involving chromo- typical, 40 mild and 73 atypical. Molecular testing some 19 isrelatively rare compared toother chromosomes. identiﬁed a (likely) pathogenic variant for 47/66 typical In comparison to patients with similar aberrations, our (71%), 18/40 mild (45%), and 14/73 atypical (19%) patientshowed aphenotypesimilarto19p13.3duplication, individuals conﬁrming CdLS for 73 of them. A differential regarding intellectual disability and growth retardation diagnosis was identiﬁed for 6 atypical individuals. We (Orellana et al., 2015). This is the ﬁrst complex sSMC identiﬁed 11 mosaic mutations with variable phenotypes; 9 originating from chromosome 19 and 22. Functional were detected in saliva and were undetectable in blood. analysis of the genes in these regions may provide a better Clinical scores were signiﬁcantly higher for typical explanationaboutthegene-dosageeffectsonthephenotype. individuals and for pathogenic variants carriers. ReferencesLiehr,T.,Cirkovic,S.,Lalic,T.,Guc-Scekic, Conclusions:Applyingdeepgenepanelsequencingfrom M., de Almeida, C., Weimer, J., et al. (2013). Complex other tissues than blood is an effective strategy for typical small supernumerary marker chromosomes - an update. CdLS given the number of mosaics, while atypical Mol. Cytogenet. 6, 46. Orellana C, Roselló M, Monfort S, phenotypes could be resolved by ﬁrst-tier exome/genome Mayo S, Oltra S, Martínez F. (2015). Pure duplication of sequencing. 19p13.3 in three members of a familyintellectual disability G. Vera: None. A.Goldenberg: None. F. Lecoquierre: and literature review. Deﬁnition of a new microduplication None. N. Drouot: None. K. Cassinari: None. F. syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 167:1614-20. Charbonnier: None. S. Coutant: None. O. Quenez: S. Altiner: None. N. Yürür Kutlay: None. None. T. Frebourg: None. G. Nicolas: None. P. Saugier-Veber: None. 
P11 .23.B Clinical and molecular description of 202 cases of 
P11 .24.C Cornelia deLangeSyndrome and differentialdiagnoses Identifying Cornelia de Lange Syndrome by facial phenotypes using Face2GeneAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 459 A. Latorre-Pellicer1, Á. Ascaso2, L. Trujillano2, M. Gil- Conclusions: Overall, we conclude that computer- Salvador1, M. Arnedo1, C. Lucia-Campos1, R. Antoñanzas- assisted image analysis based on deep learning could Perez1, I. Marcos-Alcalde3,4, I. Parenti5,6, G. Bueno- support the clinical diagnosis of CdLS. Lozano2, A. Musio7, B. Puisac1, F. Kaiser5,8, F. Ramos1,2, A. Latorre-Pellicer: None. Á. Ascaso: None. L. P. Gómez-Puertas3, J. Pié1 Trujillano: None. M. Gil-Salvador: None. M. Arnedo: None. C. Lucia-Campos: None. R. Antoñanzas-Perez: 1Unit of Clinical Genetics and Functional Genomics, None. I. Marcos-Alcalde: None. I. Parenti: None. G. Department of Pharmacology-Physiology, School of Med- Bueno-Lozano: None. A. Musio: None. B. Puisac: None. icine, University of Zaragoza, CIBERER-GCV02 and IIS- F. Kaiser: None. F. Ramos: None. P. Gómez-Puertas: Aragon, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Department of Paediatrics, None. J. Pié: None. Hospital Clínico Universitario "Lozano Blesa", Zaragoza, Spain, 3Molecular Modelling Group, Centro de Biología 
P11 .25.A Molecular Severo Ochoa, CBMSO (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, HDA
C8 -related Cornelia de Lange Syndrome - cases Spain, 4Bioscience Research Institute, School of Experi- report mental Sciences, Universidad Francisco de Vitoria, UFV, Pozuelo de Alarcón, Spain, 5Section for Functional M.S.Santos1,S.Fernandes1,M.Lopes-de-Almeida2,P.M. Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University of Almeida1, S. Maia1,3, C. F. Reis4, J. Sá1,3 Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 6Institute of Science and Technology (IST) Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria, 7Isti- 1Medical Genetics Unit, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário tuto diRicerca Genetica eBiomedica, Consiglio Nazionale de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Medical Genetics Unit - delle Ricerche, Pisa, Italy, 8Institute for Human Genetics, Hospital de Braga (former worker of Medical Genetics University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Unit, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra), Essen, Germany Braga, Portugal, 3University Clinic of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine - Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, Introduction: DeepGestalt technology, and its app Face2- 4Medical Genetics Unit, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário Gene, is having a growing impact on the diagnosis and do Porto (former worker of Medical Genetics Unit, Centro managementofgeneticdiseasesbyanalysingthefeaturesof Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra), Porto, Portugal affected individuals. This is of particular interest for Cor- neliadeLangesyndrome(CdLS),inwhichheterogeneityin Introduction: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a clinical presentation and phenotype overlap with different heterogeneous genetic disorder best known for its dis- syndromes, and the still widely unknown molecular tinctive craniofacial features of microbrachycephaly, pathomechanisms makes its diagnosis challenging for pae- highly-archedeyebrows,synophrysandantevertednares,as diatricians. Here, we performed a phenotypic study on a well as upper-limb defects, growth retardation, intellectual cohort of 49 individuals harbouring causative variants in disabilityandhirsutism.Fivegeneshavebeenidentiﬁedbut known CdLS genes in order to evaluate Face2Gene utility only4%ofcasesareassociatedwithHDA
C8 ,incontrastto and sensitivity in the clinical diagnosis of CdLS. 60% associated with NIPBL gene. Variants in HDA
C8  Material and Methods: We analysed the frontal images present themselves with phenotypical differences from the of all individuals using Face2Gene technology. All classical-CdLS, therefore having no evident clinical diag- individualswithCdLSweresubjectedtomolecularanalysis nose. In the past 3 years, with whole exome sequencing bynextgenerationsequencing.TheCdLSclinicalscorewas (WES), we identiﬁed three cases of HDA
C8  CdLS, computed by trained physicians according to the interna- including a long-term accompanied, yet undiagnosed, 20 tional consensus criteria of CdLS. year old girl. Results: Based on the proﬁle images of patients, a Cases report: Three girls were studied due to develop- diagnosis of CdLS was within the top ﬁve predicted ment disorder and multiple dysmorphologies not resem- syndromes for 97.9% of our cases and even listed as ﬁrst bling of any particular syndrome. After initial inconclusive prediction for 83.7%. The age of patients did not seem to analysis, further testing with WES found that each one affectthepredictionaccuracy,whereasourresultsindicatea presentedavariantintheHDA
C8 gene,onealreadyknown correlation between the clinical score and affected genes. andclassiﬁedaspathogenic,andtwounknownclassiﬁedas Furthermore, each gene presents a different pattern likely pathogenic. The next table lists some alterations recognition that may be used to develop new neural usually linked to HDCA8-CdLS and found in our patients. networks with the goal of separating different genetic subtypes in CdLS.460 J.delPicchia development, pontocerebellar atrophy and altered Patient1 Patient2 Patient3 myelination Ageofﬁrst 10years 5months 3years evaluation Y. Oktay1,2,3, S. Gungor4, S. Hiz5, A. Yaramis6, Á. Ageofdiagnosis 20years 35months 10years Aranguren-Ibáñez7, U. Yis5, E. Sonmezler2, E. Yilmaz2, B. VariantHDA
C8  c.467A>Gp. c.706C>Tp. c.653G>Ap. Ekinci2, M. Aslan4, S. Balaraju8, N. Szabo9, S. Laurie10, S. (Asn156Ser) (Gln236*) (Gly218Asp) Beltran10, D. Hathazi9, D. MacArthur11, A. Roos12, H. Distinctivefacial No No,butlow No,but Lochmuller13, I. Vernos14, R. Horvath9 featuresofCdLS anteriorhairline synophrysand arched eyebrows 1Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center (IBG), Izmir, Otherfacial Hoodingof Telecanthus Thinupperlip Turkey, 2Izmir International Biomedicine and Genome featuresdescribed lidsandPtosis andWidely Institute,IBG-izmir, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey, inHDA
C8  spacedteeth 3Dept. of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz variants Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey, 4Inonu University, Faculty Upper-limb Short5thﬁnger None Short5thﬁnger of Medicine, Turgut Ozal Research Center, Department of defects andProximally andProximally setthumbs setthumbs Paediatric Neurology, Malatya, Turkey, 5Dokuz Eylul Growth No Yes(Heightand No University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric retardation Weight=P<1, Neurology, Izmir, Turkey, 6Pediatric Neurology Clinic, >-3.0SD) Diyarbakir Memorial Hospital, Diyarbakir, Turkey, 7Cen- Intellectual Severe Moderate Moderate treforGenomicRegulation(CRG),TheBarcelonaInstitute Disability ofScienceandTechnolog,Barcelona,Spain,8JohnWalton Motor 36months 27months 24months Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Institute of Transla- development tional and Clinical Research, Newcastle University, New- (walking) castleuponTyne,UnitedKingdom,9DepartmentofClinical Verbal 30months 18months 24months development Neurosciences, John Van Geest Cambridge Centre for (ﬁrstwords) Brain Repair, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Hirsutism Yes No No Medicine, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 10CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, 11Analytic and Conclusions: These cases enlighten the heterogeneity of Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hos- phenotypes and the clinical diagnostic challenge regarding pital, Boston, MA, United States, 12Leibniz Institut für syndromesinthespectrumofaverywell-knownpathology. Analytische Wissenschaften, ISAS, Dortmund, Germany & It also shows how the evolution of genetical tests now Pediatric Neurology, University Hospital, University of allows us to ﬁnally attribute a “name” and a better follow- Duisburg-Essen, Faculty of Medicine, Essen, Germany, up to some of our long-term undiagnosed patients. 13Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Insti- M.S. Santos: A. Employment (full or part-time); tute; Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Signiﬁcant; Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra. Ottawa Hospital; and Brain and Mind Research Institute, S. Fernandes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 14Centre for niﬁcant; Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra. M. Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Lopes-de-Almeida: A. Employment (full or part-time); Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain Signiﬁcant;HospitaldeBraga.P.M.Almeida:A.Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centro Hospitalar e Microtubules are long ﬁbers made of protoﬁlaments of α- UniversitáriodeCoimbra.S.Maia:A.Employment(fullor andβ-tubulinheterodimers.Microtubuleorganizingcenters part-time);Signiﬁcant;CentroHospitalareUniversitáriode are protein complexes composed of several proteins form- Coimbra. C.F. Reis: A. Employment (full or part-time); ing the γ-tubulin ring complex or γ-TuRC that directly Signiﬁcant; Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto. J. drives MT nucleation. By whole exome sequencing we Sá: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centro identiﬁed a novel homozygous variant in exon 8 of Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra. TUBGC
P2 (NM_001256617.1:c.1015G>A, p.Glu339Lys), which encodes γ-TuRC component GC
P2  protein, in two 
P11 .26.B siblings (10 yo female and 8 yo male) from a con- Ahomozygousmissense variantinTUBGC
P2 altertheg- sanguineous Turkish family. Although TUBGC
P2  muta- tubulin ring complex leading to abnormal cortical tionswererecentlyreportedinfamilieswithdevelopmental delay, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, epilepsy,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 461 microcephaly and lissencephaly spectrum changes, we for recorded with craniosynostosis in the ﬁles of the Iasi the ﬁrst time investigated the cellular defects caused by RegionalMedicalGeneticsCenterforthelast15years.For GC
P2  mutations in patient ﬁbroblasts by immunocyto- each case we have studied clinical features to highlight the chemical, proteomic and in silico analyses. We studied the evocativesignsfordiagnosisandtoestablishthecorrelation localization of some γ-TuRC components and associated with the laboratory results. In all patients we applied ima- proteins in control and patient ﬁbroblasts in interphase and gistic investigations (RX or CT) that was concordant with in mitosis by immunoﬂuorescence, and the levels of the craniosynostosis types. We identiﬁed 99 patients suspected GC
P2  protein along the cell cycle. Our data suggested that for craniosynostosis. From these, 84 presented an isolated the localization of γ-TuRC complex was perturbed in formofcraniosynostosis,while15patientshadasyndromic mitosis but not in interphase. Label-free LC-MS/MS ana- form (Apert, Saethre-Chotzen, Crouzon, Carpenter syn- lysisofpatient-derivedﬁbroblastsidentiﬁed26upregulated dromes).Weinvestigated15patientswithsyndromicforms and 24 down-regulated proteins, which were enriched for of craniosynostosis by MLPA analysis using kit 
P064  and tubulin and cytoskeletal proteins that play role in neurode- 
P080  (MRC Holland®). We identiﬁed the mutation in velopment.Insummary,wedescribetwosiblingscarryinga TWIST1geneassociatedwithSaethre-Chotzensyndromein novel homozygous TUBGC
P2  variant with dysmorphic 4 patients. Another mutation was detected in FGFR2 gene, signs, severe developmental delay and epilepsy, and show being discovered in a case of Apert syndrome. In familial that, in addition to a neuronal migration defect, brainstem cases we accorded genetic counsellinginconcordancewith atrophy and disturbed myelination are also associated with results of molecular analyses and we discussed the possi- TUBGC
P2  mutations, explaining the variable clinical and bility of surgical therapy. Our cases illustrate the genetic imaging ﬁndings. *TUBITAK research grant 216
S771 , heterogeneity among cranyosinostosis syndromes. Mole- NewtonFund(UK/Turkey,MR/N027302/1),AFM#21644. cular diagnosis is very important for an adequate genetic Y. Oktay: None. S. Gungor: None. S. Hiz: None. A. counseling and guidance for patients with syndromic Yaramis: None. Á. Aranguren-Ibáñez: None. U. Yis: craniosynostosis. None. E. Sonmezler: None. E. Yilmaz: None. B. Ekinci: M. Danila: None. M. Tonu: None. M. Panzaru: None. None. M. Aslan: None. S. Balaraju: None. N. Szabo: L.Butnariu:None.R.Popescu:None.C.Banescu:None. None. S. Laurie: None. S. Beltran: None. D. Hathazi: I. Resmerita: None. E. Gavril: None. E.V. Gorduza: None. D. MacArthur: None. A. Roos: None. H. None. C. Rusu: None. Lochmuller: None. I. Vernos: None. R. Horvath: None. 
P11 .29.B 
P11 .28.A TheclinicalfeaturesofindividualsofMenke-Hennekam Clinical & genetic characteristics of syndromes asso- syndrome ciated with craniosynostosis E. Nishi1, K. Ueda1, F. Miya2, K. Yanagi3, S. Mizuno4, T. M. Danila1, M. Tonu1, M. Panzaru2,3, L. Butnariu2,3, R. Kaname3, K. Kosaki5, N. Okamoto1 Popescu2,3, C. Banescu4, I. Resmerita3, E. Gavril3, E. V. Gorduza1,3, C. Rusu2,3 1Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Osaka, Japan, 2Department of Med- 11."Cuza-Voda"ObstetricsandGynecologyHospital,Iasi, ical Science Mathematics, Medical Research Institute, Romania,22.“SaintMary”EmergencyChildren’sHospital Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan, - Regional Medical Genetics Centre, Iasi, Romania, 33. 3Department of Genome Medicine, National Research “GrigoreT.Popa”UniversityofMedicineandPharmacy- Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania, 44. 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Aichi Developmental Clinical County Emergency Hospital, Targu Mures, Disability Center Central Hospital, Kasugai, Japan, 5Cen- Romania ter for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan Craniosynostosis represents a premature fusion of one or morecranialsuturesleadingtosecondarydistortionofskull Menke-Hennekam syndrome-1 (MKHK1) is a congenital shape resulting in skull deformities with a variable pre- disordercharacterizedbyvariableimpairmentofintellectual sentation.Craniosynostosismayoccurinanisolatedsetting development, feeding difﬁculties, autistic behavior, hearing oraspartofasyndrome.FGFR2,FGFR3,FGFR1,TWIST1 impairment, short stature, microcephaly, and facial dys- and EFNB genes are major causative genes of genetic morphisms [Menke et al., 2016; Menke et al., 2018]. syndromes with craniosynostosis. Our aim was to investi- MKHK1iscausedbyheterozygousmutationinexon30or gate the clinical and genetic aspects for the patients 31 of CREBBP (OMIM 600140). CREBBP mapped462 J.delPicchia 16p13.3 encodes CREB-binding protein, the heterozygous progenitors were related (the two mothers being sisters and loss of function variants are well-known causes of the two fathers being cousins once removed). Additionally, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome Type 1 (RST
S1 , OMIM O
C15  parents were consanguineous (again cousins once 180849) which is characterized by developmental delay, removed). mild to moderate intellectual disability, short stature, Material and Methods: WES analysis of patient O
C15  microcephaly, broad thumbs, broad halluces, and facial was performed as a singleton inside the URD-Cat project. dysmorphism including highly arched eyebrows, long eye- The O
C15 b trio was sequenced at the National Center of lashes, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, broad nasal bridge, Genomic Analyses (CNAG; Barcelona, Spain). Selected beaked nose with the nasal septum, highly arched palate, variants were validated by Sanger sequencing. mild micrognathia [Hennekam, 2006; Petrij et al., 1995]. Results:Wedidnotidentifyanysharedvariantthatcould The clinical features included facial characteristics of indi- be associated with the disease. Instead, each patient viduals of MKHK1 are developmental delay or intellectual presented a de novo heterozygous variant in a different disability, short stature, microcephaly, short palpebral ﬁs- gene. O
C15  carried a nonsense mutation in PORCN (p. sures, telecanthus, depressed nasal bridge, short nose, Arg95*), a gene responsible for Goltz-Gorlin syndrome, anteverted nares, short columella, and long philtrum. while O
C15 b carried an indel mutation in ZI
C2  leading to Although both syndromes have variants in the same gene, the substitution of 3 residues by a proline (p.His404_- CREBBP, the phenotype of individuals with MKHK1 are Ser406delinsPro). Autosomal dominant mutations in ZI
C2  differed substantially from phenotype of RST
S1 [Menke have been associated with holoprosencephaly 5. Both etal.,2016;Menkeetal.,2018].Herewereportfourfurther variants are absent in the general population and are individuals with de novo pathogenic variants, affecting the predicted to be pathogenic. last amino acids of exon 31 of CREBBP. One has a Conclusions: These two de novo heterozygous variants recurrent variant, and the othes have novel variants identiﬁed in the two patients seem to explain the major including two nonsense variants. All of them did not phenotypic alterations of each particular case, instead of a recognize the characteristics of RSTS like broad thumbs, homozygous variant that would be expected by the but rather shared the clinical features of MKHK1. underlying consanguinity. E. Nishi: None. K. Ueda: None. F. Miya: None. K. Funding: Associació Síndrome Opitz C, Spain; Spanish Yanagi: None. S. Mizuno: None. T. Kaname: None. K. MINECO (SAF2016-75948-R, FECYT-PRECIPITA); Cat- Kosaki: None. N. Okamoto: None. alan Government (PERIS SLT002/16/00174); CIBERER (U720). 
P11 .31.A L.Castilla-Vallmanya:None.S.Acar:None.Ö.Giray- Two different de novo mutations causing syndromic Bozkaya: None. A. Prat: None. M. Centeno: None. A. developmental delay in two patients from a consangui- Carbonell-Roqué:None.R.Martínez-Cabrera:None.R. neous Turkish family Rabionet:None.D.Grinberg:None.S.Balcells:None.R. Urreizti: None. L. Castilla-Vallmanya1, S. Acar2, Ö. Giray-Bozkaya3, A. Prat1, M. Centeno1, A. Carbonell-Roqué1, R. Martínez- 
P11 .32.B Cabrera1, R. Rabionet1, D. Grinberg1, S. Balcells1, R. Non-mosaic germline cancer hotspot mutation p. Urreizti1 Ser1344Leu in the RNase IIIa domain of DICER1 causes a GLOW syndrome-like phenotype 1Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, IBUB, IRSJD, S. A. Frisk1,2, E. Pontén1, K. Lagerstedt-Robinson1,2, R. CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Pediatric Vaz1, F. Taylan1, A. Nordgren1,2 Genetics,Dr.BehcetUzChildren’sHospital,Izmir,Turkey, 3DepartmentofPediatricGenetics,DokuzEylülUniversity, 1Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden, 2Karolinska Uni- Izmir, Turkey versity Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden Introduction: We present a Turkish family with two cou- DICER1isanendoribonucleasecentraltothegenerationof sins (O
C15  and O
C15 b) affected with syndromic develop- microRNAs (miRNAs), important for embryogenesis and mental delay, microcephaly and trigonocephaly but with early somatic development. Germline DICER1 mutations some phenotypical traits distinct between them. cause DICER1 syndrome - a cancer predisposition syn- O
C15  showed asymmetrical skeletal defects and syndac- drome with an increased risk of a variety of tumors, most tyly, while O
C15 b presented with a more severe micro- commonly pleuropulmonary blastomas, cystic nephromas, cephaly and semilobal holoprosencephaly. All four Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors and multinodular goiter.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 463 Recently, biallelic mutations of DICER1 involving the in individuals with multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) RNase III domain were reported in 1% of Wilms and (or) intellectual disability (ID)/ developmental delay tumor (WT). (DD). The aim of this study is to perform whole exome Here,wepresentan18-yearoldmalewithmacrocephaly, sequencing (WES) in these individuals to search for single lung and renal cysts, polydactyly, autism, intellectual nucleotide variants (SNVs) related to the phenotype. disability, scoliosis, multiple nevi, ear pits and WT. Whole Methods: We selected 36 individuals with CNVs genome sequencing identiﬁed a de novo heterozygous classiﬁed as VOUS, from a group of 228 individuals c.4031C>T,p.Ser1344LeuvariantlocatedintheRNaseIIIa presentingMCAand(or)ID/DDpreviouslyinvestigatedby domainofDICER1.Thephenotypeinourpatientresembles Chromosomal Micorarray Analysis. To date, WES was two previously reported patients with GLOW (Global performed for 18 individuals using the Agilent SureSelect developmental delay, Lung cysts, Overgrowth and Wilms Target Enrichment V5 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, tumor)syndromeharboringmosaichotspot mutations inthe CA, USA) sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq platform RNase IIIb domain. His symptoms support novel results (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). from integrated genetic analysis and in vitro cell experi- Results: WES revealedpathogenic nucleotide variants in ments where RNase IIIa p.Ser1344 site mutations cause 4/18 (22,2%) individuals (ANKRD11; JAG1; KMTD2; miRNA-strain imbalance, analogous to RNase IIIb muta- EBF3).Inallofthemtheclinicalphenotypewascompatible tions involving the catalytic core, causing phenotype with the mutations found. In addition, a class IV, likely commonalities with tissue speciﬁc tumors. In addition, his pathogenicSNVwasfoundinoneindividual(FOX
L2 ),and symptoms with macrocephaly, polydactyly, multiple nevi, SNVs classiﬁed as VOUS were found in an additional ﬁve andintellectualdisabilityresemblephenotypesseeninother individuals (ARID2; GNAS; SOX11 and NSDHL; ASX
L2 ; overgrowth syndromes that activate PI3K/AKT/mTOR TGFBR1), one of them also with a pathogenic variant in signaling. another gene. None of the SNVs found matched the CNVs In conclusion, we show that non-mosaic germline classiﬁed as VOUS. mutation p.Ser1344Leu in the RNase IIIa domain of Conclusions: Since the (likely) pathogenic SNVs found DICER1 is compatible with life and causes a GLOW in5/18(28%)individualsexplaintheclinicalphenotype,we syndrome-like phenotype through a novel pathogenic conclude that the CNVs classiﬁed as VOUS were rare mechanism in the RNase IIIa domain. ﬁndings, with no clinical relevance. Grant references: Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation Financial support: CAPES, FAPESP (#2018/08890-9) S.A. Frisk: None. E. Pontén: None. K. Lagerstedt- and FAEPEX-Unicamp. Robinson: None. R. Vaz: None. F. Taylan: None. A. S. Spineli-Silva: None. N. de Leeuw: None. A.P. dos Nordgren: None. Santos: None. N. Leijsten: None. M.H.A. Ruiterkamp- Versteeg: None. J.R.M. Prota: None. A.T. Maciel- 
P11 .33.C Guerra: None. A. Marques-de-Faria: None. C.E. Stei- Whole Exome Sequencing in Brazilian individuals with ner: None. V.L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes: None. T.P. intellectual disability, Neurodevelopmental Delay and Vieira: None. (or) Multiple Congenital Anomalies with Copy Number Variants of Uncertain Clinical Signiﬁcance detected by 
P11 .35.B Chromosomal Microarray Analysis EFTUD2 and Mandibulofacial Dysostosis with Micro- cephaly - An Australian case series S. Spineli-Silva1, N. de Leeuw2, A. P. dos Santos1, N. Leijsten2, M. H. A. Ruiterkamp-Versteeg2, J. R. M. Prota1, S. O’Sullivan1, J. McGaughran1, L. McGregor2 A. T. Maciel-Guerra1, A. Marques-de-Faria1, C. E. Steiner1, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes1, T. P. Vieira1 1GeneticHealthQueensland,RoyalBrisbaneandWomen’s Hospital, Brisbane, QLD, Australia, 2SA Clinical Genetics 1Department of Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Service, Women and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Aus- School of Medical Sciences, State University of Campinas, tralia Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Introduction: Mandibulofacial dysostosis with micro- Netherlands cephaly(MFDM)wasrecognisedasadistinctclinicalentity in 2006, with the genetic basis later attributed to hap- Introduction: The identiﬁcation of variants of unknown loinsufﬁciency of the EFTUD2 gene. EFTUD2 pathogenic clinical signiﬁcance (VOUS)isa constantchallengeduring variants cause mis-splicing of pre mRNAs, disrupted gene theinterpretationofcopynumbervariants(CNVs)detected expression and cell apoptosis. MFDM is characterised by464 J.delPicchia ﬁrst and second pharyngeal arch anomalies, hearing loss, were called correctly provided that the DNA was extracted microcephaly, developmental delay, intellectual impair- from peripheral blood and there was no low mosaicism for ment, dysmorphism and systemic malformations. The pre- the pathogenic variant. Reasons for requesting an EpiSign valenceiscurrentlyunknown,with110affectedindividuals clinical test were: the presence of a variant of unknown reportedintheliterature.MFDMisanimportantdifferential clinical signiﬁcance, clinical diagnosis without molecular forother multiplecongenitalmalformationsyndromessuch conﬁrmation, or as a test complementary to WES/WGS, as CHARGE syndrome. without a prior (suspected) diagnosis. In approximately Materials and methods: A systematic review of the 40% of cases with a suspected (VUS present) or clinical literature was undertaken using Pubmed. A proforma was diagnosis, EpiSign was able to conﬁrm this diagnosis. This devised to capture the demographic, clinical and genetic shows that EpiSign is a powerful new diagnostic tool, in variables of identiﬁed patients. Other clinical genetic particular for patients for whom conventional genetic test- services in Australia were contacted to contribute. ingwasinconclusive.InMarch2020anupdatedversionof Results: Four patients with EFTUD2 related MFDM EpiSign will be available (EpiSignv2), allowing diagnosis wereidentiﬁedattwoAustraliancentres.Twopatientswere ofanadditional23syndromes(45intotal).Foracurrentlist monochorionic monoamniotic (MCMA) twins. One twin of syndromes detected by EpiSign see https://genomedia died secondary to complications of MFDM in the ﬁrst year gnostics.amsterdamumc.nl/ of life, his surviving twin was recently reviewed at age 7 M.Alders:None.P.Henneman:None.E.Aref-Eshghi: years. Two patients were last reviewed aged 15 and 30 None. A. Venema: None. J. Kerkhof: None. B. Sadiko- years respectively. vic: None. M. Mannens: None. Conclusions: This case series contributes further to the literature, allowing for greater expansion of the known 
P11 .39.C phenotype for this rare congenital multiple malformation FOXG1 variants can be associated with milder pheno- syndrome. In particular, our report of MCMA twins of types than congenital Rett syndrome varyingclinicalmanifestations,supportstheviewthatwhile MFDM is highly penetrant, it is variably expressive. Our B. Mazel1,2, A. Garde1,2, A. Bruel3,2, Y. Duffourd3,2, D. case series mayfurther guidesurveillanceandmanagement Lopergolo4,5,A.M.Pinto5,M.A.Mencarelli5,R.Canitano6, of this small, but highly diverse, patient group. F. Valentino4, C. Fallerini4, F. Papa4, F. Mari4,5, N. Bahi- S. O’Sullivan: None. J. McGaughran: None. L. Buisson7,8, A. Munnich9, R. Pfundt10, D. Fitzpatrick11, C. McGregor: None. Thauvin1,3,2, A. Renieri4,5, C. Philippe1,3,2, L. Faivre1,3 
P11 .37.A 1Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Genome wide methylation proﬁling, EpiSign, as a Syndromes Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD - Centre diagnostic test Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France, 2Labor- atoire de Génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, UF M.Alders1,P.Henneman1,E.Aref-Eshghi2,A.Venema1,J. Innovation en diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, Kerkhof2, B. Sadikovic2,3, M. Mannens1 Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du 1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2London Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada, 3Western 4Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, University, London, ON, Canada 5Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 6Division of Child and Adolescent A growing number of neurodevelopmental syndromes are Neuropsychiatry,UniversityHospitalofSiena,Siena,Italy, shown to have unique genomic DNA methylation proﬁles. 7ServicedeNeurologiePédiatrique,HôpitalNeckerEnfants These episignatures can be used to diagnose patients with Malades, Paris, France, 8Inserm, Equipe "Embryologie et such syndromes. We have recently implemented genome Génétiques des malformations congénitales" Institut des wide methylation proﬁling as a diagnostic test in our Maladies Génétiques, Institut Imagine, Paris, France, laboratory. This test, named EpiSign(v1), is able to recog- 9ServicedeGénétiqueMédicaleetClinique,HôpitalNecker nize22syndromes,14ofwhicharesyndromeswithspeciﬁc Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10Department of Human episignatures, (for example for Kabuki syndrome, BAFo- Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, pathies and Cornelia de Lange syndrome), 6 are imprinting Netherlands, 11MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute disorders and 2 are repeat expansion disorders. Validation of Genetics and Molecular Medicine at the University of of the test was based on 38 positive samples (with known Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom pathogenic variant) and 24 negative controls. All samplesAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 465 Introduction : Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) haploinsufﬁ- Stavropoulos1,2, S. W. Scherer1,2, C. W. Marshall1,2, R. R. ciency has been associated in 2008 with a severe neurode- Cohen1,2, E. Cohen1,2, J. Orkin1,2, S. Meyn4,1,2 velopmentalphenotypewithfeaturesofRettsyndrome,but earlieronsetintheﬁrstmonthsoflife.Mostpatientsdidnot 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, achieve unassisted sitting or walking, had no speech and 2The University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Mount were not able to use their hands purposefully. For years, Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4University of targeted sequencing of FOXG1 gene has only been pre- Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI, United States scribed in such severe cases and did not permit to describe the full clinical spectrum associated with FOXG1 variants. Children with medical complexity have ≥1 chronic condi- The advent of exome/genome sequencing now permits to tion(s), multiple subspecialist involvement, and high diagnose unbiased clinical presentations. healthcare utilization. We hypothesized that genome Methods : A collaborative call was sent through the sequencing (GS) has high potential to diagnose children ERN-ITHACA, in order to gather detailed clinical cases withmedicalcomplexity,andthatcohortsofthesechildren with a heterozygous FOXG1 variant associated with a mild are enriched for novel genetic disorders. phenotype,deﬁnedasapatientswhocouldwalkunassisted Screening 545 children with medical complexity from a and/or acquire speech. Complex Care Program yielded 143 children suspected of Results : Eight patients were collected from different an undiagnosed genetic condition, despite having under- European countries, all carrying a pathogenic or likely gone an average of four genetic tests per proband. 49/143 pathogenic de novo missense FOXG1 variant, the majority were evaluated through clinical genetic assessments and being located in the forkhead conserved site 1. Patients found to be phenotypically complex, with a median of 24 usually presented with non-speciﬁc ID, distinct from the Human Phenotype Ontology terms/patient. Short read GS congenital Rett variant, microcephaly and epilepsy being was performed on these 49 probands, including 2 quartets, rarely associated. 40 trios, and 3 dyads. Conclusion : These ﬁndings corroborate with the recent Despitepriorgenetictesting,GSyieldedanewmolecular genotype-phenotypeanalysis(Mitteretal.,2017)proposing diagnosis for 15/49 probands (31%). The majority of to delineate 5 different FOXG1 genotype groups. Milder diagnostic variants were sequence level variants, although phenotypeswereassociatedwithFOXG1missensevariants an exonic duplication causing Kabuki syndrome found by intheforkheadconservedsite.Thisinformationisvaluable GS escaped detection by CMA, ES, or MLPA analysis. Of for better prognosis after the identiﬁcation of a FOXG1 note, only three autosomal recessive disorders were variant in young children but also for the interpretation of identiﬁed and >90% (11/12) of the dominant and X- new FOXG1 variants identiﬁed after exome/genome linked disorders identiﬁed by GS were caused by de novo sequencing. mutations. The majority of disorders (9/15) were ultra rare B. Mazel: None. A. Garde: None. A. Bruel: None. Y. (<25 reported cases), including three associated with novel Duffourd:None.D.Lopergolo:None.A.M.Pinto:None. disease genes FBXW7, H3F3B, and RA
C3 . Importantly, M.A. Mencarelli: None. R. Canitano: None. F. Valen- using DECIPHER, Matchmaker Exchange, and ClinVar, tino: None. C. Fallerini: None. F. Papa: None. F. Mari: similarlyaffectedindividualswererapidlyidentiﬁedaround None. N. Bahi-Buisson: None. A. Munnich: None. R. the globe. Pfundt: None. D. Fitzpatrick: None. C. Thauvin: None. Our results suggest that trio-based genome sequencing is A. Renieri: None. C. Philippe: None. L. Faivre: None. a high yield testing strategy for this patient population, which appears to be enriched for de novo mutations, ultra- 
P11 .41.B rare disorders and novel genetic syndromes. Trio genome sequencing reveals a high proportion of G. Costain: None. R.Z. Hayeems: None. S. Walker: ultra-raregeneticdisordersduetodenovomutationsin None. M. Marano: None. D. Veenma: None. M. Snell: children with medical complexity None. M. Curtis: None. S. Luca: None. J. Buera: None. D. Arje: None. M. Reuter: None. B. Thiruvahindra- G. Costain1, R. Z. Hayeems1,2, S. Walker1, M. Marano1, D. puram:None.B.Trost:None.W.Sung:None.R.Yuen: Veenma1, M. Snell1, M. Curtis1, S. Luca1, j. Buera1, D. None. D. Chitayat: None. R. Mendo-Londono: None. D. Arje1, M. Reuter1, B. Thiruvahindrapuram1, B. Trost1, W. Stavropoulos: None. S.W. Scherer: None. C.W. Mar- Sung1, R. Yuen1, D. Chitayat3,2, R. Mendo-Londono1,2, D. shall: None. R.R. Cohen: None. E. Cohen: None. J. Orkin:None.S.Meyn:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Gene42.466 J.delPicchia 
P11 .42.C 
P11 .44.B The ﬁrst patient with mesomelic dysplasia and urogen- SEVERE RESPIRATORY DISTURBANCE IN NEO- ital abnormalities associated with a de novo hetero- NATAL INTENSIVE CARE UNIT WITH A RECUR- zygous variant in HOXA11 gene RENT NONSENSE VARIANT IN MAGE
L2  GENE A. Sezer1, F. E. Perçin1, H. H. Kazan2, G. Kayhan1, M. Y. SAHIN1, T. CELIK2, N. NARLI3, H. OZGUR1 Aktürk3 1Genoks Genetic Diseases Diagnostic Center, Ankara, 1Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Turkey, 2Department of Child Neurology, Private Practice, Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Middle East Technical Adana, Turkey, 3Department of Pediatrics, Division of University, Department of Biological Sciences, Ankara, Neonatology, Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine,, Turkey, 3Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department Adana, Turkey of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey Schaaf-Yang syndrome (SYS) is characterized by neonatal Introduction: Hox genes encode transcription factors hypotonia, feeding difﬁculties, developmental delay/intel- playingcriticalrolesduringanimalembryonicdevelopment lectual disability, hypogonadism and short stature. SYS is and many of these genes have been shown to related to causedbypathogenicmutationsinthepaternalalleleofthe developmental disorders in animal models and patients. MAGE
L2  gene located in the maternally imprinted region Hoxa11 mutant mice exhibit homeotic transformations in of Prader-Willi syndrome. A 4-months-old male was thoracic and sacral vertebrae, zeugopodal phenotype in referred to our genetic laboratory because of respiratory forelimb and hindlimb, and urogenital abnormalities. A distress, hypotonia and small hands, camptodactyly of the certain heterozygous variant in HOXA11 gene has been thirdandfourthﬁngers.Andtheothersiblingofthefamily associated with radioulnar synostosis and amegakaryocytic died after 90 days of aggravated apnea. Whole exome thrombocytopenia 1 (RUSAT1, OMIM #605432). Here we sequencing (WES) performed on DNBSEQ-G400 sequen- present the ﬁrst patient with mesomelic dysplasia and uro- cer and Sanger sequencing were used to validate the ﬁnd- genitalabnormalitiesputativelyrelatedtoadenovovariant ings. WES was revealed a novel truncating pathogenic in HOXA11 gene. variant in MAGE
L2  gene inherited from the unaffected Materials and Methods: An 18-year-old female patient father and conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. We report 2 with normal intelligence was presented with dispropor- newborns affected with SYS in one family with severe tionate short stature, scoliosis, mesomelic limb shortening, respiratory distress one of them died. Considering neonatal radial and ulnar bowing, fusions in carpal bones, operated intensivecareconditionswheretimeisovervalued,WESis pes equinovarus, short 4th-5th metatarsals, primary amenor- an important diagnostic method in rare cases with atypical rhea due to hypoplasia of uterus, and vesicoureteral reﬂux. courses. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) analysis was applied to Y. Sahin: None. T. Celik: None. N. Narli: None. H. investigate the genetic etiology. Ozgur: None. Results: WES analysis revealed heterozygous c.881T>G (p.Met294Arg) variant in HOXA11 (NM_005523.6) gene. 
P11 .46.A The variant was determined as de novo by family study. The genetic landscape of Joubert syndrome in Italy Conclusions: To date, only a heterozygous premature stop-codon variant in HOXA11 gene has been associated V. Serpieri1, S. Nuovo2, A. Micalizzi3, F. D’Abrusco1, P. with RUSAT1 in two families. Some skeletal problems Accorsi4, R. Battini5,6, F. Benedicenti7, E. Bertini8, S. without mesomelic dysplasia and urogenital abnormalities Bigoni9, M. Bonati10, R. Borgatti11, M. Briguglio12, A. have been reported in this condition. However, our patient Casella1, R. Ciccone1, S. D’Arrigo13, M. Dotti14, F. did not have RUSAT. This may be due to the different Emma15, E. Fazzi16,17, M. Ginevrino18, L. Giordano16, I. functional effects of these variants, although they are Moroni19, M. Romani20, R. Romaniello21, S. Signorini11, F. locatedinthesameproteindomain(homeodomain).Invitro Stanzial7, N. Vanacore22, G. Zanni8, E. Valente1,23 functional studies are ongoing to evaluate the effect of the variant, c.881T>G. 1Dept. of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, A.Sezer:None.F.E.Perçin:None.H.H.Kazan:None. Italy,2Dept.ofPaediatrics,ChildNeurologyadPsychiatry, G. Kayhan: None. M. Aktürk: None. SapienzaUniversityofRome,Rome,Italy,3Lab.ofMedical Genetics, IRCCS Bambin Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 5Dept. of DevelopmentalAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 467 Neuroscience, IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Pisa, Italy, splicing. In 137 probands, no pathogenic variants were 6Dept.ofClinicalandExperimentalMedicine,Universityof identiﬁed. Yet, most of them have been tested only for a Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 7Genetic Counseling Service, Dept. of subset of known genes, and WES is in progress. Clinical Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy, evaluation of JS-mutated cases conﬁrmed strong gene- 8Lab. of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Neuromuscolar and phenotype correlates for some major genes (CE
P290  with Neurodegenerative Disorders, Dept. of Neurosciences, JS+retina+kidney; CPLAN
E1  with pure JS or OFDVI IRCCS Bambin Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, syndrome;TMEM67withJS+liver;AHI1withJS+retina), 9Medical Genetics Unit, Ospedale Universitario S. Anna, while no obvious correlates emerge for C
C2 D2A and Ferrara,Italy,10ClinicofMedicalGenetics,IRCCSIstituto KIAA0586. These ﬁndings have major implications for Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 11Child and Adolescent prognosis and counselling of JS families. NeuropsychiatryUnit,IRCCSMondinoFoundation,Pavia, V.Serpieri:None.S.Nuovo:None.A.Micalizzi:None. Italy, 12Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, University F.D’Abrusco:None.P.Accorsi:None.R.Battini:None. of Messina, Messina, Italy, 13Dept. of Developmental F. Benedicenti: None. E. Bertini: None. S. Bigoni: None. Neurology, IRCCS Foundation, Istituto Neurologico C. M.Bonati:None.R.Borgatti:None.M.Briguglio:None. Besta, Milan, Italy, 14Dept. of Medicine, Surgery and A. Casella: None. R. Ciccone: None. S. D’Arrigo: None. Neuroscience, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 15Dept. of M. Dotti: None. F. Emma: None. E. Fazzi: None. M. NephrologyandUrology,UnitofNephrologyandDialysis, Ginevrino: None. L. Giordano: None. I. Moroni: None. IRCCS Bambin Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, M. Romani: None. R. Romaniello: None. S. Signorini: 16Child and Adolescent Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, None. F. Stanzial: None. N. Vanacore: None. G. Zanni: Children’s Hospital, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, None. E. Valente: None. Italy, 17Dept. of Human Neuroscience, SapienzaUniversity of Rome, Rome, Italy, 18Unit of Genetics, Università 
P11 .47.B Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 19Dept. of Description of the molecular and phenotypic spectrum Paediatric Neuroscience, IRCCS Foundation, Istituto of Kabuki syndrome in 73 Chinese patients Neurologico C. Besta, Milan, Italy, 20Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Euroﬁns GENOMA Group, Rome, Italy, Y. Wang, Y. Shen, J. Wang, X. Wang 21Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit, Scientiﬁc Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Shanghai Children’s Medical Center, Shanghai, Italy, 22NationalCenter for Disease Preventionand Health China, China. Promotion, National Institute of Health, Rome, Italy, 23IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy <META NAME="author" CONTENT="月巴月半小夜 曲"> Introduction: To retrospective analysis the clinical Joubert syndrome (JS) is a rare genetically heterogeneous phenotypes and genotypes of Kabuki syndrome patients disorder, with recessive inheritance, characterized by a diagnosedinasinglecenter.Meanwhile,theclinicaldataof unique cerebellar and brainstem malformation (the “molar ChineseKSpatientsreportedinthepreviousliteraturewere tooth sign”) and variable organ involvement, mainly eyes, summarized. To explore the characteristics of phenotype kidneysandliver.JSisrelatedtodysfunctionoftheprimary and genotype of Chinese KS patients. Materials and ciliumand,uptonow,about40causativegenesareknown, Method: The objects who were referred to Shanghai overallresponsibleforabout60%cases.Over15years,we Children’s Medical Center from July 2017 to December recruited 595 JS families (mostly Italian), of whom 507 2019 diagnosed with KS were included, and Chinese KS underwentgeneticscreeningeitherbySangersequencingof patientsreportedinthedatabasewerecollected.Theclinical selectedJS genes,targeted sequencingor WES. With these phenotypes Chinese KS patients were compared with non- strategies,we identiﬁedbiallelic pathogenic variants in284 Chinese KS patients to further analyze and summarize the probands (56%). Six major genes accounted for two-thirds characteristicsoftheirphenotypeandgenotype.Results:A of mutated cases (CE
P290  14.8%; CPLAN
E1  14.4%; total of Chinese KS patients include 32 cases diagnosed by C
C2 D2A 12.3%; TMEM67 10.9%; AHI1 9.5%; our hospital and 41 reported cases in the database. By KIAA0586 5.3%). Additional 86 probands (17%) carried a comparing the clinical phenotypes of Chinese KS patients singlepathogeneticvariantinaJSgene:todate,42ofthem with non-Chinese KS patients, we found that the incidence underwent high-resolution custom array, which disclosed of some facial features was higher in Chinese KS patients, large heterozygous deletions in 5 probands (1 AHI1, 2 but congenital heart disease, cleft palate, infant ﬁnger pad CPLAN
E1 , 2 KIAA0586). Array-negative single hetero- and vision abnormality was lower. The difference of the zygous carriers are currently undergoing RNA analysis to above phenotypic incidence was statistically signiﬁcant. investigate the presence of cryptic variants affecting Sixty-ﬁve pathogenic mutations of KMT2D gene, 7468 J.delPicchia pathogenic mutations of KDM6A gene and 1 copy number 
P11 .50.B mutation of KDM6A gene were found. Conclusions: KBG syndrome: common and uncommon clinical Through this study, we found that the incidence of several features based on 31 new patients phenotypes in Chinese KS patients vs non-Chinese KS patients was statistically signiﬁcant. This study expanded M. Gnazzo1, F. Lepri1, M. Dentici1, R. Capolino1, E. thephenotypeandgenotypeofKSinChina,andprovideda Pisaneschi1,E.Agolini1,M.Rinelli1,V.Alesi1,P.Versacci2, theoretical basis for its diagnosis, treatment and prognosis. S. Genovese1, C. Cesario1, L. Sinibaldi1, A. Baban1, A. Y. Wang: None. Y. Shen: None. J. Wang: None. X. Bartuli1, B. Marino2, M. Cappa1, B. Dallapiccola1, A. Wang: None. Novelli1, M. Digilio1 
P11 .49.A 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Medical Genetics, Rare Clinicalfeaturesandidentiﬁcationofmutationspectrum Diseases, Pediatric Cardiology, Endocrinology Units and in 23 Turkish children with Kabuki syndrome Scientiﬁc Rectorate, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pedia- E. Usluer1, G. Yeşil2, N. Güneş1, D. Uludag Alkaya1, B. trics, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy Tüysüz1 Introduction: KBG syndrome (MIM #148050) is an 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istan- autosomal dominant disorder characterized by develop- bul,Turkey,2BezmialemVakifUniversity,MedicalFaculty, mental delay, intellectual disability, distinct craniofacial Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey anomalies, macrodontia of permanent upper central inci- sors, skeletal abnormalities and short stature. Molecular Introduction: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare genetic defectresultsfromlossoffunctionmutationsordeletionsof disorder characterized by distinct facies (long palpebral the ANKRD11 gene, encoding for an inhibitor of ligand- ﬁssures with eversion of the lateral portion of the lower dependent transcriptional activation. eyelid and large ears), persistent fetal ﬁnger pads and Materials and Methods: KBG patients were analized intellectual disability (ID). It is caused by heterozygous withNGSCohesinopathiesgenepanelwhileclinicalexome mutations in KMT2D (56-75%) or KDM6A (3-8%) genes. sequencing was performed to study patients with a likely We investigated clinical and molecular ﬁndings of 23 association of neuroﬁbromatosis. Common clinical features patients diagnosed with KS. havebeenreviewedtogetherwithunusualﬁndings,clinical Methods: Twenty-three patients clinically were enrolled. expression in the ﬁrst years of life and distinctive Exons and exon-intron boundaries of KMT2D and KDM6A associations. were studied by Sanger sequencing method. Results: This single-center study reports the clinical Results: We detected different pathogenic mutations (ﬁve features of 31 KBG patients of Bambino Gesù Children missense, four nonsense, ﬁve small deletion, one small Hospital:28withANKRD11pathogenicvariantsand3with insertion, one splicing) in KMT2D gene in 16 patients 16q24 deletions. In addition to ANKRD11 causative (69.6%), seven of them were novel. None of patients had a mutation, pathogenic NF1 variants have been found in mutationinKDM6Agene.Allofthepatientshadtypicalfacial twopatients.Unusualmanifestationsemergingfrompresent features, fetal ﬁnger pads and ID (6 severe, 17 mild). The series include juvenile idiopathic arthritis, dysfunctional patientsalsohadshortstature(11/23),renalanomalies(11/23), dysphonia, multiple dental agenesis, idiopathic precocious congenital heart defects (CHD) (11/23), cleft palate (5/23), telarche,oralfrenula,motortics,lipomaofcorpuscallosum, epilepsy (8/23), abnormal brain MRI ﬁndings (6/23), con- pilomatrixomaandendothelialcornealpolymorphicdystro- genital hypothyroidism (6/23) and premature thelarche (2/23). phy. Facial clinical markers suggesting KBG syndrome Conclusions: Up to date 829 different mutations in before 6 years of age include ocular and mouth conforma- KMT2D gene have been reported. This study also revealed tion,wideeyebrows,synophrys,longblackeyelashes,long that novel mutations are common in KMT2D gene. The philtrum and thin upper lip. absence of mutations in 30.4% of patients points genetic Conclusions:ThespectrumofclinicalfeaturesinKBGis heterogeneity and the need to investigate indels and new wide. It is likely that uncommon clinical presentation and candidate genes. In addition, while patients with KMT2D overlapping features in patients with multiple variants are gene mutations have CHD and renal abnormalities, the responsible for underdiagnosis in KBG syndrome. absence of those without mutations supports the effect of Improved knowledge about typical and atypical symptoms KMT2D gene on heart and kidney development. is useful for clinical management of this disorder. E. Usluer: None. G. Yeşil: None. N. Güneş: None. D. M. Gnazzo: None. F. Lepri: None. M. Dentici: None. Uludag Alkaya: None. B. Tüysüz: None. R. Capolino: None. E. Pisaneschi: None. E. Agolini:Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 469 None. M. Rinelli: None. V. Alesi: None. P. Versacci: None. A. Fernández: None. V. Ruíz-Pérez: None. L. None.S.Genovese:None.C.Cesario:None.L.Sinibaldi: Montoliú:None.M.Palacín:None.P.Lapunzina:None. None. A. Baban: None. A. Bartuli: None. B. Marino: None. M. Cappa: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. A. 
P11 .53.B Novelli: None. M. Digilio: None. Mabry syndrome: A novel recurrent PGA
P3  variant in an African population 
P11 .52.A Pathogenic variant in KLH
L11  in six individuals from a H. Bezuidenhout1, S. Bayley1, K. Fieggan2, N. Makubalo3, family with lichen planus, ungueal hypoplasia and C. Spencer2, S. Moosa1, L. Smit1, C. Uren1, M. Moller1, C. cancer. ¿A new entity with novel gene? Kinnear1, M. Urban1 J. Tenorio1, J. Nevado1, J. Fort2, M. Feito3, V. Martínez- 1Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Glez1, R. De Lucas3, A. Fernández4, V. Ruíz-Pérez5, L. University of Stellenbosch and Tygerberg Hospital, Cape Montoliú4, M. Palacín2, P. Lapunzina1 Town, South Africa, 2Division of Medical Genetics, Groote SchuurHospitalandUniversityofCapeTown,CapeTown, 1INGEMM, Madrid, Spain, 2Institute for Research in SouthAfrica,3DoraNginzaHospital,PortElizabeth,South Biomedicine, Barcelona, Spain, 3Dermatology Department Africa - Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, Madrid, Spain, 5Instituto de Background: Mabry syndrome (MS) is a rare autosomal Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Madrid, Spain recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in one of several genes involved in glycosylphosphatidylinositol Lichen planus (LP) is a chronic inﬂammatory disorder that metabolism. The phenotype includes severe intellectual affectstheskin,oralmucosaandhair.ThelesionsoftheLP disability, distinctive but subtle facial features, hypotonia, tend to chronify and sometimes can lead to malignancy variable congenital malformations and persistently elevated neoplasias. LP can be associated with several systemic alkaline phosphatase (ALP). disorders such as metabolic syndrome, diabetes mellitus, Methods: The search for an unidentiﬁed syndrome hypertension, etc. We here present a 2-generation family causing the above clinical features led to the clinical with six affected members with LP, nail dystrophy and in identiﬁcation of a case of MS at Tygerberg Academic two of them, carcinoma of the tongue and other localiza- Hospital. This was assisted by Face2Gene phenotype tions, with several members of the families developing matching and conﬁrmed by elevated ALP. Whole exome cancer. Clinical features segregates along the family, sug- sequencing detected a homozygous candidate variant gestinganautosomaldominantpatternofinheritance.Thus, (PGA
P3 :c.557G>C, p.Arg186Thr). A case series was whole exome sequencing was performed in all available assembled by retrospective and prospective case ﬁnding at members of the family (including healthy and affected three South African sites using database searches, Face2- members), allowing to identify a heterozygous missense Gene phenotype matching, and/or ALP levels and Sanger variantinKLH
L11 thatsegregateswiththephenotype.This sequencing for the candidate variant. variantisnotpresentinthecontrolpopulationdatabases.In Results: Nine clinical cases were identiﬁed and Sanger addition, there is no disease associated with KLH
L11  yet. sequencing could be performed on 7, all proved homo- KLH
L11  belongs to the KELCH superfamily -42 genes zygous for the candidate variant. The likely pathogenic described -, and encoded for a protein that have a BTB/ variantisabsentfrompopulationdatabases,affectsahighly POZ,BACKﬁveKELCHdomains.TheBTB/POZdomain conserved amino acid and is predicted damaging/deleter- isinvolvedinprotein-proteinbindinganddimerization.The ious. Observed clinical features in all included severe BACK domain does not have a known function and the intellectual disability, absent speech, hypotonia and cleft KELCH motifs create a tertiary structure of β –helix which palate in (5/9) (56%). ALP levels were signiﬁcantly raised. is involved in extracellular functions, cellular integrity and Most discriminating facial features include hypertelorism, proteinbinding. Kelch proteins acts ashomodimer, andthe longpalpebralﬁssures,broadnasaltipandtentedupperlip. variant detected it is suspected to impair this dimerization. Conclusion: A previously undiagnosed syndrome was It’s the ﬁrst time that a KLH
L11  is associated with lichen identiﬁed in an indigenous South African population, with planus and neoplasia. Functional assays are necessary to computer-assisted syndromology being instrumental. We conﬁrm the pathogenic mechanism. describe9casesofMSandtheirgeneticbasis.Thecommon J. Tenorio: None. J. Nevado: None. J. Fort: None. M. homozygous variant in PGA
P3 , in the absence of Feito: None. V. Martínez-Glez: None. R. De Lucas: consanguinity, suggests genetic drift and investigation is ongoing.470 J.delPicchia H. Bezuidenhout: None. S. Bayley: None. K. Fieggan: 
P11 .55.A None.N.Makubalo:None.C.Spencer: None.S.Moosa: The Qatari Mendelian program - A premium resource None. L. Smit: None. C. Uren: None. M. Moller: None. for gene discovery and data sharing for rare diseases C. Kinnear: None. M. Urban: None. from the greater Middle East 
P11 .54.C W. Aamer1, A. Almaraghi1, A. Al-Kurbi1,2, S. Padmajeya1, De novo variants in MCF2L are associated with A. Al-Shakaki3, the Qatari Mendelian Program, A. Robay3, congenital blindness, hearing loss, microcephaly, ID M. Kamal1,4, A. Akil1, T. Ben Omran1,4,3, K. A. Fakhro1,3,2 and autism 1Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar, 2Hamad Bin Khalifa D. J. Smits, L. Donker Kaat, R. Schot, M. Wilke, M. van University, Doha, Qatar, 3Weill Cornell Medical College, Slegtenhorst, G. M. S. Mancini Doha, Qatar, 4Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Nether- lands The recent investment in biomedical research and the launch of a large-scale national genome program for Qatar Introduction:MCF2LencodesfortheDbsproteinwhichis have motivated the establishment of the Qatari Mendelian a Rho-speciﬁc guanine nucleotide exchange factor (Rho- Program - a multi-stakeholder initiative offering WGS to GEF). Rho-GEFs accelerate the exchange activity of Rho patients with idiopathic disorders in an area of the world GTPases and thereby regulate several growth related pro- where consanguinity levels are high (>50%) and clinical cesses. MCF2L interacts with RA
C1  via its plekstrin care is largely centralized. Following our recent pilot of 30 homology domain, and thereby in turn activates RHOA. families (PMID:31625567), we have now sequenced the RA
C1  activating mutations have been associated with whole genomes of a further 336 individuals (including 115 megalencephaly and RHOA mosaic postzygotic inactivat- patients) from 87 families with various conditions, includ- ing variants have been recently associated with a neu- ing: Autism (n = 23), neurodevelopmental and neuromus- roectodermal syndrome with asymptomatic cular (n = 16), metabolic and endocrine (n = 14), leukoencephalopathy, microphthalmia or other ocular, craniofacial(n=10),sensory(n=7),immune(n=7)and dental and skeletal anomalies. Previously, GWAS studies other (n = 10) disorders. We identiﬁed novel causative pointed to MCF2L as locus for osteoarthritis. mutations in known disease genes in 34 families (40.2%), Results: We identiﬁed heterozygous de novo missense including 29 SNVs/indels and 5 structural variants. Nota- variants in the spectrin-like repeat domain of MCF2L in bly, we discovered a complex rearrangement (tandem two unrelated boys. They presented with nearly identical duplication and deletion) affecting exons 1-6 of IRF6 in and recognizable phenotypic features including mild three siblings with Popliteal pterygium syndrome, con- facial dysmorphisms, microphthalmia with persistent ﬁrmed by de novo local re-assembly of WGS reads and hyperplastic primary vitreous, congenital retinal detach- PCR. For another 15 families, we identiﬁed putatively ment, mild hearing loss, microcephaly, cognitive impair- damagingvariantsinnovelcandidategenes,e.g.amissense ment, autism, epilepsy, pyramidal signs and congenital variant in the CPSG4 shared by two siblings with severe thyroidinsufﬁciency.BrainMRIinonechild(10yearsof hypotonia, dysmorphic features and myoclonic encephalo- age) showed focal cortical dysplasia of the insula, one pathy with seizures. Homozygous zebraﬁsh we generated periventricular nodular heterotopia and calciﬁcations. In byCRISPRdisplayedhighlysimilarphenotypes,prompting the other child, the MRI showed neonatal cerebellar deeperfunctionalstudiestoelucidategenemechanism.The subdural hygroma, modest intraparenchymal parietal and Qatari Mendelian program continues to enroll 2-4 families vitreous bleeding. per week, consented for sample/data sharing, thus creating Conclusions: These phenotypic similarities suggest a an international genomic and phenotypic resource for causal implication for the MCF2L variants, which enlarge mutation matching and gene discovery from the globally the broad clinical spectrum of mutations in proteins under-represented greater Middle Eastern populations. involved in regulation of Rho-protein signalling and W. Aamer: None. A. Almaraghi: None. A. Al-Kurbi: emphasizetheimportanceofthispathwayinneurodevelop- None. S. Padmajeya: None. A. Al-Shakaki: None. A. mental disorders. Robay: None. M. Kamal: None. A. Akil: None. T. Ben D.J. Smits: None. L. Donker Kaat: None. R. Schot: Omran: None. K.A. Fakhro: None. None.M.Wilke:None.M.vanSlegtenhorst:None.G.M. S. Mancini: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 471 
P11 .57.C 
P11 .60.C Menke-Hennekam syndrome subtypes caused by var- Microcephalicosteodysplasticprimordialdwarﬁsmtype iants in the Zinc ﬁnger domains ZZ and TAZ2 and the II and pachygyria: morphometric analysis in a 2 years- fourth intrinsically disordered linker of CBP and p300 old girl L. A. Menke1,2, Z. A. Jenkins2, E. Williams2, G. Gimenez3, M. Dentici, M. Rossi-Espagnet, L. Pasquini, C. Carducci, A. C. O’Neill2, R. C. Hennekam1, S. P. Robertson2 M. Lucignani, D. Longo, E. Agolini, A. Novelli, M. V. Gonﬁantini, M. Digilio, A. Bartuli 1Department of Paediatrics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Bambino Gesú Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy., Women’s and Children’s Health, Dunedin School of Rome, Italy Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, 3Department of Pathology, Dunedin School of Medicine, Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarﬁsm University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand (MOPD) type II is a rare disorder characterized by skeletal dysplasia, severe proportionate short stature, insulin resis- Introduction: CREB-binding protein (CBP, encoded by tance and cerebrovascular abnormalities including cerebral CREBBP) and its paralog 
E1 A-associated protein p300 aneurysmsandmoyamoyadisease.MOPDtypeIIiscaused (E
P300 ) are histone acetylators and important cofactors for by mutations in the pericentrin (PCNT) gene, which transcription. Variants that produce a null allele or destroy encodes a protein involved in centrosomes function. their catalytic function cause Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, We report a 2 year old girl affected by MOPD type II while clustered pathogenic variants in exon 30/31 cause caused by two compound heterozygous loss of-function phenotypes now bundled under the umbrella term Menke- variants in PCNT gene, of which one is a novel variant Hennekam syndrome (MKHK, OMIM 618332 and (c.5304delT; p.Gly1769AlafsTer34). The patient presented 618333). atypical brain MRI ﬁndings consistent with pachygyria. Materials and Methods: To distinguish MKHK sub- This was conﬁrmed by morphometric analysis of cortical types and deﬁne their characteristics, molecular and thicknessandgyriﬁcationindex bycomparing MRIdata of extended clinical data on 53 individuals (25 unpublished) the patient with a group of 8 age-matched healthy controls. with avariant inCBP/p300 (hg19; residues 1710-1872 and The statistical analysis revealed a signiﬁcant and diffuse 1673-1835, respectively) were systematically gathered. increase of cortical thickness with an anterior predominant Morphological characteristics were assessed by an expert pattern and diffuse reduced gyriﬁcation (p< 0.05). (RCH) blindedtothemoleculardata.Variantswereplotted These ﬁndings provide new evidences to the emergent on 3D protein domains using iCn3D software. concept that malformations of cortical development are Results: Variants clustered closely around the Zinc complex disorders and that new genetic ﬁndings contribute binding residues of two Zinc ﬁnger domains (ZZ and to the fading of classiﬁcation borders. TAZ2)andwithintheﬁrstα-helixofthefourthintrinsically M. Dentici: None. M. Rossi-Espagnet: None. L. disordered linker (ID4) of CBP/p300. All variants were Pasquini: None. C. Carducci: None. M. Lucignani: predicted to disturb local protein structure and therefore None. D. Longo: None. E. Agolini: None. A. Novelli: likely the function of CBP/p300. By evaluating morpholo- None. M.V. Gonﬁantini: None. M. Digilio: None. A. gical and physical features, we discerned one clearly Bartuli: None. delineated and three likely subtypes. Conclusions: Variants in the ﬁrst α-helix of ID4 cause a 
P11 .61.A separate, recognisable MKHK subtype. Although numbers Mowat-Wilson syndrome: growth charts are still small, three other possible subtypes can be discerned in ZZ and two regions within TAZ2. LAM was I. Ivanovski1, O. Djuric2, S. Broccoli2, S. Carafﬁ1, P. funded by the Janivo Foundation and Emma Children’s Accorsi3, M. P. Adam4, K. Avela5, M. Badura-Stronka6, A. Hospital Foundation. Bayat7,8, J. Clayton-Smith9,10, D. Cordelli11, G. Cuturilo12, L.A. Menke: None. Z.A. Jenkins: None. E. Williams: V. Di Pisa13, J. Dupont Garcia14, R. Gastaldi15, L. None. G. Gimenez: None. A.C. O’Neill: None. R.C. Giordano3, A. Guala16, C. Hoei-Hansen17, M. Inaba18, A. Hennekam: None. S.P. Robertson: None. Iodice19,J.Nielsen20,V.Kuburovic21,B.Lazalde-Medina22, B. Malbora23, S. Mizuno18, O. Moldovan14, R. Møller24,25, P. Muschke26, C. Pantaleoni27, C. Piscopo28, M. Poch- Olive29, I. Prpic30, M. Puriﬁcacìon31, F. Raviglione32, E. Ricci11, E. Scarano33, R. Smigiel34, G. Tanteles35, L.472 J.delPicchia Tarani36,A.Trimouille37,38,E.Valera39,S.Vergano40,41,K. Cardarelli", Naples, Italy, 29Department of Pediatrics, H. Writzl42, B. Callewaert43, S. Savasta44, M. Street45, L. San Pedro, La Rioja, Logrono, Spain, 30Department of Iughetti46,47, S. Bernasconi48, P. Giorgi Rossi49, L. Pediatrics–Child Neurology Service, University Hospital Garavelli1 Rijeka, Medical Faculty, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 31Dismorphology and Reproductive Genetics, 1Medical Genetics Unit AUSL IRCCS RE, Reggio Emilia, Neonatal Research Group, Health Research Institute Italy, 2Epidemiology Unit, Azienda Unità Sanitaria Locale Hospital La Fe, University & Polytechnic Hospital La Fe, – IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Italy, Reggio Emilia, Italy, Valencia, Spain, 32Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, U.O.N.P.I. 3Neuropsychiatric Department, Spedali Civili Brescia, AASST–Rhodense,Rho,Milano,Italy,33UnitofPediatrics, Brescia, Italy, 4Division of Genetic Medicine, University Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Policlinico of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United St. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, States, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki Uni- Bologna,Italy,34DepartmentofGenetics,WroclawMedical versityHospital,Helsinki,Finland,6DepartmentofMedical University,Wroclaw,Wroclaw,Poland,35ClinicalGenetics Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Clinic, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Poznan’, Poland, 7Department of Pediatrics, University Nicosia, Cyprus, 36Department of Pediatrics, University HospitalofCopenhagen/Hvidovre,Copenhagen, Denmark, “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 37CHU de Bordeaux, Service 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Univer- de Génétique Médicale, Bordeaux, France, 38INSERM sity Hospital of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, U1211, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 39Department 9Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, University of ofPediatrics,RibeirãoPretoMedicalSchool,Universityof Manchester, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 40Department of Pediatrics, Kingdom, 10Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, United SchoolofBiologicalSciences,FacultyofBiology,Medicine States, 41Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Children’sHospital of The King’s Daughters, Norfolk, VA, Kingdom,11ChildNeurologyandPsychiatryUnit,Pediatric United States, 42Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Department, S. Orsola Hospital in Bologna, University of University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 12Faculty of Medicine, University 43Ghent University, 26656, Center for Medical Genetics of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 13Manchester Centre for Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 44Pediatric Clinic, IRCCS Policli- Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester Uni- nico "S. Matteo" Foundation, University of Pavia, Pavia, versity NHS Foundation Trust, Health Innovation Manche- Italy, 45Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetol- ster, Manchester, United Kingdom, 14Serviço de Genética ogy, Department of Mother and Child, Azienda Unità Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa SanitariaLocale-IRCCSdiReggioEmilia,ReggioEmilia, Maria,CentroHospitalarLisboaNorte,CentroAcadémico Italy, 46Post-graduate School of Pediatrics, University of de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 15UOC Clinica Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, 47Department Pediatrica,IstitutoGianninaGaslini,Genova,Italy,16SOC of Medical and Surgical Sciences of Mother, Children and Pediatria,OspedaleCastelli,Verbania,Italy,17Department Adults, Pediatric Unit, University of Modena and Reggio of Paediatrics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshos- Emilia, Modena, Italy, 48Microbiome Research Hub, pitalet,Copenhagen,Denmark,18DepartmentofPediatrics, University of Parma, Parma, Italy, 49Epidemiology Unit, Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, AziendaUnitàSanitariaLocale–IRCCSdiReggioEmilia, Japan, 19Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, AUSL- Reggio Emilia, Italy IRCCS, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 20Department of Pediatrics, Zealand University Hospital Roskilde, Roskilde, Denmark, Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a genetic condition 21Department of Cardiology, Mother and Child Health causedbyheterozygousmutationsordeletionsoftheZEB2 Care Institute, Belgrade, Serbia, 22Biomedical Research gene, and characterized by typical face, intellectual dis- Unit, Mexican Institute of Social Security, Durango, ability, epilepsy, Hirschsprung disease, and congenital Mexico, 23Department of Pediatric Hematology & Oncol- anomalies.Thechartsformalesandfemalesagedfrom0to ogy, Tepecik Training and Research Hospital, Izmir, 16 years were constructed using a total of 2,865 measure- Turkey, 24Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, mentsof99MWSpatients,ofdifferentancestries.Thedata 25Institute for Regional Health Services, University of were collected through collaboration with the Italian MWS Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 26Institute for association (AIMW) and the MWS Foundation. To model Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magde- the growth charts, the GAMLSS package for the R statis- burg, Germany, 27Developmental Neurology Unit, Fonda- tical program was used. Height, weight, body mass index zione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, (BMI) and occipito-frontal circumference (OFC) were Italy, 28U.O.S.C. Medical Genetics, A.O.R.N. "A. compared to healthy children using CDC growth charts. InAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 473 newborns, weight and length were distributed as in the 5,000 females. MRKH syndrome is often associated with general population, while head circumference was slighlty extragenital malformations (type 2), predominantly kidney smaller. Weight and height distribution was slightly shifted anomalies such as renal agenesis. The aetiology remains to lower values than the general population untilthe age of unknown, however rare reports of familial occurrence 7, when the difference increased. BMI distribution was suggest a genetic cause following autosomal dominant almost similartothatofthenon-affected children until the inheritance with incomplete penetrance. age of 7, then values in the general population increase Material and Methods: We investigated a unique three- rapidly and in MWS children increase with a less steep generation family with two female cousins with type 2 slope. Microcephaly develops gradually in infancy, not all MRKH syndrome including unilateral renal agenesis and children were microcephalic and the head circumference two deceased male relatives with renal agenesis. We wasoftenbetween the3rdandthe10thcentile.Thesecharts performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) of genomic contribute to the understanding of the natural history of DNA from eight family members. MWSandshouldassistpediatriciansandothercaregiversin Results: Weidentiﬁed anovel likely pathogenic (CADD providing optimal care to MWS individuals with problems = 33) c.705G>T missense variant in GREB1L - a gene related tophysical growth.Thisistheﬁrststudyongrowth recently identiﬁed as a novel cause of bilateral renal in patients with MWS. agenesis. Previous literature include several cases of I.Ivanovski:None.O.Djuric:None.S.Broccoli:None. bilateral renal agenesis in female foetuses also having S.Carafﬁ:None.P.Accorsi:None.M.P.Adam:None.K. uterus agenesis, which supports GREB1L as an important Avela:None.M.Badura-Stronka:None.A.Bayat:None. gene in both kidney and female genital tract development. J.Clayton-Smith:None.D.Cordelli:None.G.Cuturilo: The missense variant was conﬁrmed in all affected family None. V. Di Pisa: None. J. Dupont Garcia: None. R. members, however, the variant was vertically transmitted Gastaldi: None. L. Giordano: None. A. Guala: None. C. through two unaffected women suggesting incomplete Hoei-Hansen:None.M.Inaba:None.A.Iodice:None.J. penetrance following a parent-origin-speciﬁc manner. Nielsen:None.V.Kuburovic:None.B.Lazalde-Medina: Conclusions: We suggest GREB1L as a novel and None. B. Malbora: None. S. Mizuno: None. O. Moldo- promising candidate gene in MRKH syndrome aetiology, van: None. R. Møller: None. P. Muschke: None. C. especially in patients with type 2 MRKH syndrome also Pantaleoni: None. C. Piscopo: None. M. Poch-Olive: having kidney abnormalities. The incomplete penetrance None. I. Prpic: None. M. Puriﬁcacìon: None. F. observed in our family could be explained by genomic Raviglione: None. E. Ricci: None. E. Scarano: None. R. imprinting and is currently subject to further investigation. Smigiel: None. G. Tanteles: None. L. Tarani: None. A. M.K. Herlin: None. A.T. Højland: None. V.Q. Le: Trimouille:None.E.Valera:None.S.Vergano:None.K. None. A. Ernst: None. H. Okkels: None. A.C. Petersen: Writzl:None.B.Callewaert:None.S.Savasta:None.M. None. M.B. Petersen: None. I.S. Pedersen: None. Street: None. L. Iughetti: None. S. Bernasconi: None. P. Giorgi Rossi: None. L. Garavelli: None. 
P11 .64.A Singleton clinical exom sequencing in fetuses with 
P11 .62.B multiple anomalies A novel GREB1L c.705G>T missense variant identiﬁed bywhole-exomesequencinginathree-generationfamily K.Gahle,M.Shoukier,C.Daumer-Haas,C.Bagowski,N. withMüllerianandrenalagenesis:anewcandidategene Hirschberger, S. Minderer, T. Schramm, K. P. Gloning in Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome Prenatal Medicine Munich, Munich, Germany M. K. Herlin1,2, A. T. Højland1,3, V. Q. Le1, A. Ernst1, H. Introduction: Identifying the genetic cause of fetal struc- Okkels1,A.C.Petersen1,M.B.Petersen1,3,I.S.Pedersen1,3 tural anomalies is a diagnostic challenge. We present here the results of singleton clinical exome sequencing (SCES) 1Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 2Aarhus of 60 fetuses with complex malformations. University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 3Aalborg Univer- Materials and Methods: From January 2019 to January sity, Aalborg, Denmark 2020, in total 60 prenatal cases with complex structural anomalies, not ﬁtting any speciﬁc syndrome, were inves- Introduction: Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) tigated by targeted NGS of the coding regions of syndrome, also referred to as Müllerian aplasia, is a con- 5230 selected genes (Custom Constitutional Panel 17 Mb, genital anomaly characterised by uterovaginal agenesis in Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Variant pathogenicity femaleswithanormal46,XXkaryotype. Prevalenceis1in assessment by familial co-segregation analysis for was474 J.delPicchia carriedoutwhennecessary.AccordingtotheACMG-AMP only “Pathogenic” or “Likely pathogenic” variants were guidelines(2015),variantswereclassiﬁedasclasses1to5. reported. Fetal karyotypes were normal. Results: Heterozygous missense variants were identiﬁed Results: Likely pathogenic (class 4) and pathogenic in 10/15 patients, achieving a diagnostic yield of 67%. (class 5) variants were identiﬁed in 14 (23%) out of the 60 Causativealterationsincludedknownpathogenicvariantsin cases. The variants were found in 13 different genes: the PTPN11 gene (5 variants), 2 in RIT1 gene, 1 in KRAS DHCR7 (2 cases), AFF4, ARSE, CNTNA
P1 , ERC
C5 , gene, 1 in SO
S1  gene and 1 in SHO
C2  gene. FAT4, KIF7, MAGED2, MYH3, NIPBL, RAF1, SHH and Discussion: In most cases, the NS genotype cannot be TSEN54. In addition variants of uncertain signiﬁcance predicted by phenotype. Even typical cases with character- (class 3)weredetectedin6cases (10%).Novariants(class istic morphological features, pulmonary valve stenosis and 3-5) were identiﬁed in a total of 40 fetuses (67%). Our short stature, as well as atypical cases, were positive for ﬁndings show a strong correlation between the detection pathogenic variants in any currently known Noonan rate of causative mutations and the complexity of the fetal causative genes. WES supports marked improvement in phenotype. diagnostic-yield for NS, including unusual phenotypes and Conclusions: SCES facilitates the identiﬁcation of sometimes revealing unusual genotypes. genetic causes with high diagnostic yield and should be E. Tsoutsou: None. N. Marinakis: None. K. Kosma: considered for molecular genetic diagnosis in cases of None. S. Psoni: None. J. Traeger-Synodinos: None. complex fetal malformations. This unique challenge of exome-based prenatal diagnostics requires a team of 
P11 .68.B prenatal and human genetic specialists. MEK inhibitor treatment in a newborn with Noonan K.Gahle:None.M.Shoukier:None.C.Daumer-Haas: syndrome and severe obstructive hypertrophic None. C. Bagowski: None. N. Hirschberger: None. S. cardiomyopathy Minderer: None. T. Schramm: None. K.P. Gloning: None. A. Mussa1, D. Carli1, E. Giorgio2, A. M. Villar3, C. Carbonara4, G. Paolo4, G. Botta5, G. Andelﬁnger6, M. 
P11 .67.A Tartaglia7, E. Medico8,9, A. Brusco2,10, G. B. Ferrero1 Spectrum of Noonan Syndrome: Is genotype predicted by phenotype? 1Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, UniversityofTorino,Torino,Italy,2DepartmentofMedical E.Tsoutsou,N.Marinakis,K.Kosma,S.Psoni,J.Traeger- Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 3Pediatric Synodinos Cardiology, Regina Margherita Children Hospital, Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, Italy, 4Neonatal National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Intensive Care Unit, S.Anna Hospital, Città della Salute e Greece della Scienza, Torino, Italy, 5Department of Pathology, S. Anna Hospital, Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, Introduction: Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal Italy, 6Cardiovascular Genetics, CHU Sainte Justine, dominant disorder belonging to a group of developmental Department of Pediatrics, Université de Montréal, 3175, disorderscalledRASopathieswithoverlappingfeaturesand Chemin Côte Sainte Catherine,, Montréal, QC, Canada, multiple causative genes. The variable clinical phenotype 7Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale associatedwithNSandNoonan-like disordersispartly due Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Roma, Italy, 8Labora- togeneticheterogeneity,wherebymutationsinmanygenes tory of Oncogenomics, Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO- may result in different phenotypic expression. In this study IRCCS, Candiolo, Italy, 9Department of Oncology, Uni- we present the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of NS versity of Torino, Torino, Italy, 10Medical Genetics Unit, illustrated by the analysis of 15 patients. Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, Italy Materials and Methods: Fifteen patients with pheno- typic characteristics of NS were referred to the Laboratory We report a preterm female newborn, with a gestation of Medical Genetics, following clinical evaluation, pre-test characterized by polyhydramnios and fetal hypertrophic counsellingandsignedconsent.Clinicians requestedwhole cardiomyopathy (HCM), presenting facial dysmorphisms exomesequencing(WES,~19,000genes).Libraryprepara- consistent with Noonan syndrome (NS), who required tion used Sophia Genetics kits and Nextera Rapid Capture resuscitation and mechanical ventilation at birth. Echo- Exome (Illumina), run on a NextSeq-500 (Illumina). cardiography conﬁrmed severe obstructive HCM and dys- BioinformaticsanalysisusedSOPHiADDM®andVarAFT. plastic pulmonary valve. At the 2nd day of life, she Variants were categorised according to ACMG guidelines; developed a cerebral ventricular haemorrhage. AAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 475 heterozygous de novo c.770C>T p.Ser257Leu variant in memory, attention, executive functioning and decreased RAF1(NM_002880),typicallyassociatedwithsevereHCM overall intelligence level. The resting-state functional con- and pulmonary hypertension, conﬁrmed the clinical diag- nectivity (rsFC) analysis could be particularly useful for nosis. She developed severe congestive heart failure (CHF) characterizing functional brain network differences in requiring amine administration and mechanical ventilation. populations with intellectual disabilities. Given the near-terminal CHF, Trametinib - a selective Materials and Methods: According to our knowledge inhibitor of MEK1/2 approved for the treatment of cancers this is ﬁrst study on functional connectivity in Noonan with RAS/MAPK hypersignaling - was introduced (0.022 syndrome. 28 subjects with Noonan syndrome and 23 mg/kg/day). There was prompt improvement in clinical healthy took part in rs-fMRI data acquisition using a 3 T condition, allowing inotropes and mechanical ventilation Siemens PRISMA scanner. All subsequent analysis of rs- withdrawal;consistentwithHCMstabilization,nt-pro-BNP fMRI ﬁndings was performed in CONN-fMRI Functional decreased from 30,805 to 2,355 pg/ml. During the next Connectivity (FC) toolbox ver. 18b. We tested for group month, treatment was continued without side effects, differences in between- and within-network rsFC connec- allowing a progressive reduction of respiratory support. tivityforkeyseedsofsalienceanddefaultmodenetwork.In Cardiac ultrasound showed a tendency to HCM improve- addition,, subjects underwent a complex assessment of ment but revealed the sudden appearance of pulmonary cognitive abilities with the use of Stanford-Binet Intelli- artery dilation. At 3 months of age, she underwent ven- gence Scales. triculoperitoneal shunt device placement for post haemor- Results: Overall, both hypo- and hyper- connectivity rhagic hydrocephalus: after surgery she showed a rapidly within salience and DMN networks were revealed in worsening of CHF and died at 3½ months of age from subjects with Noonan syndrome. For example, patients untreatable CHF. Autopsy showed an obstructive HCM, exhibit increased connectivity between DMN network severedilationofpulmonaryarterytrunkandbrancheswith MPFC seed and superior frontal gyrus bilaterally and complete disarray of both gross and ﬁne pulmonary vas- PCC and cerebellum. Simultaneously, they demonstrated cular anatomy. Whole RNA sequencing from white blood decreased connectivity within precuneus which is a key cells before and during treatment was performed to deﬁne region of DMN. In respect of IQ, subjects with Noonan transcriptional effects of MEK inhibition. syndrome showed decreased Verbal and Nonverbal IQ A. Mussa: None. D. Carli: None. E. Giorgio: None. A. compared to healthy controls. M. Villar: None. C. Carbonara: None. G. Paolo: None. Conclusions: These ﬁndings imply that the functional G. Botta: None. G. Andelﬁnger: None. M. Tartaglia: architecture of rsFC might be altered in subjects with None. E. Medico: None. A. Brusco: None. G.B. Noonan syndrome. Ferrero: None. Supported from NCN research projects no. 2016/21/N/ H
S6 /02891 
P11 .69.C N. Braun-Walicka: None. A. Pluta: None. T. Wolak: Research on a pathogenesis of cognitive and neurofunc- None.E.Maj:None.A.Maryniak:None.M.Gos:None. tioningimpairmentsinpatientswithNoonansyndrome. A. Abramowicz: None. A. Landowska: None. E. A role of RAS/MAPK signaling pathway gene Obersztyn: None. J. Bal: None. disturbances 
P11 .70.A N. Braun-Walicka1, A. Pluta2,3, T. Wolak2, E. Maj2, A. Genotype and phenotype in patients with Noonan Maryniak3, M. Gos1, A. Abramowicz1, A. Landowska1, E. syndrome caused by SO
S2  variants Obersztyn1, J. Bal1 C. Lissewski1, V. Chune2, F. Pantaleoni3, A. De Luca4, Y. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Capri2,J.Brinkmann1,F.Lepri3,P.Daniele4,E.Leenders5, Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Bioimaging Research Center, L. Mazzanti6, K. Kutsche7, A. Küchler8, M. Gérard2, J. World Hearing Center at the Institute of Physiology and Amiel2, Y. Vial2, I. van der Burgt5, E. Andreucci9, G. Pathology of Hearing, Kajetany, Poland, 3Department of Mastromoro10, M. C. Digilio3, H. Cavé2,11, M. Tartaglia3, Child and Family Clinical Psychology of the University of M. Zenker1 Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magde- Introduction: Noonan syndrome (NS) is one of the most burg, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Département de Génétique, common genetic conditions caused by mutations in parti- HopitalRobertDebré,AssistancePubliquedesHopitauxde cular genes of the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway. Patients Paris(AP-HP),Paris,France,3GeneticsandRareDiseases with NS might have cognitive problems in language skills, Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,476 J.delPicchia IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa None. M. Gérard: None. J. Amiel: None. Y. Vial: None. Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, I. van der Burgt: None. E. Andreucci: None. G. 5Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Mastromoro: None. M.C. Digilio: None. H. Cavé: None. Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Pediatric Rare M. Tartaglia: None. M. Zenker: None. Diseases Unit, Department of Pediatrics, S.Orsola-Mal- pighi University Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, 
P11 .71.B Italy, 7Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Investigatingthegeneticintersectionoforofacialclefting Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 8Institut and normal facial variation für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 9Medical Genetics Unit, K. Indencleef1, H. Hoskens1, M. Lee2, J. D. White3, R. J. Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, Eller4, S. Walsh4, M. D. Shriver3, S. Richmond5, H. 10Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza Uni- Peeters1, M. L. Marazita2, J. R. Shaffer2, S. M. Weinberg2, versity, Policlinico Umberto I Hospital, Rome, Italy, G. Hens1, P. Claes1 11Inserm U1131, Institut de Recherche Saint-Louis, Uni- versité de Paris, Paris, France 1KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 3Pennsylvania State Uni- Introduction: RASopathies are caused by pathogenic var- versity, State College, PA, United States, 4Indiana Uni- iantsingenesencodingmembersormodulatorsoftheRAS/ versity Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN, MAPK signalling pathway. Noonan syndrome is the most United States, 5Cardiff University, Cardiff, United King- common entity among this group of disorders and is char- dom acterized by heart defects, short stature, variable develop- mentaldelayandtypicalfacialfeatures.Pathogenicvariants Orofacial clefting is the most common craniofacial mal- inSO
S2 ,encodingaguaninenucleotideexchangefactorfor formation in humans. Previous research has demonstrated RAS,haverecentlybeenidentiﬁedinpatientswithNoonan that unaffected relatives of patients with non-syndromic syndrome. The number of published cases with pathogenic cleftlipwith/withoutcleftpalate(NSCL/P)showdistinctive SO
S2  variants is still limited and little is known about facialfeatures,whichcanbeconsideredanendophenotype. genotype-phenotype correlation. The presence of this facial endophenotype is potentially an Materials and Methods: We collected clinical and expression of underlying genetic susceptibility to NSCL/P. genotype data from 17 previously unpublished individuals To investigate this, we applied partial least squares regres- carrying a disease-causing SO
S2  variant. Results: Most sion (PLSR) to deﬁne a set of endophenotypic traits in a individuals had one of the previously reported pathogenic dataset of 3D facial images from 264 unaffected parents of variants; only three had novel changes at the established patients with NSCL/P and 3,171 controls. The PLSR pro- mutation hotspots, which were classiﬁed as likely patho- vides a p-value and direction of effect (or trait) for each genic. The phenotype of the 17 patients ﬁts well into the endophenotype. We observed nominally signiﬁcant (p < spectrum of Noonan syndrome and is most similar to the 0.05)differencesbetweenparentsandcontrolsinvolving59 phenotype observed in patients with SO
S1 -related Noonan endophenotypictraits.Next,wequantiﬁedthesediscovered syndrome,withectodermalanomaliesascommonandshort endophenotypictraitsinanotherdatasetof8,246unaffected stature and learning disabilities as infrequent ﬁndings. The European individuals and then subjected these traits to spectrum of heart defects in SO
S2 -related Noonan syn- GWAS. We identiﬁed 29 independent lead SNPs that were drome was consistent with the known spectrum of cardiac associated with at least one of the tested endophenotypic anomaliesinRASopathies, butno speciﬁc heart defect was riskphenotypesatthegenome-widelevel(p<5e-8).Ofthe particularly predominating. Notably, lymphatic anomalies 29 lead SNPs, 22 are in the proximity of SNPs previously were extraordinarily frequent in our cohort, affecting more associated with normal facial variation and 15 are near than half of the patients. genesthatshowevidenceofrolesinorofacialclefting.This Conclusions: SO
S2 -related Noonan syndrome is pheno- study supports the existence of an overlap between the typically similar to SO
S1 -related Noonan syndrome and genetic pathways involved in normal facial development associated with a particularly high risk of lymphatic and orofacial clefting. complications that may have a signiﬁcant impact on Grants: National Institutes of Health (1-RO1- morbidity and quality of life. D
E027023 ), the Research Fund KU Leuven (BOF-
C1 , C. Lissewski: None. V. Chune: None. F. Pantaleoni: 
C14 /15/081) and the Research Program of the The None.A.DeLuca:None.Y.Capri:None.J.Brinkmann: Research Foundation-Flanders (Belgium) (FWO, None. F. Lepri: None. P. Daniele: None. E. Leenders: G078518N) None.L.Mazzanti:None.K.Kutsche:None.A.Küchler:Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 477 K.Indencleef:None.H.Hoskens:None.M.Lee:None. report the ﬁrst patient with a pathogenic variant in PIA
S4 - J.D. White: None. R.J. Eller: None. S. Walsh: None. M. andthreeadditionalrearrangementsattheproximal19p13.3 D.Shriver:None.S.Richmond:None.H.Peeters:None. locus. These observations add further evidence about the M.L. Marazita: None. J.R. Shaffer: None. S.M. Wein- molecular basis of this microdeletion/microduplication berg: None. G. Hens: None. P. Claes: None. syndrome. Grants: FIS PI15-01481 
P11 .76.A P. Lapunzina: None. J. Tenorio: None. J. Nevado: Further deﬁnition of the proximal 19p13.3 microdele- None. A. González-Meneses: None. P. Arias: None. I. tion/microduplication syndrome and implication of Dapía: None. C. Venegas-Vega: None. M. Calvente: PIA
S4  as the major contributor None. A. Hernández: None. L. Landera: None. S. Ramos-Sorigué: None. T. Consortium: None. J. Cigu- P. Lapunzina1, J. Tenorio1, J. Nevado1, A. González- dosa: None. L. Pérez-Jurado: None. Meneses2, P. Arias1, I. Dapía1, C. Venegas-Vega3, M. Calvente4,A.Hernández1,L.Landera5,S.Ramos-Sorigué1, 
P11 .77.B T. Consortium1, J. Cigudosa4, L. Pérez-Jurado6 ExpandingthespectrumofPP
P2 R3C-relatedsyndromic phenotypes to XX gonadal dysgenesis without ocular or 1Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM), muscular involvement Madrid, Spain, 2Dysmorphology and Metabolism unit, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, U. Altunoglu1, E. Börklü-Yücel1, A. Shukla2, N. Escande- 3UnidaddeGenética,HospitalGeneraldeMéxico,México, Beillard3, S. Ledig4, H. Azaklı1, S. Nayak2, S. Eraslan1, K. Spain, 4NIMGENETICS, Madrid, Spain, 5Congenital mal- Girisha2, I. Kennerknecht4, H. Kayserili1 formations laboratory, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Madrid, Spain, 6Women’s and Children´s Hospi- 1Koc University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics tal,SouthAustralianHealthandMedicalResearchInstitute Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Medical (SAHMRI), Adelaide, Australia Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India, 3Institute of Medical The proximal 19p13.3 microdeletion/microduplication Biology, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore, 4Institut für (prox19p13.3del/dup) syndrome is a recently described Humangenetik, Westfaelische Wilhelms - Universitaet disorder with common clinical features including develop- Muenster, Muenster, Germany mental delay, intellectual disability, speech delay, facial dysmorphic features with ear defects, anomalies of the HomozygousmutationsinPP
P2 R3Chavebeenreportedto hands and feet, umbilical hernia and hypotonia. While cause a syndromic 46,XY complete gonadal dysgenesis deletions are associated with macrocephaly, patients with phenotype with extragonadal manifestations (Gonadal dys- duplications have microcephaly. The SRO in multiple genesis, dysmorphic facies, retinal dystrophy and myo- patients (113.5Kb) included three genes and one pseudo- pathy, GDRM, MIM# 615902) in patients from four gene,withasuggestedmajorroleofPIA
S4 indetermination unrelated families, whereas heterozygous mutations have of the phenotype and head size in these patients. Here we been linked to reduced fertility with teratozoospermia reﬁnetheprox19p13.3del/dupwithfouradditionalpatients; (SPGF36,MIM#618420)inmalecarriers.Wepresenteight twowithmicrodeletions,onewithmicroduplicationandfor patients from four unrelated families of Turkish and Indian the ﬁrst time as far as we know one family with single- descent with three different germline homozygous nucleotide nonsense variant in PIA
S4 :NM_015897.4: PP
P2 R3Cmutationsincludinganovelin-frameduplication exon9:c.1063C>T:p.Gln355* and concordant phenotype. (c.639_647dupTTTCTACTC, p.Ser213_Tyr215dup). All The variant was detected by NGS and is not present in her patients exhibited recognizable facial dysmorphisms with healthyparents.PIA
S4 isan
E3 ubiquitinligaseencodedby broad eyebrows, underdeveloped alae nasi, thin vermilion PIA
S4  and acts as a small ubiquitin-like modiﬁer (SUMO) of the lips and low-set ears, allowing for gestalt diagnosis. ligase that regulates the interaction between 
E2  enzymes 46,XX patients had hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and suchasUB
E2 IandthesubstrateThepatientwiththePIA
S4  nonvisualized gonads, and were diagnosed due to primary LoF variant displayed a phenotype quite similar to deletion amenorrhea along with absence of secondary sexual char- patients -including the macrocephaly and many other core acteristics and/or unique facial gestalt. 46,XY affected featuresofthesyndrome.Patient’sSNVwasinheritedfrom individualsdisplayedaspectrumofgenitalphenotypefrom hermotherwhoissimilarlyaffected.Thus,ourdataindicate ambiguous to complete female, with Müllerian remnants that PIA
S4  is a major contributor to the proximal conﬁrmed by imaging and/or histopathology. Four of eight 19p13.3del/dup syndrome phenotype. In summary, we patients were evaluated by fundoscopy, optical coherence478 J.delPicchia tomography, and electromyogram, and had no evidence of Discussion: In combining this detailed phenotypic data retinal dystrophy or a myopathy. We expand the spectrum with the previously reported, and variably phenotyped, of PP
P2 R3C-related syndromic phenotypes to XX and individuals we further reﬁne the known frequencies of incomplete XY gonadal dysgenesis without ocular invol- featuresassociatedwithVRJS.TheseincludeGDD(100%), vement or myopathy. We speculate a possible role for short stature (68%), limb anomalies (64%), axial skeletal PP
P2 R3C in the early signalling cascade controlling sex anomalies (57%), cardiac anomalies (62%), auditory determinationinhumans,sinceitcausesgonadaldysgenesis impairment (50%), colobomata (31%) and other ocular in both sexes. anomalies (61%). This case series, incorporating two U. Altunoglu: None. E. Börklü-Yücel: None. A. patients from previously unreported ethnicities, further Shukla: None. N. Escande-Beillard: None. S. Ledig: delineates the mutational spectrum and pleiotropy of None. H. Azaklı: None. S. Nayak: None. S. Eraslan: PUF60 variants. None. K. Girisha: None. I. Kennerknecht: None. H. A.P.Fennell:None.Z.Stark:None.T.Y.Tan:None.S. Kayserili: None. Kumble: None. G. Poke: None. C. McKeown: None. M. F. Hunter: None. 
P11 .79.A The diverse pleiotropic effects of spliceosomal protein 
P11 .80.B PUF60: a case series of Verheij syndrome Perinatal mortality in Rasopathies A. P. Fennell1,2, Z. Stark3,4, T. Y. Tan3,4, S. Kumble3, G. Y. Capri1, F. Guimiot1,2, C. Vignal1, T. Attie-Bitach3, B. Poke5, C. McKeown5, M. F. Hunter1,2 Bessiere3, J. Martinovic4, P. Letard5, L. Loeuillet6, S. Khung-Savatovsky1, M. Bonniere3, N. Pouvreau1, C. 1Monash Genetics, Melbourne, Australia, 2Monash Uni- Aupiais1, V. Chune1, A. Verloes1,2, H. Cave1,7 versity, Melbourne, Australia, 3Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia, 4The University of Mel- 1CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France, 2INSERM UMR 1141, bourne,Melbourne,Australia,5GeneticHealthServiceNew Paris,France,3CHUNecker,Paris,France,4CHUAntoine Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand Béclère, Paris, France, 5Hôpital Jean Verdier, Paris, France, 6CHU Cochin, Paris, France, 7INSERM UMR Introduction: Verheij syndrome (VRJS) is a neurodeve- 1131, Paris, France lopmental and multiple congenital anomaly syndrome caused by heterozygous SNVs in PUF60 or interstitial Rasopathies are a group of multiple congenital anomalies deletions of the 8q24.3 region, where PUF60 is located. syndromes clinically and biologically similar including PUF60encodesasplicingfactorwhichfacilitatesassembly Noonan, Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous and Costello syndromes. of the spliceosome and preferentially activates speciﬁc Rasopathiesoccurinadominantorsporadicmannerandare exons enriched for uridine upstream of their 3’ splice sites. caused by abnormality of ubiquitous proteins belonging to We undertook a literature review of VRJS caused by the cell signalling pathway RAS-MAPKinase. Prenatal PUF60 SNVs to ascertain the known mutational and phe- symptoms including abnormal nuchal translucency, serosis notypic spectrum. This identiﬁed 25 individuals exhibiting effusion or polyhydramnios lead to suspect Rasopathies marked phenotypic heterogeneity. duringpregnancybutlittleisknownabouttheprognosisof Case reports: We report four additional patients, foetuses with prenatal symptoms. By studying the clinical including the ﬁrst described patients of Khmer and Indian presentation and the distribution of molecular anomalies in ethnicities, with previously unreported heterozygous affected subjects who died in perinatal period, we aimed to PUF60 variants (3 conﬁrmed de novo, 1 undetermined) ﬁnd prognostic elements which could help in counseling. identiﬁed through clinical exome sequencing. These Amongmore than 1500positivespatients foramutationin includedtwonovelframeshiftvariants(p.(Pro385Leufs*12) one of the 18 known genes involved in Rasopathies from and p.(Gly268Alafs*18)), a novel missense change (p. the French cohort, we selected subjects who died in peri- (Arg146Cys)) and one inframe deletion variant (p. natale period (during pregnancy or within the 28 days after (Ala150_Phe152del)). All four patients had global devel- birth). We collected 65 subjects with severe clinical pre- opmentaldelay(GDD)andunderwentthoroughphenotypic sentation leading to pregnancy termination (34), stillbirth assessment identifying variable dysmorphism, growth (15) or death within the 28 days after birth (16). Mutations delay, and congenital anomalies. Features unique to our occurred de novo in 43, was inherited in 14. PTPN11 was Khmer and Indian patients were talon cusps and proximal involvedin33cases(50,7%),RAF1in12(18,5%),RIT1in insertion of the right hallux, and craniosynostosis, 10 (15,4%), SO
S1  in 3 (4,6%), BRAF in 3, and HRAS, respectively. NRAS, LZTR1 and NF1 in 1 for each gene. If PTPN11Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 479 remains the major gene, RIT1 and RAF1 are more repre- Introduction: The RASopathies are a group of clinically sented in this lethal population compared to the post natal and genetically heterogeneous developmental disorders distribution of Rasopathie genes. Whereas SO
S1 , which is caused by dysregulation of the RAS/MAPK signalling usually the 2nd gene in Noonan syndrome, is under- pathway.Mutationsinseveralcomponentsandregulatorsof represented. this pathway have been identiﬁed as pathogenetic cause. In Y. Capri: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, 2015, missense variants in A2M
L1  were reported in three collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as unrelated families with clinically suspected Noonan syn- grants already received); Modest; Agence de la Bioméde- drome (NS). Two subsequent publications reported three cine.F.Guimiot:None.C.Vignal:None.T.Attie-Bitach: additional A2M
L1  variants in NS patients. However, an None.B.Bessiere:None.J.Martinovic:None.P.Letard: association of A2M
L1  variants with NS has not been None. L. Loeuillet: None. S. Khung-Savatovsky: None. replicated since. Herein, we report our experience with M. Bonniere: None. N. Pouvreau: None. C. Aupiais: A2M
L1  mutational screening in a large cohort of patients None.V.Chune:None.A.Verloes:None.H.Cave:None. with clinically suspected NS or another RASopathy. Materials and Methods: Individuals included in this 
P11 .81.C study belong to a cohort of 1029 patients with clinically The role of A2M
L1  variants in Noonan syndrome suspected NS/RASopathy that underwent multigene panel remains unveriﬁed sequencing of RASopathy-related genes including A2M
L1 . Results: We report on 15 individuals carrying rare J. Brinkmann1, C. Lissewski1, V. Pinna2, Y. Vial3,4, F. variantsinA2M
L1 ,includingpreviouslypublishedvariants. Pantaleoni5, F. Lepri5, P. Daniele2, B. Burnyte6, G. The respective A2M
L1  variant was inherited in all cases Cuturilo7,8, C. Fauth9, D. Kotzot9, E. Y. Güleç10, V. where parental DNA was available. Seven individuals had Iotova11, G. Forzano12, D. Schanze1, F. Ramond13, M. an alternate disease-causing genetic aberration. In cases Havlovicová14, G. E. Utine15, P. O. Simsek-Kiper15, A. with A2M
L1  mutations only, careful re-analysis of the Verloes3, A. De Luca2, M. Tartaglia5, H. Cavé3,4, M. phenotype indicated that clinical features were insufﬁcient Zenker1 tomeetcriteriafordeﬁniteclinicaldiagnosisofNSinmost. None of the A2M
L1  variants evaluated herein reach a 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magde- classiﬁcationaboveclass3(VUS)withstrictapplicationof burg, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Medical Genetics Section, published classiﬁcation criteria. IRCCS Fondazione Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Conclusions: Our ﬁndings underscore that current Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3Department of Genetics, Hopital evidence is insufﬁcient to support a causal relation of Robert Debré, Assistance Publique des Hopitaux de Paris variants in A2M
L1  and NS. Inclusion of A2M
L1  mutation (AP-HP), Paris, France, 4Inserm U1131, Institut de screening in diagnostic RASopathy testing cannot be Recherche Saint-Louis, Université de Paris, Paris, France, recommended. 5Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale J. Brinkmann: None. C. Lissewski: None. V. Pinna: Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 6Institute of None. Y. Vial: None. F. Pantaleoni: None. F. Lepri: Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Uni- None. P. Daniele: None. B. Burnyte: None. G. Cuturilo: versity,Vilnius,Lithuania,7FacultyofMedicine,University None. C. Fauth: None. D. Kotzot: None. E.Y. Güleç: of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 8University Children’s None. V. Iotova: None. G. Forzano: None. D. Schanze: Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia, 9Institute of Human Genetics, None. F. Ramond: None. M. Havlovicová: None. G.E. Medizinische Universität Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, Utine: None. P.O. Simsek-Kiper: None. A. Verloes: 10Medical Genetics Section, Health Sciences University, None. A. De Luca: None. M. Tartaglia: None. H. Cavé: Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, None. M. Zenker: None. Istanbul, Turkey, 11Department of Pediatrics, Varna Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria, 12Department of 
P11 .82.A Biomedical,ExperimentalandClinicalSciences,University Characterizationofauniquekaryotyperesultingfroma of Florence, Florence, Italy, 13Department of Genetics, complex rearrangement involving the chromosomes 3 Hôpital Nord, Saint Etienne University Hospital, Saint- and 4 using chromosome analysis, FISH and array- Etienne, France, 14Department of Biology and Medical CGH in a girl with facial dysmorphism Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 15Department of Pediatric Genetics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey480 J.delPicchia V. Langhof1, J. Naab1, C. Bartaun1, S. Anders1, S. Gonzales6, J. Martinovic2, S. Whalen7, B. Arveiler1, P. Demuth2, T. Liehr3, M. Klaus1 Fergelot1, D. LACOMB
E1  1MVZ Mitteldeutscher Praxisverbund Humangenetik 1Medical Genetics, BORDEAUX, France, 2Medical Genet- GmbH, Dresden, Germany, 2MVZ Mitteldeutscher Prax- ics, Paris Necker, France, 3Medical Genetics, Tours, isverbund Humangenetik GmbH, Erfurt, Germany, 3Uni- France, 4Medical Genetics, Amiens, France, 5Medical versitätsklinikum Jena, Institut für Humangenetik, Jena, Genetics, Saint Denis, La Réunion, France, 6Medical Germany Genetics, Paris Trousseau, France, 7Medical Genetics, Paris Pitié, France Genomic rearrangements can result in losses, gains, trans- locations and insertions of DNA fragments thereby mod- Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS; OMIM 180849) is an ifying genome architecture, and potentially having clinical autosomal dominant developmental disorder characterized consequences. We report on a four-month-old girl with by facial dysmorphism, broad thumbs and halluces asso- facialdysmorphism.Physicalandmotoricdevelopmentwas ciated with intellectual disability. RSTS is caused by normal. Karyotype analysis presented mosaicism, showing alterationsinCREBBP(about60%)andE
P300 genes(8%). onepartiallydeletedchromosome4inallanalysedcellsand RSTS is often diagnosed at birth or during early childhood an additional ring chromosome of unknown origin in only but generally not suspected during antenatal period. We part of the cells. Array CGH detected different gains report nine cases of well-documented fetal RSTS. Two 4p15.33p15.31, 4p15.1p12 and 4p12q12 and one deletion caseswereexaminedafterdeathinuteroat18and35weeks in4q13.3q22.1.Twogainsshowedmosaicismof76%.The of gestation and seven cases after identiﬁcation of ultra- deletion was detected in a mosaic level of 35%. Therefore, sound abnormalities and termination of pregnancy. On wesuggestedthattheadditionalringchromosomeconsisted prenatal sonography, a large gallbladder was detected in of the detected aberrations showing mosaicism. To prove two cases, and brain malformations were noted in four this presumption, we performed FISH. The results con- cases, especially cerebellar hypoplasia. However, the diag- ﬁrmedourhypothesisconcerningtheringchromosomeand nosis of RSTS has not been suggested during pregnancy. surprisingly identiﬁed an insertion of material of chromo- Fetalautopsyshowedthatallfetuseshadlargethumbsand/ some 4 in the short arm of one chromosome 3 in all of the or suggestive facial dysmorphism. A CREBBP gene analysed metaphase spreads. In relation to the array result, anomalywasidentiﬁedinallcases.Alterationsweresimilar this insertion might represent the gain of 4p15.33p15.31, to those found in typical RSTS children. This report will detected without mosaicism. As wellas for the gains as for contribute to a better knowledge of the fetal phenotype to thedeletion,different severe clinical effects weredescribed consider the hypothesis of RSTS during pregnancy. Geno- including developmental delay, behavioural problems, epi- typing allows reassuring genetic counseling. leptic seizures and facial dysmorphisms. The clinical fea- J. Van-Gils: None. S. Naudion: None. J. Toutain: turescoulddifferduetosizeofthecopynumberchangesas None. G. Lancelot: None. T. Attié-Bitach: None. S. well as to mosaic level and distribution in different tissues. Blesson: None. B. Demeer: None. B. Doray: None. M. Our results suggest that the mosaicism of the 4q deletion Gonzales: None. J. Martinovic: None. S. Whalen: None. could explain the mild clinical features of the little girl. B.Arveiler:None.P.Fergelot:None.D.Lacombe:None. Analysis of the parents showed that the chromosome abnormalities occurred de novo. 
P11 .87.C V. Langhof: None. J. Naab: None. C. Bartaun: None. SETB
P1  gene variants: from Schinzel-Giedion syn- S. Anders: None. S. Demuth: None. T. Liehr: None. M. drometomildneurodevelopmentaldisorder,achallenge Klaus: None. for the clinician. 
P11 .85.A A. Moroni1, D. Carli2, E. Giorgio3, F. Sirchia4, L. Fetal phenotype of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome caused Pavinato3,S.Cardaropoli2,P.DiMartino5,6,A.Mussa2,T. by CREBBP mutations Pipucci6,5, S. De Rubeis7, A. Brusco1,3, G. B. Ferrero2 J. Van-Gils1, S. Naudion1, J. Toutain1, G. Lancelot1, T. 1Medical Genetics Unit, Città della Salute e della Scienza Attié-Bitach2, S. Blesson3, B. Demeer4, B. Doray5, M. University Hospital, Turin, Italy, 2Division of Pediatrics, Dep.ofPublicHealthandPediatricSciences,Universityof Turin, Turin, Italy, 3Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 4Institute for Maternal andChildHealth-IRCCS“BurloGarofolo”,Trieste,Italy,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 481 5Medical Genetics Unit, Polyclinic Sant’Orsola-Malpighi Milani3, G. Scuvera3, M. Mariani4, A. Selicorni4, L. University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 6Department of Med- Larizza1 icalandSurgicalSciences,UniversityofBologna,Bologna, Italy, 7Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino (MI), Italy, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 2UOC Clinica Pediatrica, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, United States Genova, Italy, 3Unità di Pediatria ad alta Intensità di Cura, Fondazione IRCSS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Introduction: Genotype-phenotype correlations for Policlinico, MILANO, Italy, 4UOC Pediatria, ASST Lari- SETB
P1  gene are extremely complex and clinically rele- ana, Como, Italy vant. Nonsense variants and whole gene deletions cause intellectual disability with marked speech delay, seizures Silver Russell Syndrome (SRS, MIM #180860) is a rare and facial dysmorphisms. Recurrent missense variants at (1:30,000-1:100,000) growth retardation disorder, whose codons868-871,formingthecriticalconsensussequenceof clinicaldiagnosisisbasedontheNetchine-Harbisonclinical the degradation signal, have been associated with classic scoringsystem(NH-CSS),combiningsixfeatures:pre-and Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS; MIM269150) which is postnatal growth failure, relative macrocephaly, prominent characterized by severe developmental delay, facial dys- forehead, body asymmetry and feeding difﬁculties. The morphisms, epilepsy, hydronephrosis, cardiac and brain molecular mechanisms underlying SRS are highly hetero- anomaliesandprogressiveneurodegeneration,malignancies geneous, including (epi)genetic deregulation at multiple and frequent early death. Patients with missense mutation loci. Over50%ofSRS show lossof methylation (LOM) at near the degradation sequence (codons 862, 867, and 873) the paternal H19/IGF2:IG-DMR (chr11p15.5), about 10% exhibit a milder SGS phenotype. Here we report two maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 (UPD(7) patientswithnoveldenovomissenseheterozygousSETB
P1  mat), while pathogenic CNVs, 14q32 abnormalities, rare variants, presenting with mild and atypical phenotypes. CDKN1C and IGF2 mutations, UPD(16)mat and UPD(20) Case report: Patient 1 is a 3 years old female with mat have been reported in a minority of cases. Our study developmental delay, stunted growth, typical SGS facial was aimed to evaluate the frequency of the rarest known dysmorphisms,neutropenia,andjointhypermobility,carry- molecular defects in a cohort of SRS patients with a NH- ing a p.Ser854Tyr variant. Patient 2 is a 15 years old male, CSS≥3. Within a selected cohort of 176 SRS, 55 patients withspeechdelayandborderlineintellectualdisabilitywith had LoM at H19/IGF2:IG-DMR (31.3%) and 17 cases autistic traits, carrying the p.Pro995Leu variant, not showed UPD(7)mat (9.7%). Further investigations on the associated with other sign of SGS. 104 remaining patients identiﬁed 3 cases sharing Conclusions: Phenotype severity in patients carrying UPD20mat (1,7%), the most frequent out of the rare SETB
P1  missense variants depends on localization and alterations. The patients, with a clinical score >3, shared biological effect of the variants, providing a likely prominent forehead, feeding difﬁculties and postnatal explanation to the mild phenotypes we have observed in growth delay, while one case had relative macrocephaly, these patients. Clinical evaluation and prognosis deﬁnition and another body asymmetry. Interestingly maternal age in in SETB
P1  patients are challenging. Further functional and these three UPD(20)mat cases is >40 years and literature genotype-phenotype correlation studies are essential to surveypointedoutonatotalof16casesameanof38years, establish their natural history and management indications. likely due to its origin by trisomy rescue. Our study iden- A.Moroni:None.D.Carli:None.E.Giorgio:None.F. tiﬁes UPD(20)mat as a subclass among patients with NH- Sirchia:None.L.Pavinato:None.S.Cardaropoli:None. CSS≥3 and elevated maternal age suggesting to introduce P.DiMartino:None.A.Mussa:None.T.Pipucci:None. this pathomechanism in the SRS diagnostic ﬂow-chart. S. De Rubeis: None. A. Brusco: None. G.B. S. Russo: None. D. Minervino: None. P. Tannorella: Ferrero: None. None. S. Guzzetti: None. L. Calzari: None. G. Patti: None. M. Maghnie: None. A.E.M. Allegri: None. D. 
P11 .88.A Milani: None. G. Scuvera: None. M. Mariani: None. A. Maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 20 (UPD Selicorni: None. L. Larizza: None. (20)mat) and advanced maternal age in Silver Russell Syndrome: identiﬁcation of three new cases. 
P11 .89.B First record of homozygous loss of function variants in S. Russo1, D. Minervino1, P. Tannorella1, S. Guzzetti1, L. the SLF2 gene in patients with chromosome instability Calzari1, G. Patti2, M. Maghnie2, A. E. M. Allegri2, D. syndromes482 J.delPicchia N.Nahavandi1,Z.Yüksel1,M.Drasdo1,A.Kron1,P.Vogt1, Bianchessi4, M. Marina Melone5, C. Schettino5, F. A. Jonasson1, S. Ahmed Seth2, M. Tareg Mustafa2, K. Natacci3, M. Eoli4 Danish2 1Univrsità degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2CNR, 1Bioscientia Institute for Medical Diagnostics, Human Milano, Italy, 3Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 2King Fahad Military Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 4Fondazione IRCCS Medical Complex, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia IstitutoNeurologicoCarloBesta,Milano,Italy,5Università della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Napoli, Italy The chromosome instability syndromes are a group of predominantly recessively inherited conditions associated Spinal Neuroﬁbromatosis (SNF) is a speciﬁc form of with defects in DNA repair mechanisms that lead to chro- Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) characterized by bilateral mosomal instability and chromosomal breakage. The so far neuroﬁbromasinvolvingallspinalroots.Thisfeatureallows known Double Strand Break Repair (DSBR) associated tospeciﬁcallydistinguishSNFfromNeuroﬁbromatosistype inherited genetic disorders share cancer predisposition, 1 (NF1), and Multiple Neuroﬁbromas Few Spinal Root immunodeﬁciency, neurological disease and aplastic ane- (MNFSR), presenting single/few isolated spinal neuroﬁ- mia as main clinical phenotypes. Here we present two bromas.WhiletheclinicalphenotypeofSNF,MNSFRand patients with the shared clinical symptoms of severe classicalNF1canberevealedbyspinalMRI,littleisknown intrauterine growth restriction, short stature, hypotonia, on the molecular basis underlying these conditions. We respiratory insufﬁciency and dysmorphic features. Chro- investigated 12NF1 familieswith atleastone SNFpatient, mosomal analysis for both patients revealed increased 15 sporadic SNF/MNSFR patients, diagnosed by Spinal amount of numerical and structural chromosome aberra- MRI.WeappliedTargetedNGSusingapanelconsistingof tions, indicative for a genetic instability syndrome. Whole 139genesencodingRASpathwayeffectors, neuroﬁbromin exome sequencing analysis revealed novel homozygous interactors and genes mapping at 17q11.2 region. On loss of function variants in SLF2 [p.(Arg190*) and p. identiﬁed26NF1variants,36,6%weremissensemutations, (Asp783Serfs*53)]. SLF2 (SM
C5 -SM
C6  complex locali- indicating an increased prevalence in our cohort versus zation factor 2) plays a role in the DNA damage response 27,7% missense/nonsense mutations reported in Italian (DDR)pathwaybyregulatingpost-replicationrepairofUV- (PMID:26740943)andinaBritish(PMID:28637487)NF1 damaged DNA and genomic stability maintenance. The population. Furthermore, we evaluated rare variants with SLF1-SLF2 complex acts to link RAD18 with the SM
C5 - damaging predictors in genes of RAS pathway and neuro- SM
C6  complex at replication-coupled interstrand cross- ﬁbromin interactors. In more than one sporadic case pos- links(ICL) andDNAdouble-strand breaks(DSBs)sites on sible pathogenic variants were found in LIMK2, RASA
L1 , chromatinduringDNArepair.Tothebestofourknowledge RASA
L3 , SO
S1 , A2M
L1 , MA
P3 K1, while in more than we are presenting here the ﬁrst human phenotype of a one SNF family were detected RASA
L1 , RASA
L3 , chromosomeinstabilitysyndromeinassociationwithSLF2. MA
P3 K1 genes variations. Our results conﬁrm the high Ourﬁndings underlinetheimportanceofSLF2 intheDDR frequency of missense mutations in SNF as reported pathway and introduce the ﬁrst human chromosomal and (PMID: 26740943, PMID:25211147), indicating neuroﬁ- phenotypic presentation associated with a defect in this bromin gain-of-function variants as associated to SNF. In gene. In addition to diagnostic analysis, reporting scientiﬁc some patients, the co-occurrence of potential pathogenic ﬁndings in disease candidate genes seems to be a crucial variants in NF1 related genes are detected with severe task of the diagnostic laboratory settings. phenotypes, suggesting that they might be modiﬁer genes N. Nahavandi: None. Z. Yüksel: None. M. Drasdo: and promising pharmacological targets. Italian Ministry of None.A.Kron:None.P.Vogt:None.A.Jonasson:None. Health RF-2016-02361293. S. Ahmed Seth: None. M. Tareg Mustafa: None. K. P.Riva:None.E.Mangano:None.C.Cesaretti:None. Danish: None. P.Bettinaglio:None.R.Bordoni:None.V.Tritto:None. C. Battaglia: None. V. Saletti: None. D. Bianchessi: 
P11 .90.C None. M. Marina Melone: None. C. Schettino: None. F. Prevalence of NF1 missense mutations and candidate Natacci: None. M. Eoli: None. modiﬁer genes in 12 familial and 15 sporadic spinal neuroﬁbromatosis patients 
P11 .91.A New cohort of patients with CEDNIK syndrome P. Riva1, E. Mangano2, C. Cesaretti3, P. Bettinaglio1, R. expands the phenotypic and genotypic spectra Bordoni2, V. Tritto1, C. Battaglia1, V. Saletti4, D.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 483 A. Y. Mah-Som1, C. Skrypnyk2, R. Hamad3, V. Nivrutti3, A. hypoplasia, agenesisofCC Guerin4, M. Shinawi1 Seizures Noseizures Noseizures Seizures Hypotonia, Cerebralpalsy,spastic Profound Profound spasticity diplegia hypotonia hypotonia, 1Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, +/-clonus scoliosis DD/ID Mild-moderate Moderate-severe Severe Severe MO,UnitedStates,2DepartmentofMolecularMedicine,Al Eyeﬁndings Strabismus Strabismus,foveal Corticalvisual Strabismus, hypoplasia,rovingeye impairment, microphthalmia, Jawhara Center for Molecular Medicine, Genetics and movements nystagmus nystagmus Inherited Diseases, College of Medicine and Medical Skinphenotype Ichythyosis, Ichthyosis, Ichthyosis Ichthyosis, plantar palmoplantar palmoplantar Sciences,Manama,Bahrain,3DivisionofMedicalGenetics, keratoderma keratoderma keratoderma Miscellaneous Nosigniﬁcant Deaf,recurrent Deaf,G-tube, Recurrent DepartmentofPediatrics,BahrainDefenseForceHospital, dysmorphism,no respiratoryinfections recurrent respiratory Manama, Bahrain, 4Department of Pediatrics, Queen’s recurrent respiratory infections, respiratory infections, microcephaly, University, Kingston, ON, Canada infections plagiocephaly micrognathia Previous PMID:31748968 Tiwana2019AAN Novel PMID:21073448 reportof abstract SNA
P29  Introduction: CEDNIK (cerebral dysgenesis, neuropathy, variant ichthyosis,andkeratoderma)syndrome(MIM#609528)isa rarecondition(15publishedcases)causedbybiallelicloss- of-function variants in SNA
P29 , which encodes a protein A.Y.Mah-Som:None.C.Skrypnyk:None.R.Hamad: involved in membrane trafﬁcking processes. Clinical man- None. V. Nivrutti: None. A. Guerin: None. M. ifestations include developmental delay (DD)/ intellectual Shinawi: None. disability (ID), brain malformations including cortical migration and corpus callosum (CC) defects, failure to 
P11 .93.C thrive, and skin abnormalities. Loss-of-function mutations of TMEM260 cause auto- Materials and Methods: Clinical trio exome or targeted somal recessive polycystic kidney, cerebral atrophy and sequencing was performed for each case to elucidate the cardiac malformation cause of DD/ID and of other speciﬁc ﬁndings. Results: We report ﬁve patients with homozygous T.M.Keszthelyi1,2,M.Varga3,D.Czimer3,D.Ralbovszki3, predicted loss-of-function variants in SNA
P29 , four of L. Ablonczy4, C. Bole5, C. Antignac5, K. Tory1,2 which are from consanguineous marriages. All patients exhibitDD/ID,ichthyosisand/orpalmoplantarkeratoderma, 1Semmelweis University, Ist Department of Pediatrics, andhypotoniawith spasticity. 3/5subjectshadseizuresand Budapest, Hungary, 2MTA-SE Lendület Nephrogenetic 4/5 had ophthalmological ﬁndings. Other phenotypes were Laboratory, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Genetics, variable between cases, including facial features, poor Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary, 4Gottsegen growth and feeding difﬁculties, and recurrent respiratory György National Institute of Cardiology, Budapest, Hun- infections. The cohort includes 2 siblings with a c.2T>C gary, 5INSERM, UMR 1163, Imagine Institute, Paris, variantwhohaveamilderneurologicalphenotype,apatient France with the most C-terminal variant yet described (c.622G>T) with a more severe phenotype, and two patients with Introduction: Association of polycystic kidney, cerebral previously described variants (c.354dupG, c.487dupA). atrophy and truncus arteriosus had not been reported in the Conclusions: We describe ﬁve additional patients with medical literature until recently. We aimed to identify the CEDNIK syndrome, including novel SNA
P29  variants and causal gene and to explore the function of the encoded the oldest known surviving individual. Our cohort expands protein. the genotypic and phenotypic (seizures and strabismus) Materials and methods: Exome sequencing was per- spectrum of CEDNIK syndrome. formedina5-year-oldmale.Thelocalizationoftheprotein was studied by immunoﬂuorescence staining in transiently Table 1. Phenotypic and genotypic data of patients with transfected IMCD3 cells after the induction of ciliogenesis. CEDNIK syndrome Mutant zebraﬁsh lines were generated by the CRISPR/ Cas9 system. Patient 1&2 3 4 5 Age(yrs) 19,12 8 4 7 Results: We identiﬁed compound heterozygous truncat- Sex F,M F F M ing mutations in the TMEM260 gene: c.592_593delTT, p. SNA
P29  c.2T>C(p.Met1?) c.354dupG(p. c.622G>T(p. c.487dupA(p. variant Leu119Alafs*15) Glu208*) Ser163Lysfs*6) Leu198Valfs44* (paternal) and c.1854C>A (p.Tyr618*) Ethnicity Amish, Mexican Tibetan,Indian Arab (maternal). Out of the two isoforms Mennonite (ENST00000261556.11, long”; ENST00000538838.5, Consanguin. Yes Yes No Yes Neurologic Leukodystrophy Polymicrogyria(PMG) PMG, Lissencephaly, short”),onlythelongisaffectedbythep.Tyr618*mutation, phenotype hypoplasticCC PMG,cerebellar allowing the short isoform to be properly translated. We484 J.delPicchia successfully generated tmem260 biallelic loss-of-function delayandintellectualdisability,hypertrichosis(cubiti-hairy mutant zebra danio lines. Homozygous mutants with elbow-or generalized) and facialdysmorphism. Concerning different LOF mutations show no obvious phenotype. the incidence of bone anomalies, to date trigonocephaly (a Interestingly,incontrasttotheproteinsimplicatedinciliary featureatourﬁrstevaluation)hasbeenreportedonlyinone kidney disorders, TMEM260 long isoform showed a case, while craniovertebral junction anomalies have been moderate cytoplasmic and a strong nuclear membrane describedintwootherpatients;bothofthesesignswerenot localization.Theshortisoformlocatedinthecytoplasmand included in the features associated with WSS. Further data stronglyinthenucleus.Neitherisoformsweredetectablein will be needed to evaluate the exact incidence of these the primary cilium. Mutations of TMEM260 cause auto- features in subjects with WSS associated with hap- somal recessive polycystic kidney, cerebral atrophy and loinsufﬁciency of a gene involved in histone-mediated truncus arteriosus. chromatin remodeling. Conclusions: Our results are strongly supported by one E. Fiorentini: None. G. Traﬁcante: None. R. Artuso: publication indicating the role of TMEM260 in this None.G.Gori:None.G.Forzano:None.S.Giglio:None. syndrome. The preserved translation of the short isoform in all three affected families strongly suggest that the 
P11 .97.A dysfunction of the short isoform is intrauterine lethal. Phenotypic spectrum of Xp22 duplication; A tertiary T.M. Keszthelyi: None. M. Varga: None. D. Czimer: center experience None.D.Ralbovszki:None.L.Ablonczy:None.C.Bole: None. C. Antignac: None. K. Tory: None. N. Alsaleh1, I. Ben Abdallah2, A. Al Hashem1,3, H. El Ghezal2 
P11 .96.C Possible improvement in phenotype deﬁnition of 1Division of Genetic and Metabolic Medicine, Department Weidemann-Steiner syndrome by Whole Exome of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Sequencing Saudi Arabia, 2Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Division, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, E. Fiorentini, G. Traﬁcante, R. Artuso, G. Gori, G. Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Pediatrics, College of Forzano, S. Giglio Medicine, AlFaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and Introduction: Evidence strongly supports the use of chro- Experimental Biomedical Sciences ‘Mario Serio’, Univer- mosomal microarray analysis as a ﬁrst-tier cytogenetic sity of Florence, I-50139 Florence, Italy., Florence, Italy diagnostic tool in patients with developmental delay/intel- lectual disability and multiple congenital anomalies. Copy We report the case of a boy evaluated mainly for trigono- number variants (CNV) involving the X chromosome has cephaly and generalized seizures. His critical events were beenpreviouslydescribed,mainlydeletions(e.g.Leri-Weill poorly controlled by antiepileptic multi-drug therapy. His dyschondrostsosis). However, little is known about pheno- phenotype with some facial features (thick eyebrows, epi- types arising from duplications. In this study, we reviewed canthus, long ﬁltering, thin upper lip), growth and psy- CNVs involving the short arm of the X chromosome, spe- chomotor development delay, renal ectopia, complete hip ciﬁcally duplications involving band 
P22 . This region dislocation, thin corpus callosum with scarcity of white contains 194 genes, only 107 have an OMIM description matter, did not suggest any speciﬁc condition. Karyotype (e.g. SHOX and STS). and CGH-array analysis were normal. Whole exome Materials and Methods: Cases that underwent array sequencing (WES) revealed a heterozygous frameshift comparative genomic hybridization between years (2016- variant in KMT2A, resulting in a premature stop codon. 2019) were reviewed. Indication for testing was variable, VariantsinKMT2Ahavebeenalreadydescribedinpatients ranging from developmental delay, seizures to multiple with Wiedeman-Steiner Syndrome (WSS). This gene congenitalanomalies.Wefocusedoncaseswithduplication encodes a histone methyltransferase involved in the reg- involving Xp22 ulationofchromatin-mediatedtranscriptionanditiswidely Results: 69 cases reported with CNVs involving the X expressed in most human tissues. The majority of WSS- chromosome. (33/69) with Xp22 duplication. (17/33) associated variants reported so far are de novo loss-of- Females and (16/33) males. (1/33) involving Xp22.2, (1/ function, predicted to result in premature termination of 33) involving Xp22.3, (1/33) involving Xp22.32, (12/33) translation and nonsense-mediated decay of the corre- involving Xp22.31 and (18/33) involving Xp22.33. The sponding transcripts. WSS is a rare autosomal dominant size of the duplication ranged from 147 Kb to 2.3 Mb. The disorder, characterized by short stature, developmental detected CNVs ranged from benign or likely benign (12/Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 485 33), pathogenic or likely pathogenic (9/33) and variants of Westmead, Westmead, Australia, 13Munroe-Meyer Institute unknown signiﬁcance (12/33). Some cases were de novo, for Genetics & Rehabilitation, University of Nebraska others were inherited from a healthy parent. Variable Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States, 14Hospital expressivity and low penetrance were observed in this Universitario Quirón de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 15Depart- cohort. ment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Prenatal Diagnostics Conclusions: Deletions affecting the X chromosome is & Therapy, Maastricht University Medical Center+, azM, usually associated with a known clinical syndrome that Maastricht,Netherlands, 16Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, could be male lethal. However, duplications tend to be Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Greifswald, Ger- milder, showing variable expressivity and penetrance, many, 17Department of Neurology, Maastricht University which makes it hard to conﬁrm pathogenicity. Medical Center+, azM, Maastricht, Netherlands, 18SA N. Alsaleh: None. I. Ben Abdallah: None. A. Al Clinical Genetics Service, Women’s and Children’s Hospi- Hashem: None. H. El Ghezal: None. tal,Adelaide,Australia,19DepartmentofClinicalGenetics, Amsterdam UMC location AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 
P11 .98.B 20Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, South- Deleterious de novo variants of X-linked Z
C4 H2 in ampton, United Kingdom, 21Nottingham University Hospi- females cause a variable phenotype with neurogenic talsNHSTrust,CityHospitalCampus,,Nottingham,United arthrogryposis multiplex congenita Kingdom, 22Institute of Human Genetics, Westfälische Wilhelms Universität Münster, Münster, Germany, S. G. M. Frints1,2, F. Hennig3, R. Colombo4,5, S. 23Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurol- Jacquemont6, P. Terhal7, H. H. Zimmerman8, D. Hunt9, B. ogy, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Mississippi, A. Mendelsohn10, U. Kordaß11, R. Webster12, M. MS, United States, 24Department of Neurology, Boston Sinnema1,2,O.Abdul-Rahman13,V.Suckow3,A.Fernández- Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Jaén14, Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) MA, United States, 25Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Study, S. J. C. Stevens1,2, M. V. E. Macville1,2, K. van Cambridge, MA, United States, 26Department of Ophthal- Roozendaal1,S.Al-Nasiry15,K. vanGassen7,N. Utzig16,S. mology, Boston Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical M. Koudijs17, L. McGregor18, S. M. Maas19, D. Baralle9,20, School, Boston, MA, United States, 27Department of A. Dixit21, P. Wieacker22, M. Lee23, A. S. Lee24,25, E. C. Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Engle24,25,26, G. Houge27, A. G. L. Douglas9,28, C. Norway, 28Human Development and Health, Faculty of Longman29, S. Joss29, G. A. Gradek27, D. Velasco30, R. C. Medicine,UniversityofSouthampton,Southampton,United Hennekam31, H. Hirata32, V. M. Kalscheuer33 Kingdom, 29West of Scotland Regional Genetic Centre, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, United 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Kingdom, 30Department of Pediatrics, Munroe-Meyer Medical Center+, azM, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Depart- Institute for Genetics & Rehabilitation, University of ment of Genetics and Cell Biology, Faculty of Health Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States, Medicine Life Sciences, Maastricht University Medical 31Department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Center+, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, Netherlands, 32Department of Chemistry and Biological 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Science, College of Science and Engineering, Aoyama Germany, 4Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Gakuin University, Sagamihara, Japan, 33Research Group Italy, 5Center for the Study of Rare Inherited Diseases Development and Disease, Max-Planck-Institute for Mole- (CeSMER), Niguarda Ca’ Granda Metropolitan Hospital, cular Genetics, Berlin, Germany Milan, Italy, 6Service de Génétique Médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Laboratories, Pharmacy and Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the X-linked gene Biomedical Genetics Division, University Medical Centre Z
C4 H2 cause an infrequently described syndromic form of Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Department of Pediatrics, arthrogryposismultiplexcongenita(AMC)withcentraland Division of Medical Genetics, University of Mississippi peripheralnervoussysteminvolvement(Z
C4 H2-Associated Medical Center, Mississippi, MS, United States, 9Wessex Rare Disorders, ZARD). ClinicalGeneticsService,UniversityHospitalSouthampton Materials and Methods: We performed exome sequen- NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom, cing and array-CGH and tested Z
C4 H2 missense variants 10Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Univer- identiﬁed in affected patients in zebraﬁsh. sityofCalifornia,SanFrancisco,CA,UnitedStates,11MVZ Results: We present genetic and detailed phenotypic fürHumangenetikundMolekularpathologieGmbH,Zweig- information on 23 newly identiﬁed families and simplex stelle Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 12The Department casesthatinclude19affectedfemalesfrom18familiesand ofNeurologyandNeurosurgery,TheChildren’sHospitalat 14affectedmalesfromninefamilies.Thegeneticspectrum486 J.delPicchia of Z
C4 H2 defects comprises novel and recurrent mostly Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) and its precancerous inherited missense variants in affected males, and de novo condition Barrett’s esophagus (BE) are multifactorial dis- splicing, frameshift, nonsense, and partial Z
C4 H2 deletions eases with rising prevalence rates in Western populations. inaffectedfemales.Twonewlyidentiﬁedmissensevariants Our recent integrative analysis of GWAS and GTEx eQTL were investigated by studies in zebraﬁsh and the results data showed that the risk allele of the sentinel SNP supported pathogenicity. Of note, the 15 females with (rs147462972)atthegenome-widesigniﬁcantlocus5p15is deleterious de novo Z
C4 H2 variants presented with associatedwithincreasedSL
C9 A3expressioninesophageal phenotypes ranging from mild to severe, and their clinical mucosa tissue. Interestingly, upregulation of this gene has features overlapped with those seen in affected males. By been linked to gastro-esophageal reﬂux disorder, a major contrast, of the nine carrier females with inherited Z
C4 H2 risk factor for BE development. Therefore, we hypothesize missense variants that were deleterious in affected male that rs147462972 maps to a regulatory element inﬂuencing relatives, four were symptomatic. We also compared SL
C9 A3expression.Tostudytheregulatorymechanismsat clinicalphenotypeswithpreviouslypublishedcasesofboth 5p15, chromatin interactions are analyzed using circular sexesandprovideanoverviewon48malesand57females chromosome conformation capture (4C) technology from from 42 families. two distinct viewpoints, the promoter of SL
C9 A3 and the Conclusions:WeproposeZ
C4 H2asagoodcandidatefor region around rs147462972. The method was ﬁrst estab- early genetic testing of males and females with a clinical lished in induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC), where suspicionoffetalhypo-/akinesiaand/or(neurogenic)AMC. numerous interactions at the locus and beyond were Grants:DDDstudyHICF-1009-003andWT098051,Dutch observed. Further analyses will be performed in different NWO VENI OND1312421 (to SGM), NEI R01EY027421 cell lines representative of the course of BE/EA develop- and NHLBI X01H
L132377  (to ECE). ment: healthy epithelium(EP
C1 ),Barrett’sesophagus (CP- S.G.M. Frints: None. F. Hennig: None. R. Colombo: A), intraepithelial neoplasia (CP-B), and EA (O
E19 ). None. S. Jacquemont: None. P. Terhal: None. H.H. No interaction between the SL
C9 A3 promoter and the Zimmerman: None. D. Hunt: None. B.A. Mendelsohn: sentinel SNP was detected at 5p15 in iPSC. A lack of this None.U.Kordaß:None.R.Webster:None.M.Sinnema: interaction was assumed, since these cells do not express None. O. Abdul-Rahman: None. V. Suckow: None. A. SL
C9 A3. Based on these results, the experiments in Fernández-Jaén: None. S.J.C. Stevens: None. M.V.E. esophageal cell lines are currently ongoing and the results Macville:None.K.vanRoozendaal:None.S.Al-Nasiry: will be presented at the conference. Our work will help to None. K. van Gassen: None. N. Utzig: None. S.M. understand the contribution of the risk locus 5p15 to the Koudijs: None. L. McGregor: None. S.M. Maas: None. etiology of BE and EA, and the role of SL
C9 A3 in their D.Baralle:None.A.Dixit:None.P.Wieacker:None.M. pathogenesis. Lee:None.A.S.Lee:None.E.C.Engle:None.G.Houge: J. Schröder: None. R. Hollstein: None. I. Gockel: None. A.G.L. Douglas: None. C. Longman: None. S. None. R. Thieme: None. K.U. Ludiwg: None. J. Joss: None. G.A. Gradek: None. D. Velasco: None. R.C. Schumacher: None. A.C. Böhmer: None. Hennekam: None. H. Hirata: None. V.M. Kalscheuer: None. 
P12 .002.A Discoveryofnoveltumor-associatedexonicincertionsof 
P12  Cancer Genetics polymorphic retroelements in human genome 
P12 .001.C A.Y.Komkov1,2,M.Saliutina1,3,M.Kulikov3,E.Volchkov2, Functional annotation of 5p15 risk locus for Barrett’s S.Urazbakhtin1,3,A.Popov2,M.Maschan2,Y.Lebedev1,Y. esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma Olshanskaya2, I. Mamedov1,2 J. Schröder1, R. Hollstein1, I. Gockel2, R. Thieme2, K. U. 1Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Ludiwg1, J. Schumacher3, A. C. Böhmer1 of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof Center Of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunol- Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, ogy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Lomonosov Moscow 2Department of Visceral, Transplant, Thoracic and Vas- State University, Moscow, Russian Federation cular Surgery, University Hospital of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany,3CenterforHumanGenetics,UniversityHospital Introduction: Retroelements (RE) make a signiﬁcant con- of Marburg, Marburg, Germany tributiontomanymono-andpolygenicdisorders,including differenttypesofcancer.NewREinsertioncanleadtoexonAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 487 deletion,exondisruptionandalternativesplicing,including Introduction: Core binding factor acute myeloid leukemia formation of RE-containing exon. Most tumor-related (CBF-AML) combines two entities, which differ sig- insertions are individual-speciﬁc owing to germline or niﬁcantlyintheirclinicalandbiologicalfeatures,AMLwith somatic retroposition events. Here we investigate exonic t(8;21)andAMLwithinv(16).High-throughputsequencing polymorphic RE insertions (PREI) distributed in methods reveal characteristic mutation spectra in two leu- population. kemia subtypes; however, the role of different mutation Materials and methods: Two cohorts of 200 healthy events in tumorigenesis remains unclear. donors and 120 pediatric lymphoblastic leukemia patients Patients and methods: In total, 9 patients with t(8;21) were used for this study. Whole genome identiﬁcation of and16patientswithinv(16)wereinvestigated(13boysand RE insertions was conducted using target high-throughput 12 girls, mean age 7.2 years). For 18 patients, paired sequencing of genome fragments adjusted to insertions of samples at diagnosis and remission were analyzed. Coding active RE. Novel detected PREIs were validated using regions of 84 genes, involved in the pathogenesis of AML, capillary sequencing. PREI allele status in donors was were captured with SeqCap EZ Target Enrichment System identiﬁed using locus-speciﬁc PCR. (NimbleGen, Roche) and sequenced using NextSeq500 Results: We identiﬁed ﬁve exonic PREIs among all Illumina platform. detected polymorphic insertions. Frequency of bi-allelic Results:InbothAMLsubtypes,somaticmutationsinthe PREI (AluYa5) in PRAMEF4 gene exon was signiﬁcantly genes KIT (40%), NRAS (24%), KRAS (16%), FLT3 (12%) higher in healthy female cohort compared to healthy males werefound.TheKITmutationsweremorecommonforinv (p-value=0.05, two-tailed Fisher’s exact test) and in T- (16) compared to t(8;21) (56% vs. 11%, p = 0.04). In the lineage leukemia male cohort compared to healthy male group with inv(16), KIT mutations in exon 8 (66%) donors (p-value=0.01). Leukemia samples with bi-allelic prevailed comparing with exon 17 (33%); two patients PREI in PRAMEF4 had speciﬁc (p-value=0.008) immu- (12.5%) had biallelic KIT mutations. In group with t(8;21), nophenotype: CD33-CD13-CD34-CD117-CD56-CD1a mutations in the SM
C1 A (cohesin complex), CBL, CBLB, +CD3+CD4+CD8+CD10+ inherent to more mature ASX
L1 , TET1, EZH2 genes were revealed. In patients with lymphoblasts. inv(16), mutations in the KDM6A and KMT2A genes, Discussion: The results demonstrate that PREI in involved in chromatin modiﬁcation, were found. PRAMEF4 exon could participate in leukemogenesis in Conclusions: Mutational proﬁling revealed characteristic gender-dependent manner affecting male patients despite differencesinspectrumandfrequencyofsomaticmutations AluYa5-containing exons present in population. We inpatientswitht(8;21)andinv(16).Novelmutations,which hypothesize that bi-allelic insertion in PRAMEF4 exon is maybeinvolvedinleukemiadevelopment,wereidentiﬁed. insufﬁcient for leukemogenesis and requires additional The work was supported by the Russian Science Founda- mutations in sex chromosomes because of gender-speciﬁc tion (grant # 18−15-00398). nature of the observed phenomenon. The study was T. Nasedkina: None. L. Ghukasyan: None. G. Kras- supported by RFBR grant 18-315-20038 and RSF grant nov: None. L. Baidun: None. S. Ibragimova: None. 18-14-00244. A.Y.Komkov:None.M.Saliutina:None.M.Kulikov: 
P12 .004.C None. E. Volchkov: None. S. Urazbakhtin: None. A. Molecular studies for gain of cytarabine-resistance in Popov: None. M. Maschan: None. Y. Lebedev: None. Y. AML cells with FLT3-ITD mutations Olshanskaya: None. I. Mamedov: None. P. Chen1, Z. Chen2, L. Lin3, J. Yen2 
P12 .003.B Driver mutations in pediatric core binding factor acute 1Center of Medical Genetics, Hualien Tzu Chi Hospital, myeloid leukemia Hualien, Taiwan, 2Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan, T.Nasedkina1,L.Ghukasyan1,G.Krasnov1,L.Baidun2,S. 3Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Ibragimova3 Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Tai- wan 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Rus- Introduction:Althoughcytarabine(ara-C)hasremainedan sian Children’s Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian important cornerstone for treatment of acute myeloid leu- Federation, 3Scientiﬁc Research Institute of Hematology kemia (AML) for decades, chemo-resistance is common and Blood Transfusion, Tashkent, Uzbekistan and the overall survival of adult AML patients is less than 40%. Internal tandem duplication mutations in the FLT3488 J.delPicchia tyrosinekinasereceptor(FLT3-ITD)accountforupto30% Methods: Weutilized nanopore-sequencing toovercome of cases and are associated with a poor outcome. To the time-consuming karyotyping and further increase understand the role of FLT3-ITD in the development of resolution and accelerate SV analysis for AML classiﬁca- drug resistance. An ara-C resistant cell line (MV-4-11-CR) tion. In detail, low-coverage whole genome sequencing was established from parent MV-4-11 cells which harbors (LC-WGS) was carried out incombination witha modiﬁed FLT3-ITD. Here, we compared MV-4-11-CR with MV-4- SMURFseq protocol on AML bone marrow or blood 11 cells, and explored the underling mechanisms for samples (≥20% blasts). LC-WGS data was used to identify developing resistance in FLT3-ITD AML cells. classiﬁcation-relevant SV in AML. Genome-wide CNV Materials and Methods: MV-4-11-CR and MV-4-11 analysis was done from SMURFSeq data. cells were performed tests including MTT assay, RTqPCR, Results: For all 16 samples the results from nanopore- Western blot, G-banding and SKY. sequencing conﬁrmed the SV identiﬁed by conventional Results:MV-4-11-CRcellswerehighlyresistanttoara-C cytogenetic and FISH analyses. Translocations, inversions, by their high I
C50  value, and enhanced cell growth rate. tandem duplications and CNVs were identiﬁed at single This cell line was conﬁrmed to retain the homologous base resolution. We could detect additional small CNVs in FLT3-ITD mutations. However, a signiﬁcant increase of growth regulatinggenes whichmay modify theaggressive- FLT3-ITD mRNA and protein was observed. To test ness of the leukemia. Moreover, the procedure from DNA whether FLT3-ITD activation is crucial for resistance, we isolation to obtaining results requires less than 48h and is measured the effects of combined treatment of cells with not operator dependent. The method can also generate ara-C and FLT3 inhibitors. Inhibition of FLT3 was notably karyotype data from samples for which the cell cultivation effective in cell viability, but not effective in drug failed. sensitivity. We further compared genomic alterations and Conclusions: We show that nanopore-sequencing can found multiple chromosomal changes and complex karyo- speed-up and potentially improve the comprehensive types. Moreover, down-regulation of deoxycytidine kinase analysis of SV in AML. Rapid classiﬁcation according to (DCK), a cytarabine metabolic enzyme, was observed in ELN risk stratiﬁcation will immediately impact on targeted MV-4-11-CR. and risk adapted treatment of AML patients. Conclusions:Wesuggestthatgaintheresistancetoara-C F. Kraft: None. P. Krüger: None. S. Koschmieder: may beassociated with chromosomalaberrationsandDCK None.E.Jost:None.M.Crysandt:None.I.Kurth:None. deﬁciency in FLT3-ITD+ AML cells. P. Chen: None. Z. Chen: None. L. Lin: None. J. 
P12 .008.A Yen: None. Classiﬁcation of ATM variants identiﬁed in Spanish patients with suspicion of hereditary cancer 
P12 .007.C Nanopore-sequencing-based high-resolution karyotyp- L. Feliubadaló1,2,3,M. SantamariñaPeña4,5,6,L. Porras7,8, ing of AML patients A. Moles-Fernández9, A. Sánchez10,11, A. Blanco12,13,5, O. Diez9,14, S. Gutiérrez-Enríquez9, M. de la Hoya15,16, A. F. Kraft1, P. Krüger1, S. Koschmieder2, E. Jost2, M. Lopez-Novo17, A. Osorio18,5, M. Pineda1,2,3, D. Rueda19,20, Crysandt2, I. Kurth1 C. Ruiz-Ponte21,5, A. Vega12,13,5, I. J. Molina22, X. de la Cruz7,8,23, C. Lázaro1,2,3 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Medicine 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncol- (Hematology Oncology, Hemostaseology, and Stem Cell ogy,IDIBELL,HospitaletdeLlobregat,Spain,2Programin Transplantation), University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Molecular Mechanisms and Experimental Therapy in Aachen, Germany Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Introduction: The current diagnostic scheme for classiﬁ- Cáncer(CIBERONC),Madrid,Spain, 4Grupo de Medicina cationofacutemyeloidleukemia(AML)patientsisusually Xenómica. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago based on cytogenetic and molecular biology methods. The de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, turnaround time for karyotype analysis is up to two weeks, 5CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 6Universidad de Santiago de due to the indispensable cultivation of hematopoietic cells. Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 7Research Although initial PCR or FISH-based testing for recurrent Unit in Clinical and Translational Bioinformatics, Vall structural variations (SV) can be carried out within few d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain, hours, the AML classiﬁcation is demanding and requires 8Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, accurate karyotyping. 9Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Vall d’HebronAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 489 Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain, 10Heredi- ATM-speciﬁc criteria have allowed us to improve and tary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, standardize the classiﬁcation of the 50 pilot variants. We’ll Barcelona, Spain, 11Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, next submit our classiﬁcations to international databases United Kingdom, 12Fundación Pública Galega Medicina and extend our database to other Spanish participants and Xenómica-SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, hereditary cancer genes. Grant support: Carlos III National 13Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Health Institute - FEDER funds [PI19/00553; PI16/00563; Compostela(IDIS),SantiagodeCompostela,Spain,14Area PI16/01898; SAF2015-68016-R and CIBERONC]; the of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, University Hospital of Government of Catalonia [PERIS_MedPerCan and URD- Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 15CIBER-ONC, Instituto Cat projects, 2017SGR1282 and 2017SGR496]. de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 16Molecular Oncology L.Feliubadaló:None.M.SantamariñaPeña:None.L. Laboratory, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, IdISSC (Instituto Porras: None. A. Moles-Fernández: None. A. Sánchez: de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San None. A. Blanco: None. O. Diez: None. S. Gutiérrez- Carlos), Madrid, Spain, 17Fundacion Publica Galega de Enríquez: None. M. de la Hoya: None. A. Lopez-Novo: Medicina Xenómica, Grupo de Medicina Xenomica- None. A. Osorio: None. M. Pineda: None. D. Rueda: Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Instituto de None.C.Ruiz-Ponte:None.A.Vega:None.I.J.Molina: Investigacion Santiago de Compostela (
E035 ), Santiago de None. X. de la Cruz: None. C. Lázaro: None. Compostela, Spain, 18Human Genetics Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 
P12 .009.B 19Digestive Cancer Research Group, 12 de Octubre Establishing a scalable automation approach with the Research Institute, Madrid, Spain, 20Molecular Biology epMotion and Ampliseq for Illumina Laboratory, 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain,21FundacionPublicaGalegadeMedicinaXenomica, M. Hahn1, V. Montel2, N. Mouttham2, E. Gancarek3, S. GrupodeMedicinaXenomica-UniversidadedeSantiagode Hamels3, U. Wilkening1, J. Tsai2 Compostela, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria de San- tiago de Compostela (
E035 ), Santiago de Compostela, 1Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany, 2Illumina Inc, San Spain, 22Institute of Biopathology and Regenerative Med- Diego, CA, United States, 3Eppendorf Application Tech- icine, University of Granada, Granada, Spain, 23Institució nologies SA, Namur, Belgium Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barce- lona, Spain Due to the growing number of relevant genes and variants, next generation sequencing (NGS) has become a standard The use of NGS gene panels for clinical testing has technique in the ﬁeld of cancer research and molecular increased the diagnostic yield, but also the frequency of pathology. AmpliSeqTM panels for Illumina® have been variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS) per patient. With introduced to study the growing number of interesting var- the aim of improving and standardizing variant classiﬁca- iants in an increasing number of relevant genes. In theory, tion, we’ll create a national registry of genetic variants in librarypreparationwithsuchpanelspromisetheabilityquery cancer predisposing-genes. To that end, seven Spanish manyinteresting lociin DNAor RNAisolatedfrom a broad molecularlaboratorygroupscurrentlyusingNGSpanelsfor range of specimen, including blood, cell culture, and hereditary cancer diagnostics created a variant database. formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded (FFPE) tissue at low Our current database gathers all variants with less than 1% efforts.However,especiallyworkingwiththelattermaterials allele frequency in all GnomAD outbred populations, can represent practical challenges that require robust and starting with the ATM gene, study because of its moderate established workﬂows for analytical studies. Here we sought increase in breast cancer risk and its remarkable number of to establish a workﬂow for this purpose using automated VUSes. The methodology consisted of: 1) selection and liquid handling for library preparation on the epMotion sys- curation of 50 representative variants from our cohort; 2) temthatcanaccommodatebothRNAandDNAsamples.We evaluation of each by three members; and 3) discussion of show exemplary NGS sequencing data achieved with the evidences for classiﬁcation in monthly teleconferences. As AmpliSeq for Illumina Focus panel assembled from indivi- ATM-speciﬁc guidelines have not been published, we have dual DNA and RNA reference sample sets with known previously carried out our own ACMG/AMP criterion mutations and quality generated in a single automated setup. adjustment. So far, 842 variants belonging to 730 tested We found high run-to-run reproducibility and repeatability patientswithdifferenthereditarycancerconditions.Among (R²>0.98) with 100% success rate for library preparation the 265 unique variants, 97 appeared more than once, and (DNA n = ; RNA n = preparations). Call rates of known 35haddifferencesinclassiﬁcationamonggroups.Ournew variants(R²>0.99)andfusiontranscriptswereconsistentover several independent experimental replicates. Furthermore490 J.delPicchia variant calling and index representation were comparable to kidney and lung cancer. At the moment further testing of manual preparations performed on the same samples. The affected family members is conducted. ﬂexibility and scalability of this approach may aid in the B.W.vanPaassen:None.N.M.vanPoppelen:None.R. routine study of different samples and throughputs, while Cornelissen: None. J. von der Thüsen: None. A. de reducing the hands-on time. Klein: None. E. Kilic: None. M.Hahn:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Eppendorf AG. V. Montel: A. Employment (full or part- 
P12 .012.B time);Signiﬁcant;IlluminaInc.N.Mouttham:A.Employ- Clinically important variants in Slovene bilateral breast ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina Inc. E. cancer patients tested between 2014 and 2019 Gancarek: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Eppendorf Application Technologies SA. S. Hamels: A. G. Klancar1, P. Skrel1, V. Setrajcic Dragos1, V. Stegel1, A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Eppendorf Blatnik2,K.Strojnik2,M.Banjac2,M.Krajc2,S.Novaković1 Application Technologies SA. U. Wilkening: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Eppendorf AG. J. 1InstituteofOncology,DivisionofDiagnostics,Department Tsai: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; of Molecular Diagnostics, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia, Illumina Inc. 2Cancer Genetics Clinic, Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 
P12 .010.C Family with mesothelioma and variant of unknown Introduction:Bilateralbreastcanceraccountsfor2-11%of signiﬁcance in the BA
P1  gene all breast cancer cases. By the literature, 5-30% of patients withbilateralbreastcancercarryapathogenicvariantinthe B.W.vanPaassen,N.M.vanPoppelen,R.Cornelissen,J. high-penetrant BRCA genes. Our aim was to determine the von der Thüsen, A. de Klein, E. Kilic spectrum of pathogenic variants in HBOC genes among Slovene bilateral breast cancer patients. Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands Materials and Methods: Among 2483 HBOC patients tested between years 2014 and 2019, 205 patients with TheBA
P1 tumorpredispositionsyndrome(BA
P1 -TPDS)is bilateral breast cancer were included in the study. gDNA a hereditary tumor syndrome caused by germline patho- was extracted from peripheral blood and NGS sequencing genicvariantsinBA
P1 .Itisassociatedwithincreasedrisks was performed using Nextera_DNA_Library_Preparation_- for uveal melanoma, mesothelioma, cutaneous melanoma, Kit in combination with Illumina’s TruSight_Cancer_Panel renalcellcarcinoma,andcutaneousBA
P1 -inactivatednevi. or TruSight_Hereditary_Panel. All variants were classiﬁed A50yearoldfemalepatientpresentedwithpneumothorax, according to ACMG_guidelines. caused by bilateral mesothelioma, with no history of Results:Among205patientswithbilateralbreastcancer, asbestosexposure.Molecularanalysisofthetumorshowed 124 (60.5%) had positive HBOC family history and 81 a pathogenic variant and a variant of unknown signiﬁcance (39.5%)hadnoHBOCfamilyhistory.Apathogenicvariant (the c.535C>T, p.(Arg179Trp) variant) in the right tumor. in one of HBOC genes listed in the NCCN guidelines was The left tumor showed the same variant of unknown sig- detected in 58 patients, which represents 28.3% of all niﬁcance(VUS)asfoundintheothertumor,butnosecond patients.Mostofthem(67.2%)werepatientswithpositive mutation. Both tumors showed no staining for BA
P1  by HBOCfamilyhistory.Majorityofpatientswithpathogenic immunohistochemistry. DNA analysis of a blood sample variant harbored variant in BRCA genes: 50.0% in BRCA1 conﬁrmed that the VUS is present in the germline. RNA and 27.6% in BRCA2. Other pathogenic variants were analysis showed expression of both the wild type and the discovered also in other genes CHEK2 (6.9%), PALB2 variant allele in the same amount. Clinical work up of the (5.2%), T
P53  (3.4%), CDKN2A (3.4%), PTEN (1.7%) and patient showed no signs of uveal melanoma. Testing of PM
S2  (1.7%). healthy parents showed the VUS is present in the 80 year Conclusions: Majority of bilateral breast cancer patients oldmotheroftheproband.Inthemeantimethemotheralso with positive family history had pathogenic variant in developed mesothelioma, with no history of asbestos HBOC genes: 68.9% of cases in BRCA genes and 61.5% exposure. Molecular analysis of the tumor of the mother cases in other genes. The frequency of BRCA pathogenic showed the VUS that is present in germline and another variants in Slovene patients with bilateral breast cancer is somatic VUS in the other BA
P1  allele. The tumor was similar to frequencies reported in the literature. positive for staining of theBA
P1  protein. Familyhistoryis G.Klancar:None.P.Skrel:None.V.SetrajcicDragos: positive for basal cell carcinoma, leiomyosarcoma of the None. V. Stegel: None. A. Blatnik: None. K. Strojnik:Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 491 None. M. Banjac: None. M. Krajc: None. S. analysed genes in TGCT diagnostics. Promoting the Novaković: None. inclusion of further molecular analyses, rather than just at the protein level, enhances the development of TGCT 
P12 .013.C diagnostics as has recently been done for other types of Comprehensive analysis of prominent molecular bio- tumours. markers for TGCT diagnostics J. Krasic: None. D. Raos: None. A. Katusic Bojanac: None.S.Masic:None.M.Ulamec:None.F.Bulic-Jakus: J. Krasic1,2,3, D. Raos1,2,3, A. Katusic Bojanac1,2, S. None. D. Jezek: None. N. Sincic: None. Masic2,4, M. Ulamec2,3,4, F. Bulic-Jakus1,2, D. Jezek2,5, N. Sincic1,2,3 
P12 .014.A BIR
C5 genepolymorphismsandgeneexpressionofeight 1Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine different isoforms in breast cancer University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Centre of Excel- lence for Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine, School V. Musani1, M. Vincetić1, I. Sušac2, M. Sabol1, D. Trnski1, of Medicine University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Epi- P. Ozretić1 Mark, Group for Research on Epigenetic Biomarkers, Zagreb, Croatia, 4University Clinical Hospital Center 1Rudjer BoškovicInstitute,10000 Zagreb, Croatia, 2Eljuga Sestre milosrdnice, Ljudevit Jurak Clinical Department of Polyclinic, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia Pathology and Cytology, Zagreb, Croatia, 5Department of Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine University Introduction: Survivin (encoded by BIR
C5  - baculoviral of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia IAPrepeatcontaining5)geneisthesmallestmemberodthe family of inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) proteins. Breast Introduction: Testicular germ cell tumours (TGCTs) are cancer (BC) isoneof themost common cancers and isone classiﬁed into seminoma(SE)andnon-seminoma (NSE) of of the leading causes of cancer related deaths in women in various types. They originate from germ cell neoplasia the world. insitu(GCNIS)causedbygeneticandepigeneticincidents. Materials and Methods: The whole coding region, With currently used TGCT biomarkers lacking speciﬁcity including alternate exons S-2α, S-2B and S-3B, as well as and sensitivity, stronger discriminatory biomarkers for 5’ and 3’UTR regions of BIR
C5  gene was genotyped in various forms of TGCTs are needed. Our goal was to eighteen BC patients. Eight different BIR
C5  gene isoforms evaluate the diagnostic potential of POU5F1, NANOG, (S-WT, S-2α, S-2B, S-3α, S-3B, S-Δex3, S-3γM and S- KIT, SAL
L4 , HOXA9 and MGMT assessed at the protein 3γV) were analyzed at the mRNA expression level in BC level (current clinical use) alongside mRNA expression, samples and matching healthy tissues. TBP gene was used DNA alteration and DNA methylation using prominent as housekeeping control. databases. Results: Eleven different polymorphisms were found in Materials and Methods: For immunohistochemical thebreast cancer samples. All eight isoforms weredetected detection, 108 FFPE TGCTs and 48 tumour-free testes in BC samples, but isoforms S-3γM and S-3γV were not were analysed semi-quantitatively. TGCT patient’s data expressedinanyofthehealthymatchingtissues.S-WTand were retrieved from TCGA while healthy adult testis data S-2α isoforms had the highest expression, followed by S- fromGTExdatasets,andanalysedusingXENA,UALCAN Δex3, S-3B, S-2B, S-3α, and S-3γM and S-3γV had the and cBioPortal platforms. lowest. All isoforms, except for S-2B, S-3γM and S-3γV, Results: Our results suggest that TGCT could be had signiﬁcantly higher expression in cancer tissue in discriminated from healthy tissue by difference in mRNA comparison to healthy tissue. Expression of three isoforms, levels (all investigated genes), while SE from NSE by S-3α,S-3γMandS-3γVshowedsigniﬁcantassociationwith increased mRNA level (KIT) and DNA hypomethylation polymorphisms c.-644T>C, c.9386T>C, c.9809T>C and (MGMT and HOXA9). Identiﬁcation of individual NSE c.10611C>A. types and GCNIS was possible only by analysing gene Conclusions:Atleasteightdifferent BIR
C5 isoforms are expression at the protein level (HOXA9, KIT, SAL
L4  and expressedinbreastcancer.Theisoformsshowedsigniﬁcant POU5F1), since databases present NSE as a single entity positive association in BC tissues, and less so in healthy and no data on GCNIS. tissue. The isoforms showed signiﬁcant association with Conclusions: There is discriminatory value in gene different polymorphisms. expression at the mRNA level and DNA methylation of492 J.delPicchia V. Musani: None. M. Vincetić: None. I. Sušac: None. S. Schipor, D. Manda, C. Poalelungi, I. Nedelcu, A. M. Sabol: None. D. Trnski: None. P. Ozretić: None. Muresan 
P12 .016.C "C. I. Parhon" National Institute of Endocrinology, Rare congenital disease: Bloom syndrome. Complex Bucharest, Romania cytogenetic and molecular genetic analysis Introduction:BRAFV600Eisthemostprevalentmutation R. Michalovská1, V. Krulišová1, T. Píš1, L. Hrušková1, H. in patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). The Paszeková1, M. Gančarčíková2, Z. Vlčková1 successful targeted therapies against this mutation explain the importance of the analysis of concomitant molecular 1GHC Genetics, Praha, Czech Republic, 2LLG, Pardubice, transformations in this pathology. Czech Republic Materialsandmethods:Inordertoevaluatethedifferential gene expression proﬁle between BRAF-positive and BRAF- Introduction: Bloom syndrome (BS) is a very rare auto- negative samples in PTC patients we used DNA Agilent somal recessive disease characterized by prenatal and microarray. There were included 24 patients (8 classical PTC, postnatal growth retardation, photosensitive skin changes, 14follicularvariantofPTC,2insularand/orsclerosingvariant immune deﬁciency, insulin resistance, and signiﬁcantly of PTC), with 2 samples per patient (tumor and normal increasedriskofcancerinveryyoungage.BSiscausedby samples) obtained shortly after surgery. Patients gave their pathogenicvariantsintheBLMgene.Absenceoffunctional informedconsentforstudybeforesurgery.Microarrayanalysis BLM protein causes chromosome instability, excessive wasperformedfollowingAgilentOne-ColorMicroarray-Based homologousrecombination,andincreasednumbersofsister GeneExpressionprotocol,ver6.6,usingSurePrintG3Human chromatids exchanges. Gene Expression arrays 8x60Kv2. BRAF status was deter- MaterialsandMethods:Weperformedmassiveparallel mined by Sanger sequencing. sequencing on NextSeq (Illumina) using Sequence Capture Results: The list of differential expressed genes (DEGs) (ROCHE) panel of 55 genes. Examination of spontaneous between BRAF(+) and BRAF(-) samples was obtained by chromosome aberrations (ZCA) and classical conventional statistical analysis using GeneSpring GX-PA 14.5 software. cytogenetic analysis (G band) were used as standard Moderated T-Test with p < 0.05 identiﬁed 541 DEGs. cytogenetic procedures. Applying a fold-change >2 the list restricted to 536 DEGs Results: The 12 year old boy born from second (366up-regulated,170down-regulated).Asubsequentanalysis physiological pregnancy (sp2760 g, PD 46 cm) was (one-wayANOVA, p-value with Benjamini-Hochberg correc- genetically examined for a number of non-speciﬁc clinical tion)gavea ﬁnallistof125DEGs,91genesupregulated and problemsandduetotheoccurrenceofcancerinthefamily, 34 down-regulated between cPTC and the other types of respectively. We detected variants in BLM gene in the tumors. The Kegg pathway analysis suggested “pathways in compound heterozygous state c.1642C>T (p.Gln548Ter, cancer”asthemostsigniﬁcantsignalpathway,followedbyN- rs200389141,inheritedmaternally,class5)andc.2015A>G glycan biosynthesis and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. (p.Gln672Arg, rs747281324, inherited paternally, class 4), Conclusions:Differentialgeneexpression analysiscould which conﬁrmed clinical diagnosis of Bloom syndrome. beavaluablesourceofinformationregardingthemolecular SubsequentcytogeneticanalysisofSCEand ZCA supports changes and pathways involved in BRAF-related papillary the outcome of molecular genetic testing and presents thyroid carcinomas (CNCS-UEFISCDI grant PCCA-2011- complex examination in the rare chromosome instability 3.2-1337) syndrome of the genome S. Schipor: None. D. Manda: None. C. Poalelungi: Conclusions: Given the anamnestic data, a very rare None. I. Nedelcu: None. A. Muresan: None. diseasecalledBloomsyndromewaspredictedasapossible genetic background of the patient’s phenotype. 
P12 .018.B R. Michalovská: None. V. Krulišová: None. T. Píš: Identiﬁcation of BRCA1/2 large deletions in DNA None. L. Hrušková: None. H. Paszeková: None. M. isolated from FFPE tumor tissues and blood. Gančarčíková: None. Z. Vlčková: None. A.Podgorska1,A.Stachurska1,E.Kwiatkowska1,A.Janiec- 
P12 .017.A Jankowska1, A. Grzelak1, D. Nowakowska2, M. Prochorec- Differential expressed genes in BRAF-positive versus Sobieszek1, A. Tysarowski1 BRAF-negative papillary thyroid carcinomas 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Diagnostics, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute ofAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 493 Oncology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Genetic Outpatient Clinic, coding regions of the highly penetrant genes BRCA1 and Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of BRCA2 (BRCA1/2). Oncology, Warsaw, Poland Materials and Methods: We selected 96 high-risk HBOC patients tested negative for (likely) pathogenic Introduction: Pathogenic germline mutations in BRCA1 and variants in 94 cancer-associated genes using the TruSight BRCA2canbeidentiﬁedinmorethan10%ofhereditarybreast Cancer panel and high resolution CGH-arrays. Their andovariancancers.Withtheintroductionoftargetedtherapy genomic BRCA1/2 loci including introns and ﬂanking for BRCA-deﬁcient recurrrent ovarian cancer and breast can- intergenic regions, comprising ̴140 kb each, were ﬁrst cer, testing for somatic/germline mutations in BRCA1/2 genes enrichedusingaSureSelectcustompanelandsubsequently in tumor tissue became essential for treatment decisions. sequenced on Illumina NextSeq 500. IdentiﬁcationofpathogenicBRCA1/2variants,especiallylarge Results:Of629and663detectedvariantsinBRCA1and rearrangementsinDNAisolatedformFFPE,ischallengingdue BRCA2, respectively, 1̴ 00 variants per gene had a MAF to the high fragmentation grade of formalin-treated DNA and ≤0.1%inthegeneralpopulation(gnomAD)and<5%inour chemicalmodiﬁcationsthatlowertheDNAquality.Therefore, cohort.Usinginsilicoanalyses,suchasCADD,ncER,and the aim of the study was to verify the usefulness of NGS Alamut,remainingvariantswerefurtherprioritized.Among analysis of BRCA1/2 large rearrangements detection in DNA others, one BRCA1 variant (c.5333-469T>A, intron 21 of isolated from blood and FFPE samples. 23)ispredictedtocreateanovelacceptorsplicesite,which Materials and Methods: 920 blood samples from appears stronger than the canonical site. The variant might patients with ovarian/breast cancer and 233 FFPE tissue lead to intron retention, which is currently tested on samples from ovarian cancer patients were enrolled. FFPE transcription level to prove the predicted splicing effect. tumor cell content was determined by a pathologist and Conclusions: As the ﬁeld of genomic sequencing and tumor tissue was micro-dissected prior to DNA isolation. variantinterpretationrapidlyprogresses,regulatoryvariants The NGS technology was used to detect BRCA1/2 large should be included in the search for cancer predisposing rearrangements in all the samples. All detected BRCA1/2- variants. The identiﬁcation and characterization of genetic deletions were conﬁrmed by MLPA method. predispositions outside the coding genome cannot only Results: In total we detected 18 large deletions: 12 in 920 provide HBOC patients with superior treatment and blood-derived DNA and 6 in 233 FFPE isolated DNA. In 15 prevention plans, but may also offer new insights into casesdeletionsweredetectedinBRCA1geneand3inBRCA2. transcriptional regulation of BRCA1/2. Conclusions:Thedetectionrateoflargerearrangementswas J. Bublitz: None. J.L. van Luttikhuizen: None. S. similarinbothFFPEsamplesandbloodderivedDNAreaching Schubert:None.W.Hofmann:None.G.Schmidt:None. 1%and3%,respectively.TheresultsshowthatBRCA1/2large B. Schlegelberger: None. D. Steinemann: None. rearrangements can be reliably detected in both FFPE and blood derived DNA by next-generation sequencing (NGS). 
P12 .020.A A. Podgorska: None. A. Stachurska: None. E. Kwiat- Is HRT safe for BRCA mutation carriers after risk kowska:None.A.Janiec-Jankowska:None.A.Grzelak: reduction salpingo-oophorectomy? A 7.5 year cohort None. D. Nowakowska: None. M. Prochorec-Sobieszek: study None. A. Tysarowski: None. S. Gabizon-Peretz1, S. Paluch-Shimon1,2, S. Armon1,3, E. 
P12 .019.C Levy-Lahad1,4, R. Michaelson-Cohen1,3,4 Identiﬁcation and characterization of regulatory var- iantsinBRCA1/2causinghereditarybreastandovarian 1Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Divi- cancer sion of Oncology, Shaare Zedek Medical Centre, Jerusa- lem, Israel, 3Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, J.Bublitz,J.L.vanLuttikhuizen,S.Schubert,W.Hofmann, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Medical G. Schmidt, B. Schlegelberger, D. Steinemann Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusa- lem, Israel Department of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany Introduction: Hormonal replacement treatment (HRT) Introduction: The genetic predisposition causing heredi- after Risk-Reducing-Salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) in tary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) remains in the BRCA1/2 mutation carriers is controversial. In the general majorityofpatientsunknown.Wehypothesizethatasubset population, HRT slightly raises breast cancer (BC) risk ofHBOCiscausedbyregulatoryvariantslocatedoutsideof (HR=1.34). However, it is unclear whether this applies to mutationcarriers.Ourhypothesiswasthatshort-termuseof494 J.delPicchia HRT from RRSO till age 50 would not elevate BC risk (20%) patients from different Christian Arab families. This signiﬁcantly more than baseline risk of healthy carriers. duplicated is expected to result in an absent or disrupted Methods:Aretrospectivecohortof306healthyBRCA1/ protein product. A similar duplication has been reported in 2 mutation carriers who had undergone RRSO was theliteratureintwoindividualsaffectedwithBC.TheExon followed-up for a mean duration of 7.26 years. We 5-11 BRCA2 Duplication is a recurrent rearrangement, compared BC incidence over time in carriers who received possibly founder in the Christian Arab population in HRT vs. those who didn’t. Northern Israel. It is important to include CNV’s analysis Results: During follow-up, BC incidence was 22/150 in all Christian Arab patients suspected for HBOC. (14.7%) in HRT group vs. 16/156 women (10.2%) in non- Farther research is needed to evaluate the carrier HRT group (OR= 1.371, NS), when controlled for age, the frequency of this rearrangement in the Christian Arab association appeared stronger (OR=1.996, NS). However, population and the degree of its penetrance. These results survival analysis didn’t demonstrate a signiﬁcant difference in should help guide the BRCA1/2 genes testing strategy in BCincidence(HR=1.777,NS),possiblyduetoshorterfollow- this population. upinHRTgroup(6.2vs.8.3years,p<0.001).Medianageat N. Ekhilevitch: None. BCdiagnosisappearedearlier(43.5vs.49years,respectively), and latency period to BC diagnosis seemed shorter in HRT 
P12 .022.C group vs. non-HRT group (invasive BC 1.58 vs. 3.45 years, Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer: two cases of respectively,DCI
S1 .92vs.6.52years,respectively),however, double heterozigosity for pathogenic variants in the neither of these differences was signiﬁcant. BRCA1 or BRCA2 and ATM genes Conclusions: In our BRCA carrier cohort, followed for ~7.5 years post-RRSO, there is no evidence that HRT P. Theisen1, P. Rodrigues1, C. Silva2,3, D. Carpinteiro2, L. elevates breast cancer incidence, or signiﬁcantly shortens Ribeiro4, H. Carreiro5, H. Gervásio6, J. Leal da Silva7, L. the latency period between RRSO and cancer diagnosis. Vieira2,3, J. Gonçalves3 However, caution in HRT administration is warranted until larger, prospective studies show similar results. 1Molecular Genetics Unit, Human Genetics Department, S. Gabizon-Peretz: None. S. Paluch-Shimon: None. S. National Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Armon: None. E. Levy-Lahad: None. R. Michaelson- Portugal, 2Technology and Innovation Unit, Human Cohen: None. Genetics Department, National Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Centre for Toxicoge- 
P12 .021.B nomics and Human Health (ToxOmics) Nova Medical Recurrent BRCA2 Pathogenic Exon 5-11 Duplication in School, Faculty of Medical Sciences, New University of the Christian Arab Population in Northern Israel Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Hematology-Oncology Service, CUF Infante Santo Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal, Lisbon, N. Ekhilevitch Portugal, 5Oncological Risk Consultation, CUF Infante Santo Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal, Lisbon, Portugal, rambam, HAIFA, Israel 6Hematology-Oncology Service, CUF Viseu Hospital, Viseu, Portugal, 7Medical Oncology Service, Luz Arrábida Most of the genetic research of BRCA1/2 genes germline Hospital, Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal mutations in Israel have been focused on the Jewish Israeli Population. The Christian Arab population in Israel Introduction: Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer accounts for about 2% of the population. Unlike in the (HBOC) is estimated to represent 5-10% of all breast and JewishpopulationfounderBRCA1/2mutationshavenotyet ovarian cancer cases. Pathogenic germline variants in been reported in the Christian Arab population. BRCA1andBRCA2account for 25%offamilialcases. The Here we describe a recurrent BRCA2 pathogenic rearran- identiﬁcation of genetic defects in HBOC patients allows gement in four patients from different families with a detection of carriers that can beneﬁt from cancer risk personal and/ or familial history of Hereditary Breast and management protocols, and predictive genetic testing to at- Ovarian Cancer (HBOC). During the years 2015-2019, 20 risk family members, after appropriate genetic counseling. ChristianArabpatientswithapersonalorfamilialhistoryof Two female patients with a personal and family history of breast (BC) and/ or ovarian (OC) cancer were referred to cancer were studied by next-generation sequencing (NGS). BRCA1/2 testing (Sequencing and Copy Number Variants Methods: NGS using TruSight Cancer Panel (Illumina) (CNV’s) analysis). A recurrent gross duplication of the followed by bioinformatic analysis of 18 genes associated genomicregionencompassingexons5-10andthe5’portion with HBOC was performed. Pathogenic variants were of exon 11 of the BRCA2 gene was found in 4 out of 20 conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 495 Results: A rare event of double heterozigosity for areportedfamilyhistoryofcancerbutarenotdiagnosedwith pathogenic variants was identiﬁed in both patients: patient cancer and 410 (29.4%) have no reported history (or family A was heterozygous for BRCA1:c.2037delinsCC, p. history) of cancer. For the 529 individuals with a cancer (Lys679Asn*4) and ATM:c.3802delG, p.(Val1268*) and diagnosiswefurtherevaluatedthecontributionthattheyhave patient B carried both BRCA2:c.6001dupT, p.(Ser2001- to 100 distinct ICD10 primary cancer phenotypes and iden- Phefs*2) and ATM:3435_3436delTGinsA, p. tiﬁedthatovarian(5.3%ofreported),breast(2%ofreported), (Asp1145Glufs*11). After genetic counseling, three rela- prostate (1% of reported), pancreas (1.5% of reported) and tives of patient A were analyzed: while one of her two lung(1.1% of reported) cancers are amongstthecancersthat healthy sons was heterozygous for the ATM variant, the are signiﬁcantly enriched for these BRCA1/2 putatively other was a double heterozygote for BRCA1: pathogenic variants. This study provides an unbiased sum- c.2037delinsCC and ATM:c.3802delG; a female cousin, mary of germline BRCA1/2 contribution to various primary recently diagnosed with breast cancer, was a carrier of cancers and highlights the value of careful variant ATM:c.3802delG only. interpretation. Conclusions:Theidentiﬁcationofthesetworarecasesof Z. Ghazoui: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- double heterozigosity for pathogenic variants in BRCA1/ niﬁcant; AstraZeneca. BRCA2andATMgenes,highlightstheimportanceofusing NGS-genepaneltestinginHBOC.Ifmolecularanalysishad 
P12 .024.B been restricted to BRCA genes only, the pathogenic ATM Mutational spectrum of tumor susceptibility genes in variantswouldhavebeenmissedinbothfamilies,depriving Bulgarian BRCA1/2 negative patients with ovarian them of appropriate genetic counseling and cancer risk cancer management. P. Theisen: None. P. Rodrigues: None.C.Silva:None. M. Atanasoska1,2, R. Vazharova1,3, L. Balabanski1, S. D. Carpinteiro: None. L. Ribeiro: None. H. Carreiro: Ivanov1, S. Yaneva-Staykova1, D. Toncheva1,4 None. H. Gervásio: None. J. Leal da Silva: None. L. Vieira: None. J. Gonçalves: None. 1Gynecology and assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov MD”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Soﬁa University St. Kliment 
P12 .023.A Ohridski, Faculty of Biology, Department of Genetics, The landscape of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants from Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Soﬁa University St. Kliment Ohridski, 300,000 individuals in the UK Biobank population Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biology, Medical sampling genetics and Microbiology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Z. Ghazoui Bulgaria AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Introduction: There are more than 840 ovarian cancer cases in Bulgaria and more than 240 000 worldwide, every Prior prevalence estimates of BRCA1 and BRCA2 protein- year.OCrepresents3.7%ofallfemalecancersanditisthe truncating variants (PTVs) have been generally limited to maincauseforcancerdeathswithgynecologicmalignancy. studiesthathaveascertainedforcancerpatientsorindividuals Fifteentothirtyﬁvepercentofthefamilialcasesarecarriers with a family history of cancer. The aim of this study is to ofpathogenicvariantsintumorsuppressorgenes.Thereare utilise one of the largest sequenced Biobank populations to more than 16 known genes associated with hereditary investigate the prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 PTVs and ovarian carcinogenesis. Here we present a retrospective ClinVar pathogenic/likely pathogenic classiﬁed missense reviewofraregeneticvariantsindifferenttumorsuppressor variants. We analysed whole-exome sequence data from genes in BRCA1/2 negative Bulgarian patients with diag- 300,000 UK Biobank participants (https://www.ukbiobank. nosed ovarian cancer. ac.uk/), which is a prospective cohort study linked to deep MaterialsandMethods:Ourcohortincludes91patients phenotypic data. Among the 300,000 exomes, we identiﬁed diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Their DNA samples were 1332 carriers of high conﬁdence rare PTVs in BRCA1/2 and investigated for the presence of pathogenic variants in 94 another set of 62 carriers of rare ClinVar pathogenic/likely cancer-predisposing genes. Sequence analysis was per- pathogenic classiﬁed missense variants in BRCA1/2. Of the formed on an Illumina platform. 1394 BRCA1/2 putatively pathogenic variant carriers, 529 Results: We identiﬁed germline pathogenic variants in (38.0%)havebeendiagnosedwithcancer,455(32.6%)have 24% (21/91) of the patients. The pathogenic variants in the496 J.delPicchia BRCA1/2 genes were detected in 17% (16/91) of the followed by Sanger sequencing, to evaluate the splicing patients. In 6.6% (5/75) of BRCA1/2 negative patients impact of the c.4675+3A>C BRCA1. pathogenicloss-of-functionvariantswereobservedinATM, Results: We were able to identify an aberrant transcript, CHEK2, FANCA, FANCL and BLM genes. as a result of the creation of a new splice site, located 5`- Conclusions: The risk of ovarian cancer increases upstream from the canonical site that is translated into a parallel with the modernization and the social economic truncated protein, p.Gln1556Glyfs*14. development. The precise and fast identiﬁcation of Conclusions:Basedontheseﬁndingsandtheabsenceof pathogenic variants in the ovarian cancer-predisposing thisvariantinthepopulation,wewereabletoreclassifythe genes is a key in the decision-making process for therapy c.4675+3A>C BRCA1 variant as pathogenic, thereby strategies. Our results gain a better understanding of the warrantingthegeneticstudyofatriskrelatives,andmaking genetic complexity of the disease and may result in a more carriers eligible for surveillance and, when clinically personalized approach for cancer risk management in a applicable, treatment with PARPi. preventivesettings,earlydiagnosis,prognosisandtreatment S. Sousa: None. M. Ferreira: None. S. Maia: None. F. of ovarian cancer. Ramos: None. M. Baixia: None. M.S. Quental: None. D. M. Atanasoska: None. R. Vazharova: None. L. Pinho: None. S. Castedo: None. Balabanski: None. S. Ivanov: None. S. Yaneva-Stay- kova: None. D. Toncheva: None. 
P12 .028.C Investigating of genetic variants, associated with breast 
P12 .026.A cancer in Russian women Relevance of RNA analysis for the classiﬁcation of BRCA1 intronic variants and clinical management of T. Lisitsa1, A. Danishevich1, M. Litvinova1, N. Bodunova1, family members E. Shagimardanova2, L. Shigapova2, O. Gusev2,3 S. Sousa1,2, M. Ferreira1,2, S. Maia3,4, F. Ramos3, M. 1Moscow Clinical Scientiﬁc Center n.a. Loginov, Moscow Baixia1,2, M. S. Quental1,2, D. Pinho1,2, S. Castedo1,2,5 Healthcare Department, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Fundamental Medicine and Biology, Kazan 1Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the (Volga Region) Federal University, Kazan, Russian Fed- UniversityofPorto(Ipatimup),Porto,Portugal,2Institutefor eration, 3Cluster for Science, Technology and Innovation ResearchandInnovationinHealth(i3S),UniversityofPorto, Hub, RIKEN, Wako, Japan Porto,Portugal,3MedicalGeneticsUnit,HospitalPediat́rico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitaŕ io de Coimbra, Coimbra, Introduction: Breast cancer is the most common cancer in Portugal,4UniversityClinicofGenetics,FacultyofMedicine, women.Genetictestingisusedtoidentifyhereditary breast University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Faculty of cancer.Hereditary breastcancerisapolygenicdisease,and Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal next-generationsequencingallowsthemostcomprehensive genetic examination of patients. Introduction: Carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic Materials and Methods: We performed the analysis of variantshaveahighlifetimeriskofdevelopingbreastand/or the genomic DNA of 62 patients with a diagnosis of breast ovarian cancer. The most common pathogenic variants in cancer, who were treated in Moscow Clinical Scientiﬁc BRCA1 gene are nonsense and frameshift variants, however Center n.a. Loginov. The average age at diagnosis were therearewelldocumentedpathogenicmissenseandsplicesite 43±6.5years.Threepatientswerediagnosedwithbilateral variants.Classiﬁcationofintronicvariantscanbechallenging breast cancer, and another 4 had a combination of breast and frequently demands further molecular studies. We iden- cancer and other malignancy. A family history of 31 tiﬁed a breast cancer (BC) family with six family members patients was burdened with malignant tumors. All patients affected with BC. In the proband c.4675+3A>C BRCA1 had negative test results for 8 frequent mutations in the variantwasidentiﬁed,whichwaslaterfoundtobepresentin BRCA1/2 genes. DNA was isolated from leukocytes of two more affected relatives (of the remaining patients, two peripheral blood. For sample preparation, enrichment by were deceased and one awaits genetic counselling). Due to hybridization with NimbleGen probes (Roche) was used. lackoffurtherevidence,thisvariantwasclassiﬁedasvariant Results: We identiﬁed 140 variants in 49 genes in 48 ofunknownsigniﬁcance,accordingtotheACMGguidelines. patients with a minor allele frequency <1%. 57 variants Toclarifytheclinicalsigniﬁcanceofthisvariant,wedecided were annotated as variants with uncertain clinical signiﬁ- to evaluate its splicing impact. cance. In 12 patients, pathogenic and likely pathogenic Material and Methods: We performed RT-PCR in variants were found in the genes BRCA1, BRCA2, MSH6, cDNA synthetized from a RNA sample of the proband, PALB2, T
P53 , CTNNA1, FANCE.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 497 Conclusions: It is necessary to conduct prospective Conclusions: In our study of different components of monitoring of patients, as well as segregation analysis in TRAILapoptoticpathway,relativemRNAlevelscorrelated families, to estimate clinical signiﬁcance of the identiﬁed with clinicopathological characteristics and multiple simul- genetic variants. Investigation the effect of cancer- taneous expression patterns emerged. Taking into consid- associated genes variants can help to understand the eration these ﬁndings, it is of signiﬁcant importance to processes of carcinogenesis and individualize the treatment stratifybreastcancerpatientsusingpredictivebiomarkersin and further observation and provide genetic counseling for order to maximize the efﬁcacy of TRAIL targeting patients and their relatives. therapies. T. Lisitsa: None. A.Danishevich: None. M.Litvinova: E. Roupou: None. M. Michelli: None. I. Chatzian- None. N. Bodunova: None. E. Shagimardanova: None. dreou: None. N. Michalopoulos: None. P. Karathanasis: L. Shigapova: None. O. Gusev: None. None. A. Lazaris: None. A. Saetta: None. 
P12 .030.B 
P12 .031.C Study of relative mRNA expression of TRAIL-induced Elucidating the role of microRNAs in cholesterol apoptotic pathway components in breast carcinogenesis mediated drug resistance in breast cancer E. Roupou1, M. Michelli1, I. Chatziandreou1, N. B. A. Monchusi, G. Palma, M. Kaur Michalopoulos2, P. Karathanasis3, A. Lazaris1, A. Saetta1 University of the Witwatersrand, Braamfontein, Johannes- 11st Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, burg, South Africa National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece,2DepartmentofSurgeryAttikonHospital,Schoolof Introduction: Breast cancer is the most commonly diag- Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, nosed and leading cause of cancer-related deaths amongst Athens, Greece, 31st Department of Propaedeutic Surgery women globally. TAM resistance is the major challenge Hippokrateion Hospital, School of Medicine, National and faced during endocrine therapy in ER+ breast cancer. Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece Several TAM resistance mechanisms have been proposed. Recently lipid reprogramming was reported to be involved Introduction:ExploitationofTRAILapoptoticpathwayas inTAMresistance.IthasemergedthatcertainmiRNAsare a therapeutic target led in promising results in vivo, and involved in cholesterol metabolism and cancer drug resis- although the efﬁcacy of such monotherapies/combination tance pathways. We hypothesise that miRNAs controlling therapies in clinical trials did not meet the expectations, cholesterol metabolism and homeostasis are potential tar- TRAIL pathway still remains a promising target due to its gets to be investigated in cholesterol-mediated drug resis- high selectivity towards cancer cells. TRAIL pathway tance in breast cancer. components’ expression patterns could possibly serve as Materials and methods: To investigate the role of future predictive biomarkers for patient assortment regard- miRNAs in cholesterol-mediated drug resistance, bioinfor- ing TRAIL targeting therapies. matic tools and in vitro cell based assays were utilised. Materials and Methods: Relative mRNA expression of Estrogen positive (ER+) breast cancer was of interest as TRAIL pathway genes (TRAIL, DR4, DR5, DcR1, DcR2, drug resistance is a major problem in patients with ER+ cFLIP, BC
L2 ) was evaluated in 90 breast cancer tissues, breast cancer. using the RT-PCR/ΔΔCt method. The SPSSv22 package Results: We ﬁnd that inhibition of hsa-miR-128-3p with was used for statistical analysis. AP + TAM treatment induced cell death and decreased Results: The aforementioned genes presented elevated cholesterollevelsinMCF7cells.Throughfocusedpathway mRNA levels ranging from 8% to 17% of the cases and studyusingtheRT2proﬁlermicroarray, weﬁndthatgenes reduced mRNA levels between 31%-65% of the cases. that were differentially expressed promoted cholesterol Linear correlations were observed, indicating the simulta- efﬂux and drug metabolism while genes that mediate drug neous gene expression, with the strongest found between resistance were reduced. The work also highlights another cFLIP/DR4 (R=0,709, p < 0,001) and cFLIP/DR5 potential mechanism of AP in ER+ breast cancer, where it (R=0,793, p < 0,001). Several signiﬁcant statistical acts as a negative regulator of hsa-miR-128. correlations with clinicopathological characteristics Conclusions: The ﬁndings demonstrate that targeting emerged: a) T-category with TRAIL, DcR1, cFLIP mRNA these miRNAs presents an opportunity for developing new expression, b) N metastasisstatuswithDR4, DcR1, cFLIP, strategies to combat anticancer drug resistance. c)p-StagecategorywithcFLIP,receptors’genes,andd)p- Acknowledgements: This research has been funded by Prognostic stage with cFLIP, BC
L2 , receptors’ genes. grant #113442 from the NRF. BM has been funded by498 J.delPicchia Innovation Postdoctoral Scholarship #11319414 from ﬁndings with an alternative method. the NRF. N.B. Agaoglu: None.G.Alkurt:None.E.Celik:None. B.A. Monchusi: None. G. Palma: None. M. I.M. Akcay: None. B. Unal: None. J. Yildiz: None. G. Kaur: None. Dinler-Doganay: None. L. Doganay: None. 
P12 .034.C 
P12 .035.A ComparativeanalysisofMLPAand“CNVbyNGS”for RG
S7  is recurrently mutated in melanoma and pro- detecting copy number variations in hereditary cancer motes migration and invasion of human cancer cells patients n.qutob1,I.Masuho2,r.emmanuel3,M.Alon3,i.cohen1,A. N.B.Agaoglu1,2,G.Alkurt2,3,E.Celik2,3,I.M.Akcay2,3,B. Dipizio4, J. Madore5, A. Kahloum6, T. Ziv7, R. Levi3, J. Unal1,2, J. Yildiz2,3, G. Dinler-Doganay2,3, L. Doganay2,4 Gartner6, V. Hill6, J. Lin8, Y. Hevroni3, P. Greenberg1, A. Brodezki3, S. Rosenberg6, M. Kosloff9, N. Hayward10, A. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Umraniye Teaching and Admon7, M. Niv11, R. Scoyler12, K. Martemyanov13, Y. Research Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Umra- samuels3 niye, Istanbul, Turkey, 2GLAB (Genomic Laboratory), HealthDirectorateofIstanbul,Umraniye,Istanbul,Turkey, 1weizmann Institute of Science, rehovot, Israel, 2The 3Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Scripps Research Institute, ﬂorida, FL, United States, Technical University, Maslak, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Depart- 3weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 4hebrew ment of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Umraniye University, rehovot, Israel, 5Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Teaching and Research Hospital, University of Health ramallah, Australia, 6US National Institutes of Health, Sciences, Umraniye, Istanbul, Turkey Bethesda, MD, United States, 7Technion-Israel Institute of Technology,, haifa, Israel, 8US National Institutes of Copy number variations (CNVs) are the dosage difference Health, Marylant, MD, United States, 9University of Haifa, of the genes and are among disease-causing mutations in Haifa, Israel, 10University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, hereditary cancer syndrome. MLPA (Multiplex Ligation- 11hebrewUniversity,Rehovot,Israel,12RoyalPrinceAlfred dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation) is widely used to detect Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 13The Scripps Research CNVs. Recent advancements in bioinformatics made dele- Institute, Florida, FL, United States tion/duplication analysis possible within the NGS data without any further experimentation. Here, with this study, Analysis of 501 melanoma exomes revealed RG
S7 , which we compared the results of MLPA with CNV detection encodesaGTPase-acceleratingprotein(GAP),tobeatumor- algorithm (CNV by NGS) in colorectal and breast cancer suppressor gene. RG
S7 was mutated in 11% of melanomas patients. andwasfoundtoharborthreerecurrentmutations(p.R44C,p. Our study included 755 (683 breast-ovarian and 72 
E383 K and p.R416Q). Structural modeling of the most colorectalcancer)patients.MLPAtestwasperformedusing common recurrent mutation of the three (p.R44C) predicted exon speciﬁc primers for BRCA1/2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, thatitdestabilizestheproteinduetothelossofanH-bondand PM
S2  and EPCAM. NGS libraries were prepared by using salt bridge network between the mutated position and the targetedmulti-genecapturepanel(codingregionsandsplice serine and aspartic acid residues at positions 58 as 61, junctions of aforementioned genes) and sequenced by respectively. We experimentally conﬁrmed this prediction NextSeq using paired-end reads. CNV by NGS analysis showing that the p.R44C mutant protein is indeed destabi- was performed with Sophia DDM bioinformatics software. lized. We further show RG
S7  p.R44C has weaker catalytic In 724 patients (96%) no deletion/duplication was activity for its substrate Gα , thus providing a dual mechan- o detected in CNV by NGS, consistent with the results of ismforitslossoffunction.Bothoftheseeffectsareexpected MLPA.In21patients(2.8%),thesamegermlinepathogenic to contribute to loss of function of RG
S7  resulting in variation was detected in both CNV by NGS and MLPA increased anchorage-independent growth, migration and analyses. CNV by NGS gave a false positive result in 12 invasion of melanoma cells. By mutating position 56 in the patients (1.6%) and a false negative result in only 1 patient R44C mutant from valine to cysteine, thereby enabling the (0.13%), in which MSH6 e1 deletion was only detected formation of a disulﬁde bridge between the two mutated with MLPA. positions, we slightly increased the catalytic activity and Our experience reveals that the sensitivity of CNV by reinstated protein stability, leading to the rescue of RG
S7 ′s NGS is comparable to MLPA. Yet its considerably high functionasatumorsuppressor.OurﬁndingsidentifyRG
S7 as false positive rates necessitate conﬁrmation of the positive anovelmelanomadriverandpointtotheclinicalrelevanceofAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 499 usingstrategiestostabilizetheproteinand,thereby,restoreits Conclusions: In retrospect, 4.4% (10/229) of individuals function. in our cohort had unexpected NGS ﬁndings related to N.qutob:None.I.Masuho:None.R.emmanuel:None. cancer. More efforts are needed to create an updatable M. Alon: None. I. cohen: None. A. Dipizio: None. J. consensus in reporting variants in cancer predisposing Madore: None. A. Kahloum: None. T. Ziv: None. R. genes, especially for children. Strategies are required to Levi: None. J. Gartner: None. V. Hill: None. J. Lin: ensure that consent process informs of both value and risk None. Y. Hevroni: None. P. Greenberg: None. A. of additional genetic information. Brodezki: None. S. Rosenberg: None. M. Kosloff: None. A. Chirita Emandi: None. N. Andreescu: None. C.G. N. Hayward: None. A. Admon: None. M. Niv: None. R. Zimbru: None. M. Puiu: None. Scoyler: None. K. Martemyanov: None. Y. samuels: None. 
P12 .040.C Somatic mutation analysis of cell-free DNA in the 
P12 .036.B plasma of gastric cancer patients Unsettling NGS ﬁndings related to 94 cancer genes in pediatricpatients-istherebeneﬁtorharminreporting? G. Streleckiene1, M. Forster2, L. Kupcinskas1, J. Skieceviciene1 A. Chirita Emandi1, N. Andreescu1, C. G. Zimbru1,2, M. Puiu1 1LithuanianUniversityofHealthSciences,Kaunas,Lithua- nia, 2Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel, Ger- 1CenterofGenomicMedicine,MedicalGeneticsDiscipline, many University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Automation and Introduction:Sincethediscoveryofthecirculatingplasma Applied Informatics, Politehnica University Timisoara, cell-free DNA (cfDNA) the origin and characteristics of Timisoara, Romania cfDNAwereextensivelystudied.ItwasshownthatcfDNA could harbor genetic aberrations from malignant tissue. Large panels of genes - also called the “clinical exome” - However, there is a lack of comprehensive studies con- are increasingly used in medical practice, where “inci- ductedingastriccancer(GC)comparingtumortissueDNA dental” or “unsolicited” ﬁndings are common. There is a and plasma cfDNA mutational proﬁles. The aim of this lack ofconsistencyregardingprotocols foraddressing such study was to analyze cfDNA yield and to compare tumor ﬁndings between different laboratories. The beneﬁt of tissueDNAandcfDNAmutationalproﬁlesforGCpatients. reportingsecondaryﬁndingsinNGSrelatedtocancergenes Materials and Methods: GC tissue and blood were in children may have implications for family members, collected from 30 patients who were recruited at the nevertheless, could also cause distress. Department of Gastroenterology, LUHS Hospital. Tumor Aim: to retrospectively investigate germline variants in tissue was obtained from the primary lesion and peripheral 94 genes implicated in oncogenesis, in patients referred to blood was drawn before the surgery. cfDNA amount was NGStestingforvariousraregeneticdiseasesandreevaluate quantiﬁed by laser-induced ﬂuorescence-based microcapil- the utility of reporting different classes of pathogenicity. lary electrophoresis. Whole exome sequencing was per- Methods: We used in silico prediction software to formed for the tissue samples and targeted sequencing for classify variants and conducted manual review to further the plasma cfDNA samples. examine secondary ﬁndings frequencies in 229 children Results: Signiﬁcantly higher yield of cfDNA was with rarediseases, thatunderwent sequencingusinga4813 determined for GC patients. Mutations in GC related genes gene panel. were detected for 76.7 % of the patients. Top 10 mutated Results:Thereanalysisrevealed27907variants,ofwhich genes: KMT2C, T
P53 , TTN, FAT4, SYN
E1 , EPHB1, GLI3, 176 were considered after ﬁltering. Nine pathogenic PIK3CA, TRRAP, and APC. A custom gene panel was expected variants (in BRCA1, BMPR1A, FANCA, FANCB, createdforplasmacfDNAsequencingandanalysis.Finally, FANCC,NBN,STK11,MSH6)andfourunexpectedvariants correlation of mutant allele frequencies between tissue and (in BRCA2, PALB2, PM
S2 , RAD50) were reported to plasma cfDNA samples was determined. patients. Five secondary, probably pathogenic variants in Conclusions:OurresultsdemonstratedthatcfDNAyield ATM,ATR,BLM(intwopatients),SUFUandSDHBgenes, is signiﬁcantly higher in GC patients and reﬂects mutation presented potential cancer susceptibility, raised ethical proﬁle in GC tissue, therefore may enable cfDNA analysis debate in reporting them. for monitoring of the GC patients’ disease state. Supported bythegrantfromResearchCouncilofLithuaniaNo.LMT- K-712-01-0130_MULTIOMICS.500 J.delPicchia G. Streleckiene: None. M. Forster: None. L. Kupcins- M. Michelli, I. Giannopoulou, I. Chatziandreou, A. kas: None. J. Skieceviciene: None. Zougros, E. Roupou, A. A. Saetta 
P12 .041.A 1stDepartmentofPathology,SchoolofMedicine,National BCR-AB
L1  fusion gene acquisition of endothelial cells and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece from K562 spent serum Introduction: EGFR mutation analysis in circulating cell- C. Ç. Koçana, S. F. Toprak, S. Sözer free tumor DNA (cf-DNA) from plasma constitutes a con- venient and less invasive alternative method for NSCLC Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine, Istanbul, patients without adequate tumor material and for disease Turkey monitoring. Materials and Methods: We examined 420 blood Introduction: Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia(CML) is a samples from patients with NSCLC of which 102 had also hematopoietic stem cell originated slow-growing myelo- FFPE tissue tested. Circulating cell-free tumor DNA (cf- proliferative neoplasm. CML is associated with BCR-AB
L1  DNA) isolation from plasma and detection of EGFR located on Philadelphia chromosome[t(9;22)(q34;q11)]. mutations was performed using Cobas ® EGFR Recent studies revealed that some leukemic cells might mutation v2. release BCR-AB
L1 . Our hypothesis is; the cell-free BCR- Results: EGFR mutations in cf-DNA were detected in AB
L1  might transfect the susceptible cells and may trans- 26% of the samples. The most common mutations were form them into leukemic cells. This study aims to under- deletionsinexon19(62%),followedbypointmutationsin stand whether endothelial cells EC could acquire cell-free exon 21 (31%). A resistance mutation, p.Thr790Met was BCR-AB
L1  in vitro. displayed in 24% of the mutant cases. The presence of Materials-Methods: BCR-AB
L1  positive CML cell line mutations in primary samples reached 12% whereas for (K562) is cultivated and the spent media was collected follow up samples the percentage of mutations was 40%. every96hours,somesavedforDNAisolationandrestwas ThreeoutofﬁfteentissuesampleswithInvalidcobasresult, aliquot and stored in -80oC. BCR-AB
L1 - EC line(HUVEC) showed presence of EGFR mutation in cfDNA. The was cultured with 1x105/ml density in 96-well plates for presence of EGFR mutations in plasma and tumor tissues transfection.HUVECculturemediawasmixedwith40μlof was correlated with gender (p < 0.001, p=0.031) as were K562 spent media without any nucleases and incubated for more common in female patients. The overall concordance 48hat37oC.After48h,HUVECwas washedanddetached of EGFR mutation status in plasma and tumor was 80%, from the plate. Following gDNA isolation, PCR analysis speciﬁcity 100%, PPV 100%, NPV 72%. were performed for BCR-AB
L1 . BCR-AB
L1  product of Conclusions: The above analysis adds to current data 418bp was analysed by electrophoresis in 2% gel. indicating that cf-DNA EGFR mutation testing has a very Results:BCR-AB
L1 -HUVECwastransfectedeasilywith high PPV. The PPV indicates that EGFR mutations could + BCR-AB
L1  K562 spent media. BCR-AB
L1  insertion into bereportedwithcertainty,whereasthesensitivityofthetest the HUVEC genome was conﬁrmed by PCR analysis. indicates that a biopsy should be obtained for patients with Conclusions: Metastasis of the haematological malig- an EGFR mutation-negative cfDNA test. nancies usually referred to the cancer cells migration and M. Michelli: None. I. Giannopoulou: None. I. Chat- insertion into the different distant organs. Some studies ziandreou: None. A. Zougros: None. E. Roupou: None. revealed the theory of genometastasis; transfection of A.A. Saetta: None. healthy cells by cell-free DNA without any induction. This study provides evidence for BCR-AB
L1  insertion into the 
P12 .043.C different type of cells from their origin including EC. This Selection criteria for assembling a pediatric cancer process might also provide some answers to other cancer predisposition gene panel for use in routine diagnostics prognosis as well. Project No:TDB-2019-28744 C.Ç. Koçana: None. S.F. Toprak: None. S. A. Byrjalsen1, I. J. Diets2, J. Bakhuizen3,4, T. van Overeem Sözer: None. Hansen1, K. Schmiegelow5, A. Gerdes1, R. P. Kuiper3, H. 
P12 .042.B Merks3, K. Wadt1, M. C. J. Jongmans3,4 EGFRmutationtestingincf-DNAfromNSCLCpatients using Cobas® EGFR mutation test v2 1DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,Rigshospitalet,Copenha- gen, Denmark, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Prin- cess Máxima Center for pediatric oncology, Utrecht,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 501 Netherlands, 4Department of Genetics, University Medical Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy, therefore new and potent treat- Introduction: Genomic sequencing technologies are used ments are needed. Chloroquine is known to generate reac- increasingly in childhood cancer diagnostics and research. tive oxygen species (ROS) causing DNA double strand This provides opportunities for standardized screening of breaks(DSBs).SomeHDACihavebeenreportedtoinhibit both known and putative cancer predisposition syndromes DNA repair by homologous recombination (HR). This (CPS) in children with cancer. This confers a challenge study aims to investigate the effect of Chloroquine, Pano- regarding what gene panel to use in a diagnostic setting. binostat and their combination in the survival of different Methods:Criteriaweredevelopedtoselectgeneseligible OC cell lines. for a childhood CPS gene panel. Genes were divided into Material and methods: OC cell lines OVCAR-8, SK- twocategories:1)genesassociatedwithconditionsthatcan OV-3, IGROV-1 and A2780 were used. MTT, cell cycle only be caused by this speciﬁc gene, and 2) grouped genes and apoptosis assays were performed to test chloroquine that give rise to thesame CPS. The criteria were applied to andPanobinostatanticanceractivity.Synergisticinteraction multiple sources of in total 392 candidate genes. between these two drugs was assessed using the median Results: Single genes were included in the panel when a dose effect analysis of Chou and Talalay, and combination minimum of ﬁve children with cancer and a pathogenic indexes were calculated. DCFH-DA staining was used to variant in the gene were reported in literature. In addition, determine ROS generation. γ-H2AX and Rad51 foci were evidence must be present supporting a causal relation with detectedbyimmunoﬂuorescence.ToanalyzeHR,areporter the malignancy (i.e. studies describing somatic second hits GFP cassette was integrated into the genome of SK-OV-3 in the tumor or segregation in families). Genes were and a unique DSB was introduced by transfection with an groupediftheyareassociatedwithaheterogenousCPSand endonuclease encoding plasmid. HR-efﬁciency in the if they share the same cellular pathway or mechanism. At presence or absence of Panobinostat was calculated by least two genes in the group must fulﬁll the criteria for quantifying the number of GFP+ cells by ﬂow cytometry. individualgenesforthegrouptobeincludedinthepanel.In Results: Chloroquine and Panobinostat decreased cell total, we included 139 genes in the childhood cancer viability and induced G0/G1 and G2/M cell cycle arrest, gene panel. respectively. The combination of both drugs caused a Conclusions:Wehavemadecriteriaforthedevelopment synergistic effect in all cell lines that was reverted by the of a childhood cancer gene panel. Currently, 139 genes are addition of an antioxidant. Treatment with Panobinostat includedinthegenepanel.Regularupdatesinthefutureare decreased the efﬁciency of HR due to the inhibition of necessary for novel genes. Rad51 recruitment to DSBs. A. Byrjalsen: None. I.J. Diets: None. J. Bakhuizen: Conclusion: Our study suggests that the Chloroquine- None. T. van Overeem Hansen: None. K. Schmiegelow: Panobinostat combination could be a therapeutic strategy None. A. Gerdes: None. R.P. Kuiper: None. H. Merks: against OC. None. K. Wadt: None. M.C.J. Jongmans: None. M. Ovejero-Sánchez: None. D. Iglesias-Corral: None. P. Martín-Bejarano Soto: None. M.A. Pérez-Nieto: 
P12 .044.A None. P. García-Vallés: None. R. González-Sarmiento: Combination of Panobinostat and Chloroquine as a None. A.B. Herrero: None. therapeutic strategy against ovarian cancer 
P12 .045.B M.Ovejero-Sánchez1,2,3,D.Iglesias-Corral2,1,3, P. Martín- Tumorsphere derived chordoma cancer stem cells have Bejarano Soto4,2, M. A. Pérez-Nieto1,2, P. García-Vallés2, low migration and invasion capacities R. González-Sarmiento1,2,3, A. B. Herrero1,2,3 N. EKIMCI GURCAN1,2, U. OZBEY1,2, M. BAYINDIR 1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), BILGI
C1 ,2, D. TECIME
L1 ,2, N. IMAMOVA1,2, A. Salamanca, Spain, 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department KUSKUCU1, O. F. BAYRAK1 of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer 1Yeditepe University, School of Medicine, Department of (IBMCC), Salamanca, Spain, 4Institute of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Yeditepe University,502 J.delPicchia Institute of Natural and Applied Sciences, Department of Clinical Genetics, Tartu, Estonia Biotechnology, Istanbul, Turkey Introduction: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the Introduction: Tumorsphere formation is a widely used most common type of leukemia in adults. Laboratory cancerstemcell(CSC)enrichmentmethod.Theprotocolis methods such as next-generation sequencing (NGS), ﬂuor- based on cultivating cancer cells on a non-attachment sur- escence in situ hybridization (FISH) and chromosomal face with speciﬁc growth factors and absence of serum for microarray (CMA) are used to investigate CLL patients. enrichmentofcancer cellswithhigher stem-like properties. Theaimofthisstudywastogeneticallyproﬁleandtogetan Studies suggest that invasion and metastasis capabilities of overview of genetic alterations of the CLL patients in cancercellsaredrivenbyincreasedepithelialmesenchymal Estonia. transition (EMT) status and associated with CSC pheno- Patientsandmethods:378patientsampleswerereferred type. However, EMT characteristics of tumorsphere- to the Tartu University Hospital Clinical Genetics Center derived CSCs are poorly deﬁned. In this study, migration/ during 2018-2019 from 3 major tertiary referral hospitals. invasion capabilities of tumorsphere-derived chordoma Patients were tested with Illumina TruSight Myeloid panel CSCs, and their EMT related gene expression levels are (NGS-54 genes), FISH (T
P53 , trisomy12, ATM deletion, investigated. DLEU1deletion)andCMA(HumanCytoSNP-12).FISHor Materials and Methods: U-CH1 and MUG-Chor 1 CMAwascarriedouton343patients.NGSwasperformed Chordoma cell line derived tumorspheres were cultured on in 210 patients. Both NGS and FISH or CMA was ultra-low attachment plate in serum free culture medium performed in 175 patients. with speciﬁc supplements. Pluripotency and EMT related Results: Altogether 50/378 patients (13,2%) tested gene expression proﬁles were evaluated using qPCR. positive for T
P53  mutations or del17p. T
P53  pathogenic Migration capacity and invasiveness were assessed via mutations were detected in 40 (19%) patients. FISH/CMA Boyden chamber assay. revealed23(6,7%)patientswithdel17p.13(3,4%)patients Results: Elevated SOX2, KLF4 and NANOG expres- harboured both T
P53  mutations and del17p. Additionally, sions in chordoma tumorspheres comparing parental cell pathogenic mutations were found in AB
L1 , ASX
L1 , BCOR, lines indicates an enriched population with high pluripo- BRAF, DNMT3A, GATA2, IDH2, KRAS, MYD88, tency.Additionally,downregulationofCK19andupregula- NOTCH1, NRAS, RAD21, SF3B1, SRSF2 genes by NGS tion of Twist, Snail and ZEB1 in tumorspheres offers an panelandbyFISHtrisomy12,ATMandDLEU1deletions. epithelial-mesenchymal transition phenotype. In contrast Unfortunately,in 160 FISH/CMA-negative cases NGS was migration/invasion capacities of tumorsphere derived cells not performed and in 22 T
P53 -negative NGS cases FISH/ are decreased, a signature EMT marker, CDH1 expression CMA was not analysed. is increased. Conclusions: Both NGS and FISH/CMA testing should Conclusions: Our results demonstrates that tumorsphere beconsideredtoestablishastatusofT
P53 mutation/del17p formation assay may enrich cancer stem-like cell popula- to improve patient stratiﬁcation and optimize therapeutic tions with high stemness potential, but these tumorsphere- decisions. Funding: Estonian Research Council grant derived cells are losing their capacity to migrate, probably PRG471. duetothehighCDH1expression.Suggesting,CDH1hasa M. Tooming: None. P. Tammur: None. A. Auser: therapeutic potential for chordomas with high migrative None. Ü. Murumets: None. U. Šamarina: None. T. capacity.(TUBITAK project number: 118
S691 ) Kahre: None. N.Ekimcigurcan:None.U.Ozbey:None.M.Bayindir bilgic: None. D. Tecimel: None. N. Imamova: None. A. 
P12 .047.A Kuskucu: None. O.F. Bayrak: None. Variants in the ASX
L1  and &gt; for DMNT3A genes may provide a personalized approach to targeted CML 
P12 .046.C therapy Genetic proﬁling of chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients in Estonia during 2018-2019 E. P. Adilgereeva1, A. G. Nikitin2, D. G. Zheglo1, O. A. Shukhov3, S. A. Smirnikhina1, E. Y. Chelysheva3, A. V. M. Tooming1, P. Tammur1, A. Auser1, Ü. Murumets1, U. Lavrov1, A. G. Turkina3, S. I. Kutsev1 Šamarina1, T. Kahre1,2 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian 1Tartu University Hospital United Laboratories Depart- Federation, 2Pulmonology Research Institute, Federal ment of Clinical Genetics, Tartu, Estonia, 2University of Medical-Biological Agancy of Russia, Moscow, Russian Tartu, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Department of Federation, 3National Research Center for Hematology,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 503 Moscow, Russian Federation of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer Introduction: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) accounts (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, for about 15% of all leukemias inadults. Great success has Spain, 4Medical Oncology Service, University Hospital of been achieved in the treatment of CML due to the devel- Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 5Translational Research opment of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), but 20-40% of Group of Urology GITUR-IBSAL, University Hospital of patients are resistant to targeted therapy. The aim of the Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain studyistodetectexomevariantspredictingeffectivenessof CML therapy. Introduction: Androgen receptor (AR) plays a crucial role Materials and methods: Blood was sampled from 60 inprostate cancer (PCa) andthepresenceofthereceptorin CML patients at the time of diagnosis, before starting the blood cancer is being used as a biomarker. Circular RNAs TKI therapy. Later, 30 of the patients matched the (circRNAs) are a newly discovered type of endogenous ELN2013 criteria of optimal response, 18 were included non-coding RNAs, characterized by a closed continuous in warning group, and 12 were resistant to therapy. Exome loop, which can regulate gene expression by acting as sequencing was performed on the Illumina NextSeq 550 microRNA or RNA-binding protein sponges. In this work Sequencing System. Bioinformatic analysis included we wanted to test whether circRNAs derived from the AR SnpEff (analysis of all transcripts), ANNOVAR (analysis gene(circ-AR)couldalsobedetectedinbloodsamplesand of allele frequencies in gnomAD, 1000G, and ES
P6500 , used as PCa biomarker. algorithms in silico prediction of pathogenity of SIFT, Methods: Peripheral blood was drawn from 35 patients PolyPhen2, MutationTaster, FATMM, CADD, DANN, with diagnostic of metastasic PCa. Whole blood (10mL) REVEL, M-CAP), and Alamut Batch (inﬂuence on wascollectedinEDTAtubes.Plasmawasisolatedfromthe splicing, dbsnp, ClinVar, COSMIC, and HGMD). supernatant by centrifugation at RT, 20 minutes and 1500 Results: Loss-of-function variants were revealed in the rpm. Total RNA was extracted from patient serum/plasma ASX
L1 andDNMT3Agenesin33%ofpatientsinthegroup and VCAP cell line using the miRNeasy and miRNeasy ofresistanttotherapyTKI,butnotinothergroups.25%of Mini kits respectively. RNA samples were treated with patientsinthetreatment-resistantgrouphadvariantsonlyin RNase R for 30 minutes at 37ºC to digest linear RNA and ASX
L1 , while 8% had variants in both ASX
L1  and circRNAs were isolated again. Circ-AR expression was DNMT3A. analysedbyqPCRusingGAPDHmRNAfornormalization. Conclusions: The identiﬁed variants in ASX
L1  and Divergent primers for circ-AR were designed using the DNMT3AmaybeassociatedwithresistancetoTKItherapy CircInteractome webtool and the convergent primers of and serve as prognostic markers of the TKI therapy GAPDH were designed by Primer-BLAST. effectiveness at the stage of CML diagnosis, and thus Results: Circ-AR was detected by RT-qPCR in plasma provide a personalized approach to the targeted CML PCa patients and in VCAP cell line. To validate the therapy. existence of a circ-AR, Sanger sequencing was performed E.P. Adilgereeva: None. A.G. Nikitin: None. D.G. on the PCR product ampliﬁed with the divergent primers. Zheglo: None. O.A. Shukhov: None. S.A. Smirnikhina: Conclusions: Circ-AR was detected by RT-qPCR in all None. E.Y. Chelysheva: None. A.V. Lavrov: None. A.G. plasma samples, indicating that these molecules could be Turkina: None. S.I. Kutsev: None. used as novel biomarkers in PCa. P. Vázquez-Cárdenas: None. A. Martel-Martel: None. 
P12 .049.C M.A. Pérez-Nieto: None. J.L. García-Hernández: None. Detection of Androgen Receptor in plasma circular I. Misiewicz-Krzeminska: None. Á.J. Virseda-Rodrí- RNAs in Prostate Cancer guez: None. S. Marcos-Asensio: None. F. Gómez-Veiga: None. J.J. Cruz-Hernández: None. A.B. Herrero: None. P. Vázquez-Cárdenas1,2,3, A. Martel-Martel1,2,4, M. A. R. González-Sarmiento: None. Pérez-Nieto1, J. L. García-Hernández1,3, I. Misiewicz- Krzeminska1,3, Á. J. Virseda-Rodríguez5, S. Marcos- 
P12 .050.A Asensio5,F.Gómez-Veiga5,J.J.Cruz-Hernández1,2,4,A.B. Analytical validation of the Droplet Digital PCR system Herrero2,3, R. González-Sarmiento1,2,3 for the detection of the most frequent clinically relevant EGFR, BRAF and KRAS hotspot tumor variants 1Biomedical Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department504 J.delPicchia A. Hallermayr1, J. Romic-Pickl1, A. Benet-Pagès1,2, V. Constitutional mismatch repair deﬁciency (CMMRD) Steinke-Lange1, E. Holinski-Feder1 syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive hereditary cancer condition, characterized by early onset colorectal cancer, 1MGZ - Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany, leukemia and lymphoma, brain tumors and other malig- 2Genomics Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, nancies. We report a 24-year-old man referred to our Santa Cruz, CA, United States outpatient genetic clinic because of rectal cancer. His sister had died of an astrocytoma at age 14. Their father Introduction:Precisionmedicinetargetingspeciﬁcgenetic was diagnosed with prostate, bladder and renal cancer at variants in cancer can be used for prediction and prognosis age47and58.Apaternalunclediedofesophagealcancer of disease progression and outcome. This requires accurate at age 50, a paternal aunt was diagnosed with breast molecular proﬁling of the tumor, which is traditionally canceratage70andthepaternalgrandfatherdiedofliver performed using DNA extracted from tumor tissue. Liquid canceratage70.Thematernalgrandfatherdiedofbladder biopsies can overcome some of the challenges regarding cancer at age 77. The family history did not include tissue biopsies and offer several advantages like real-time additional cancer cases amongst ﬁrst or second degree monitoring of driver hotspot variants, although highly relatives. Immunohistochemistry of the rectal cancer sensitive methods are required to identify these variants showed mismatch repair deﬁciency with loss of MSH2, in ctDNA. atypical diminished staining of MSH6 and presence of Materials and Methods: The Droplet Digital™ PCR MLH1 and PM
S2 . Genetic analyses revealed two patho- (ddPCR) technology requires low amounts of input DNA genic heterozygous germline variants in MSH2, c.1759 and enables quantiﬁcation of low variant allele frequencies +3A>G (p.(Ser554fs)) and a deletion of the ﬁrst exon, c. (VAF) of targeted variants, yet accuracy varies between (?_-1)_(211+1_212-1)del.RNAanalysesshowedthatthe assays and laboratory protocols. splice site variant results in a loss of exon 11 from the Results: We conducted the analytical validation of ﬁve transcript.Parentaltestingshowedthatbothvariantswere ddPCR assays, for the detection of the most frequent inherited from a different parent. The latter ﬁnding con- clinically relevant EGFR, BRAF and KRAS hotspot tumor ﬁrmed CMMRD due to bi-allelic pathogenic MSH2 var- variantsandestablishedprecisethresholdsbetweennegative iants in our patient. Formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded andpositiveresultsaswellasVAFquantiﬁcation.Allassays tissue analysis revealed that his deceased sister also car- showedverylowlimitsofblankanddetectionrangingfrom ried both MSH2 variants. This case again highlights how 0%to0.11%fractionalabundanceand0.08%to0.4%VAF anindexcaseofCMMRDmaylackaclearfamilyhistory of the targeted variants, respectively. However, striking of Lynch syndrome associated tumors. differences were observed between ddPCR assays for the E.M. Leter: None. M.J.L. Ligtenberg: None. R.S. van detection of low VAFs of the targeted variants. der Post: None. N. Hoogerbrugge: None. A.R. Conclusions: In particular, the observed difference in Mensenkamp: None. performanceinlowVAFvariantdetectionandquantiﬁcation demonstrates the importance of speciﬁc analytical validation 
P12 .053.A for each assay to obtain reliable results of ctDNA analysis. Colorectal Cancer in Adolescents and Young Adults: A.Hallermayr:None.J.Romic-Pickl:None.A.Benet- Comprehensive Analyses of the Clinical and Molecular Pagès: None. V. Steinke-Lange: None. E. Holinski- Features Feder: None. R. M. de Voer, I. Diets, R. van der Post, R. Weren, E. 
P12 .052.C Kamping, T. de Bitter, L. Elze, R. Verhoeven, E. Vink- A case of MSH2-related constitutional mismatch repair Börger,A.Eijkelenboom,A.Mensenkamp,I.Nagtegaal,M. deﬁciency syndrome Jongmans, M. Ligtenberg E.M.Leter1,M.J.L.Ligtenberg2,3,R.S.vanderPost3,N. Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands Hoogerbrugge2, A. R. Mensenkamp2 Colorectalcancer (CRC)atadolescentandyoungadultage 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University (AYA;≤25years)isararecondition.Hereweanalyzedthe Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of clinicopathologicalandmolecular features of CRCatAYA Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, age to improve genetic counselling, surveillance and, ulti- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Pathology, Rad- mately, treatment and disease outcome. We retrospectively boud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands collectedclinicalinformationandtumortissuesfromAYAs with CRC between 2000 and 2017 in the Netherlands.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 505 Tumor DNAs were analyzed for microsatellite instability, interpretationchallenges,highpenetrantpathogenicvariants mutations in 56 hotspot regions and/or driver genes, and are frequently reported only in the exonic regions of genome-wide somatic copy number aberrations. A total of the genes. 139 patients (58% male) were diagnosed with CRC ≤25 Materialsandmethods:Thestudyincluded206patients years of age (mean age 22) between 2000 and 2017. with suspected hereditary CRC referred to the Cancer Mucinous and/or signet-ring-cell components were Genetics Counselling Clinic at Sahlgrenska University observedin33%ofcancers.Agenetictumorrisksyndrome Hospital in Gothenburg, Sweden. Variant screening was was conﬁrmed in 39% of cases. Negative predictors of performed using a comprehensive genomic panel including outcome were a younger age at diagnosis, signet-ring-cell established and also putative CRC predisposition genes carcinoma, the absence of a genetic tumor risk syndrome, (covering50kbupstreamanddownstreamofthegenesand and a diagnosis at advanced stage of disease. Compared to intron regions). Variants, including CNVs (copy-number CRCs ≥60 years of age from The Cancer Genome Atlas, variants), were evaluated regarding pathogenicity. In microsatellite stable (MSS) CRCs at AYA age more fre- addition,40outofthe206patientswerefurtherinvestigated quently harbor somatic mutations in T
P53  and POLE, less through whole-genome sequencing (WGS). frequentlyhaveAPCmutationsandareenrichedfornearly- Results: The spectrum of pathogenic variants was diploidMSStumorgenomes.OurdatasuggestthatCRCsat determined. The ﬁndings include identiﬁcation of pre- AYA age have a biology and etiology different from viously unreported variants and putative causative variants sporadic CRCs at older age. Therefore, treatment of AYAs in genetically unexplained patients with hereditary CRC. with CRC should be optimized based on their molecular Conclusions:Thecombinationofhigh-throughputpanel- genetic phenotypes. Performing comprehensive sequencing sequencingand WGS identiﬁesa broader set ofpathogenic of germline and tumor DNA in every individual diagnosed variants in patients with hereditary CRC, which is crucial with CRC ≤25 years of age would aid in this optimization. for clinical follow up of patients and predictive testing of R.M. de Voer: None. I. Diets: None. R. van der Post: relatives. The study was supported by grants from the None.R.Weren:None.E.Kamping:None.T.deBitter: Swedish state under the agreement between the Swedish None. L. Elze: None. R. Verhoeven: None. E. Vink- government and the county councils, the ALF-agreement Börger:None.A.Eijkelenboom:None.A.Mensenkamp: (ALF-725011) and the Swedish Cancer Society (Grant no None. I. Nagtegaal: None. M. Jongmans: None. M. 18 0357). Ligtenberg: None. F. Eiengård: None. A. Rohlin: None. E. Mårtensson: None. T. Olausson: None. T. Zagoras: None. U. 
P12 .054.B Lundstam: None. S. Gebre-Medhin: None. M. Detection of germline genetic variants in hereditary Nordling: None. colorectal cancer 
P12 .056.A F. Eiengård1,2, A. Rohlin1,2, E. Mårtensson1, T. Anewapproachfortheidentiﬁcationofnovelcandidate Olausson1,2, T. Zagoras1,2, U. Lundstam3, S. Gebre- genes of susceptibility to colorectal cancer Medhin4,5, M. Nordling1,2 A. Lopez-Novo1, A. Dacal2, D. Remedios3, J. Cubiella3, V. 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedi- Alvarez-Sanchez4, M. J. Ladra-Gonzalez5, F. Fernandez- cine, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Lopez5, A. Alvarez-Castro5, J. M. Cameselle-Teijeiro6, M. Gothenburg,Sweden,2DepartmentofClinicalGeneticsand Cuatrecasas7, F. Balaguer8, S. Castellvi-Bel9, C. Genomics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Fernandez-Rozadilla1, C. Ruiz-Ponte1,10 Sweden, 3Department of Surgery, Sahlgrenska Academy at UniversityofGothenburg,SahlgrenskaUniversityHospital/ 1FundacionPublicaGalegadeMedicinaXenomica,Grupo Östra,Gothenburg,Sweden,4DivisionofClinicalGenetics, de Medicina Xenomica-Universidade de Santiago de Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Compostela, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria de San- Lund, Sweden, 5Department of Clinical Genetics and tiago de Compostela (
E035 ), Santiago de Compostela, Pathology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden Spain,2ServiciodeDigestivo,HospitalUniversitarioLucus Augusti,InstitutodeInvestigacionSanitariadeSantiagode Introduction: Germline pathogenic variants in genes Compostela (
E035 ), Lugo, Spain, 3Servicio de Digestivo, established to be associated with hereditary colorectal can- Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Ourense, Centro cer (CRC) explain the disease in approximately 5-6% de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades patients. Due to technical limitations and variant Hepaticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Ourense, Spain, 4Ser- vicio de Digestivo, Complexo Hospitalario de Pontevedra,506 J.delPicchia Pontevedra, Spain, 5Servicio de Digestivo, Complexo germlineCRCriskvariants.Asaresultamorepersonalized Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, genetic diagnostic could be achieved. Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 6Servicio de Anatomia Grant support: ISCIII and FEDER funds PI17/00509; Patologica, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de San- Predoctoral Fellowship (GAIN, Xunta de Galicia) tiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, A. Lopez-Novo: None. A. Dacal: None. D. Remedios: 7ServiciodeAnatomiaPatologica,InstitutD’Investigacions None.J.Cubiella:None.V.Alvarez-Sanchez:None.M.J. Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer, Centro de Investigacion Ladra-Gonzalez: None. F. Fernandez-Lopez: None. A. BiomedicaenReddeEnfermedadesHepaticasyDigestivas Alvarez-Castro: None. J.M. Cameselle-Teijeiro: None. (CIBERehd) and Tumor Bank-Biobank, Hospital Clinic, M. Cuatrecasas: None. F. Balaguer: None. S. Castellvi- Barcelona, Spain, 8Servicio de Digestivo, Institut D’Inves- Bel: None. C. Fernandez-Rozadilla: None. C. Ruiz- tigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer, Centro de Ponte: None. Investigacion Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Hepati- cas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Hospital Clinic, Universitat 
P12 .057.B de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 9Grupo de Oncologia GNMTpolymorphisms are associated with perineural Gastrointestinal y Pancreatica, Institut D’Investigacions invasion and age of disease onset among colorectal Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer, Centro de Investigacion cancer patients BiomedicaenReddeEnfermedadesHepaticasyDigestivas (CIBERehd), Hospital Clinic, Universitat de Barcelona, W.Chang1,2,M.Misbah2,K.Chen3,4,J.Wang5,6,W.Wang7 Barcelona, Spain, 10Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Santiago de 1Master Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Compostela, Spain Pharmacoproteomics, SchoolofPharmacy,Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Clinical Introduction: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was Pharmacy,SchoolofPharmacy,TaipeiMedicalUniversity, expected to identify genetic variation that explained the Taipei, Taiwan, 3Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, missing heritability in colorectal cancer (CRC). The strate- College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, gies mainly relied on prioritization of recurrent loss-of- Taiwan, 4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell functionraregermlinevariantsingenespreviouslyinvolved Biology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei incancerpathways.However,notonlyaverysmallnumber Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Graduate Institute of of candidate genes with strong scientiﬁc evidence were Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Med- identiﬁed, but a large number were proposed whose role in ical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 6Center for Biomar- colorectal tumorigenesis is not yet established. The failure kers and Biotech Drugs, Kaohsiung Medical University, to identify the real causative genes could be due to the Kaohsiung,Taiwan,7ThePh.D.ProgramforTranslational genetic heterogeneity underlying CRC. Our aim is to Medicine, College of Medical Science and Technology, molecular characterize early-onset MMR-proﬁcient CRC at Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan somatic level to further identify novel candidate genes by integrating germline and tumor omic data. Introduction: Glycine N-methyl transferase (GNMT) is Materials and Methods: WES and RNA-seq were known to play an important role in the pathogenesis of performed on paired normal-tumor tissues from a phenoty- cancer. However, the effects of GNMT polymorphisms on pically homogeneous cohort of 20 early-onset (<50y) colorectal cancer (CRC) are still unclear. Herein, we MMR-proﬁcient CRC patients. Differential expression investigated the role of GNMT in CRC. analysis (DESeq2), functional enrichment analysis (G: Materials and Methods: The study sample consists of Proﬁler), consensus molecular subtyping (CMSCaller) and 352 CRC patients. Clinical variables including parameters signature proﬁle (MuSiCa) were carried out. of staging, vascular invasion, perineural invasion, and age Results: According to consensus molecular subtyping, of CRC onset were collected. Five single nucleotide colorectal tumors were classiﬁed as: CM
S1  (3), CM
S2  (2), polymorphisms (SNPs) including rs9471976, rs9462856, CM
S3  (4), CM
S4  (6), the remaining were still not rs11752813, rs10948059, and rs2274517 were genotyped. classiﬁed. The associations of SNPs with clinical variables were Conclusions: These data show the molecular hetero- examined by a two-stage approach: chi-square test and geneityunderlyingthisphenotypicallyhomogeneouscohort logistic regression were used for categorical variables; of early onset MMR-proﬁcient CRC. Thus, a more Kaplan-Meier method and Cox proportional hazard model comprehensiveprioritizationofgermlinevariantsaccording were used for age of onset. to the molecular subtype of each tumor will be followed Results:TheminorallelesofthreeSNPswereassociated increasing the probabilities to identify the causative with a higher risk of perineural invasion: T of rs9471976Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 507 (OR=1.70,95%CI=(1.13-2.55)),Cofrs9462856(OR= mutations in the MLH1 gene. Ad hoc analysis of the pro- 1.66, 95%CI = (1.11-2.49)), and T of rs2274517 (OR = spective study cohort suggests higher prevalence of MSI 1.64,95%CI=(1.10-2.45)).Furthermore,subjectscarrying and LSin CRC patient population in India. Analysis ofthe GG genotype of rs11752813 have a younger age of onset entire patient cohort (n = 0) in 2022 will provide a robust comparedwithothersubjects(HR=3.02,95%CI=(1.09, estimate of the prevalence of MSI and LS in CRC patients 8.36)). According to GTEx database, these four SNPs may in India. These estimates would help in formulation of inﬂuence expression levels of PEX6 and GNMT in national guidelines for MSI testing, LS diagnosis and che- transverse and sigmoid colon tissues. moprevention strategies of CRC in India. Study is funded Conclusions:GNMTisassociatedwithriskofperineural by Gujarat State Biotech Mission (GSBTM/JDR&D/604/ invasion and age of disease onset among CRC patients. 2019/297). Thisstudy was supportedby theMinistryofScience and H. Sheth: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Technology, Taiwan (MOST105-2628-B-038-001-MY4 collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as and MOST 106-2314-B-038-052-MY3) and the Interna- grants already received); Modest; HS is a PI of the study tionalOfﬁceofTaipeiMedicalUniversity(TMU105-5803- which is funded by the Gujarat State Biotech Mission 003-111 and TMU105-5803-010-111). (GSBTM/JDR&D/604/2019/297). E. Ownership Interest W.Chang:None.M.Misbah:None.K.Chen:None.J. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Wang: None. W. Wang: None. Modest; HS is a co-inventor on a ﬁled international patent describing methods of identifying microsatellite instability 
P12 .059.A (PCT/GB2019/052148).C.Patel:None.A.Jain:None.A. Assessing prevalence of microsatellite instability and Tank: None. S. Advani: None. L. Thomas: None. M. Lynch syndrome amongst colorectal cancer patients in Shah: None. V. Yagnik: None. B. Parikh: None. R. India Gallon: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent orother intellectual property); Modest; RGisa co-inventor H. Sheth1, C. Patel1, A. Jain2, A. Tank3, S. Advani4, L. on a ﬁled international patent describing methods of Thomas4, M. Shah5, V. Yagnik6, B. Parikh7, R. Gallon8, C. identifying microsatellite instability (PCT/GB2019/ Hayes8, G. M. Borthwick8, M. S. Jackson8, M. Santibanez- 052148). C. Hayes: None. G.M. Borthwick: None. M.S. Koref8, J. Burn8, F. Sheth1, J. Sheth1, S. Trivedi1 Jackson: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; MSJ s a co- 1FRIGE’s Institute of Human Genetics, Ahmedabad, India, inventor on a ﬁled international patent describing methods 2CIMS Hospital, Ahmedabad, India, 3Dwarika Clinic, of identifying microsatellite instability (PCT/GB2019/ Ahmedabad, India, 4Sushrut Hospital, Mumbai, India, 052148). M. Santibanez-Koref: E. Ownership Interest 5Zydus Cancer Hospital, Ahmedabad, India, 6Nishtha (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Surgical Hospital and Research Centre, Patan, India, Modest;MSKisaco-inventoronaﬁledinternationalpatent 7HOC Vedanta, Ahmedabad, India, 8Newcastle University, describing methods of identifying microsatellite instability Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom (PCT/GB2019/052148). J. Burn: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Microsatellite instability (MSI) and Lynch syndrome (LS) Modest; JB is a co-inventor on a ﬁled international patent prevalence in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients is estimated describing methods of identifying microsatellite instability to be 15% and 3% in European populations. However, (PCT/GB2019/052148). F. Sheth: None. J. Sheth: None. prevalence estimates from India are not available. We aim S. Trivedi: None. to systematically assess the prevalence of MSI and LS in CRC patient population from India. Venous blood and 
P12 .060.B primary tumour biopsies were prospectively collected and Role of miR-1246 in colorectal carcinogenesis analysed for MSI using Promega fragment length analysis assay and BRAF V600E using Q-PCR. Patients with MSI- R. Lukosevicius1, V. Salteniene1, S. Juzenas1,2, R. high BRAF-negative tumour biopsies were assessed for LS Inciuraite1, K. Balciute1, P. Ruzgys3, J. Skieceviciene1, J. using germline DNA sequencing of the mismatch repair Kupcinskas1 genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PM
S2  and EPCAM). Within 9months ofa3yearstudy,38patients havebeenrecruited 1Institute for Digestive Research, Lithuanian University of with CRC. MSI testing in these patients showed MSI-high Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Institute of Clinical phenotype in 10 patients (26.3%). Of these, 9 patients Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, (90%) were negative for BRAF V600E mutation. Germline Germany, 3Biophysical Research Group, Vytautas Magnus testing in 6 of these patients have shown known and novel University, Kaunas, Lithuania508 J.delPicchia Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent cancers worldwide and is the second leading common malignant tumors. Patients with CRC have an causeofcancer-relatedmortality.CRCdetectionrateshave increased risk for developing metachronous CRC (MCRC) improved; however, disease-related mortality remains very during follow-up evaluation. It is still unknown which high. Comprehensive miRNA analysis showed deregulated patients are prone to this condition, despite genomics stu- miRNA proﬁles in CRC. In order to understand functional dies have enhanced our ability to identify molecular chan- relevance of miRNA deregulation, studies analyzing their ges associated with CRC. The clinician´s challenge is to target genes are of major importance. proposea tight follow-upand control thepossible returnof Materials and methods: MTT, colonogenic, wound cancer. This study is focusing on the characterization of healing,dual-lightluciferasereportergene,geneandprotein mutationalproﬁleofMCRCthatcouldinforminregardsto expressionassayswereperformedinSW620,HCT-116and prognosis and therapy decision. Caco-2 cell lines after cell transfection with hsa-miR-1246 Materials and Methods: A total of 90 formalin-ﬁxed, mimic and inhibitor to determine miR-1246 impact in cell parafﬁn-embedded (FFPE) tumor DNA from 45 patients function changes and to conﬁrm its target genes. diagnosed with MCRC were selected to perform next Results: Reduced cell viability was observed in Caco-2 generation sequencing (NGS) using Ion Torrent platform and SW620 cell lines72 hours after transfection with miR- andAmpliseqcancerhotspotpanelv2(Thermoﬁsher).Data 1246 inhibitor. Colonogenic test results demonstrated that analysis was performed using Torrent Suite and Ion inhibition of miR-1246 decreased colony number only in Reporter software (Thermoﬁsher). The annotated variants Caco-2 cellline.Inhibition ofmiR-1246decreasedcovered were visualized using IGV (Broad Institute). gap area in wound healing assay in Caco-2 and HCT-116 Results: The most frequent mutations in initial tumors cells. CFTR, AXIN2 CRC-associated putative target genes were located in APC (48,9%), KRAS (42,2%), T
P53  ofmiR-1246wereconﬁrmedbyduallightluciferaseassay. (28,3%) and PIK3CA (8,9%), while in metachronous Overexpression of miR-1246 decreased the expression of tumors the most common mutations were identiﬁed in CFTR and AXIN2 genes in SW620 cell line 48 hours after KRAS (50,0%), APC (42,2%), T
P53  (15,6%), FBXW7 transfection. Tendency of higher CFTR and AXIN2 (13,3%) and CTNNB1 (8,9%). Remarkably, three (6,7%) expression in protein level was observed after inhibition patients showed the same mutations in both tumors. of miR-1246 in Caco-2 and SW620 cell lines. Moreover,those patientswith APCmutationintheirinicial Conclusions:AXIN2andCFTRaredirecttargetsofmiR- tumor showed a tendency to develop later their metachro- 1246. Overexpression or inhibition of miR-1246 affected nous tumors (p=0,05). cell viability, colony formation and migration in CRC Conclusions: These results highlight the genetic features cell lines. of MCRC that could inﬂuence for tailored surveillance Funding: Funded by the Research Council of Lithuania programs. Additionally, data showed the mutational proﬁle (grant. no. S-MIP-17-22) differences between both tumors in MCRC patients. R. Lukosevicius: None. V. Salteniene: None. S. S. Tapial: None. D. Rueda: None. D. Gómez-Sánchez: Juzenas: None. R. Inciuraite: None. K. Balciute: None. None.N.Carrizo:None.Y.Rodríguez-Gil:None.I.Rey: P. Ruzgys: None. J. Skieceviciene: None. J. None. J. Perea: None. Kupcinskas: None. 
P12 .062.A 
P12 .061.C Constitutional mismatch repair deﬁciency is the differ- Molecular proﬁle of tumor DNA from patients with ential diagnosis in 0.41% of NF1/SPRED1-mutation metachronous colorectal cancer negative children suspected of sporadic neuroﬁbroma- tosis type 1 S. Tapial1,2, D. Rueda1,2, D. Gómez-Sánchez3, N. Carrizo3, Y. Rodríguez-Gil4, I. Rey2, J. Perea5 J. A. Perez-Valencia1, R. Gallon2, Y. Chen3, J. Koch4, M. Keller4, K. Oberhuber4, A. Gomes3, J. Zschocke4, J. Burn2, 1Digestive Cancer Research Unit, 12 de Octubre Research M. Jackson2, M. Santibanez-Koref2, L. Messiaen3, K. Institute, Madrid, Spain, 2Hereditary Cancer Laboratory, Wimmer4 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 3Lung Cancer Research Unit, 12 de Octubre Research Institute, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University Madrid, Spain, 4Pathology Department, 12 de Octubre Innsbruck,, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Faculty of Medical University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 5Surgery Department, Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United King- Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital, Madrid, dom, 3Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at SpainAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 509 Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States, 4Institute of E. Celik1,2, I. M. Akcay1,2, G. Alkurt1,2, J. Yildiz1,2, N. B. HumanGenetics,MedicalUniversityInnsbruck,Innsbruck, Agaoglu3, S. Canbek3, A. Kilic4, M. Ozcelik5, K. Ozdil6, E. Austria Zemheri7, G. Dinler-Doganay1,2, L. Doganay1,6 Introduction: Biallelic germline mismatch repair (MMR) 1GLAB (Genomic Laboratory), Health Directorate of gene mutations cause constitutional MMR deﬁciency Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Molecular (CMMRD), a highly penetrant childhood cancer syndrome Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Technical University, phenotypically overlapping with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Umra- (NF1).CMMRDtestinginsuspectedNF1 children without niye TeachingandResearch Hospital,UniversityofHealth NF1/SPRED1 mutations enables inclusion of CMMRD Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of General Sur- positives into monitoring programs prior to tumor onset. gery, Umraniye Teaching and Research Hospital, Uni- However, testing is associated with potential harms. The versityofHealthSciences,Istanbul,Turkey,5Departmentof prevalence of CMMRD among these children, although Oncology, Umraniye Teaching and Research Hospital, unknown, is estimated to be as low as 0.39%. University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Depart- Methods: We have previously developed a simple and ment of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Umraniye scalable microsatellite instability (MSI) assay of non- Teaching and Research Hospital, University of Health neoplastic leukocyte DNA to reliably detect CMMRD. Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Department of Pathology, Hereweusedthisassaytoretrospectivelyscreenacohortof Umraniye Teaching and Research Hospital, Umraniye, >700childrensuspectedofsporadicNF1,butlackingNF1/ University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey SPRED1germlinemutationsafterhighlysensitivemutation analysis. Introduction: Colorectal cancers (CRC) are the third most Results:ForthreeMSI-positivepatients,identiﬁcationof commoncancersandleadingcausesofdeathinTurkey.Up MMR gene germline mutations conﬁrmed the diagnosis of to 10% of all CRC cases are considered hereditary. Here, CMMRD. Founder mutations NM_000535.5(PM
S2 ): we aimed to characterize the spectrum of pathogenic var- c.736_741delinsTGTGTGTGAAG, prevalent in Europe iants in Turkish CRC patients and investigated the and North America, and NM_000179.2(MSH6):c.10C>G, phenotype-genotype relationships of these variants. affecting 1:400 French Canadians, represented two of ﬁve Materials and Methods: We sequenced the coding mutations. CMMRD prevalence was 3/735 (0.41%, 95% regions and splice junctions of 25 cancer susceptibility CI: 0.08-1.19%). genes in 174 unrelated CRC patients and 457 elderly Conclusions: Our empirical data provide reliable num- controls with no personal and familial cancer history using bers urgently needed for genetic counseling, and conﬁrm multi-gene panel testing. We also performed MLPA previous prevalence estimations on which the Care for analyses for mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2, CMMRD (
C4 CMMRD) consortium guidelines are based. MSH6, PM
S2 ) and EPCAM 3’UTR to detect gross These advocate CMMRD testing of preselected patients deletions. rather than offering reﬂex testing to all suspected sporadic Results: We detected pathogenic germline variants in NF1 children lacking NF1/SPRED1 mutations. The MMR 24.1% (19/79) of high-risk CRC patients, 6.3% (6/95) of mutations in the CMMRD patients identiﬁed here suggest low-risk CRC patients, and 2.6% (12/457) of healthy that thepossibility offounder effects should beconsidered, controls.54.2% (n=24)ofall pathogenicvariants werein in addition to 
C4 CMMRD guidelines, when counseling mismatch repair genes MLH1 (n = 7), MSH2 (n = 4) and NF1/SPRED1 mutation negative children. MSH6 (n = 2). 2 of these variants were gross deletions. This work was funded by Austrian Science Funds. MUTYH c.1437_1439delGGA variant was the most pre- J.A. Perez-Valencia: None.R.Gallon: None.Y.Chen: valent pathogenic variant. Monoallelic MUTYH mutations None. J. Koch: None. M. Keller: None. K. Oberhuber: were not signiﬁcantly associated with colorectal cancers None. A. Gomes: None. J. Zschocke: None. J. Burn: (p=0.2849). 47% of patients with MMR gene defects had None.M.Jackson:None.M.Santibanez-Koref:None.L. loss of MMR gene expression in their tumors. 4% (7/174) Messiaen: None. K. Wimmer: None. of all patients had mutations in well-known breast cancer genes and other cancer susceptibility genes. Variants of 
P12 .063.B uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS) were detected in more than Proﬁling the mutational spectrum of hereditary color- 34% of all subjects. ectal cancers in Turkey by using multi-gene panel tests Conclusions: This study provides important information toestimatethecontributionofcancersusceptibilitygenesto CRC in Turkish population, and to improve the interpreta- tion of VUS.510 J.delPicchia E.Celik:None.I.M.Akcay:None.G.Alkurt:None.J. ofMDS.Theidentiﬁcationofthesegeneswillleadtobetter Yildiz: None. N.B. Agaoglu: None. S. Canbek: None. A. understandingoftheMDSpathogenesisandmaycontribute Kilic: None. M. Ozcelik: None. K. Ozdil: None. E. to identify new therapeutic targets. Supported by RVO- Zemheri: None. G. Dinler-Doganay: None. L. VFN64165, IHBT-00023736. Doganay: None. Z. Zemanova: None. J. Brezinova: None. K. Svobo- dova: None. H. Lhotska: None. S. Izakova: None. L. 
P12 .065.A Lizcova: None. D. Vesela: None. S. Ransdorfova: None. Atypical deletion of 5q in myelodysplastic syndromes I. Mendlikova: None. K. Michalova: None. J. Cermak: (MDS) None. A. Jonasova: None. Z. Zemanova1, J. Brezinova2, K. Svobodova1, H. Lhotska1, 
P12 .066.B S. Izakova1, L. Lizcova1, D. Vesela1, S. Ransdorfova2, I. Genomic heterogeneity of tumor evolution in primary Mendlikova2, K. Michalova1, J. Cermak2, A. Jonasova3 and recurrent diffuse gliomas 1Center of Oncocytogenomics, Institute of Medical Bio- L. Lizcova1, D. Vesela1, K. Svobodova1, H. Cechova2, H. chemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, General University Lhotska1, L. Pavlistova1, L. Hodanova1, Z. Krejcik2, S. HospitalandFirstFacultyofMedicine,CharlesUniversity, Ransdorfova2, F. Kramar3, D. Netuka3, P. Hrabal4, K. Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematology and Michalova1, Z. Zemanova1 Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 31st Medical Department,GeneralUniversityHospitalandFirstFaculty 1CenterofOncocytogenomics,GeneralUniversityHospital ofMedicine,CharlesUniversity,Prague,CzechRepublic and1stFacultyofMedicine,CharlesUniversityinPrague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematology and Introduction:Theinterstitialdeletiondel(5q)isarecurrent Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 3The Neuro- cytogenetic aberration in bone marrow of patients with surgery and Neurooncology Department, Military Univer- myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). The extent of the del sity Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles (5q) varies in individual cases. Two different commonly University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Depart- deleted regions (CDRs) have been published: the proximal ment of Pathology, Military University Hospital, Prague, 5q31.2 region associated with a high-risk MDS, and the Czech Republic distal CDR 5q32-5q33 involved in the pathogenesis of MDSwithisolateddel(5q).However,rarecasesofatypical Introduction: Diffuse gliomas are highly heterogenous deletions not including deﬁned CDRs have also been tumors with occurrence of recurrent lesions in majority of reported. patients. During disease progression gliomas undergo cel- Materials and methods: During 1993-2019 we exam- lular and genomic evolution. However, the mechanism of ined bone marrow cells of 3714 MDS patients by thiscomplicatedprocessassociatedwithtreatmentfailureis conventional G-banding and I-FISH (Abbott). Extent of poorly understood. del(5q) was analyzed using multicolor banding (mBAND; MaterialsandMethods:Wecomparedgenomicproﬁles MetaSystems) and/or aCGH (Illumina, Agilent). of 28 primary and recurrent gliomas. To assess copy Results: del(5q) was detected in 920/3714 patients number variations, IDH1/IDH2 mutation status and hyper- (24,8%). Most of them had large deletion spanning both methylationofMGMT andMLH3promoters we usedarray deﬁnedCDRs.AtypicaldeletionswithretainedCDRswere CGH/SNP (Illumina, Agilent), I-FISH (Abbott Molecular, identiﬁed in 9/920 cases (1%; 4M/5F; median age, 73 MetaSystems) and MLPA/MS-MLPA (MRC Holland). years).Inﬁveofthemdel(5q)wasasoleaberration,infour Results:In27/28cases,thegenomicproﬁlesofrecurrent cases it was detected together with other chromosomal tumors were different from their primaries and shared the rearrangements. In all cases, deletion was localized genetic/epigeneticalterationsdependingontheevolutionary proximally to the 5q31 region. The size of the deleted pattern, i.e. linear or divergent. Except typical aberrations, segment ranged from 25.46 to 53.19 Mb (median recurrent lesions in all these patients included additional 38.51 Mb). gains/losses of various parts of different chromosomes Conclusions: Our results suggest that del(5q) may occur resulting in complex rearrangements. Repeatedly affected outside of deﬁned CDRs. Although these ﬁndings are regions were detected in bands 2q36.3, 3p11.1, 8q24.13, extremely rare, they show that also genes located outside 13q14, and 22q11.1. Besides copy number variations, known CDRs may contribute to the malignant progression cnLOH were proved in 25/28 cases, predominantly locatedAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 511 at 7p, 9p, 12p, and 17p. In one case, newly acquired Results: Modules in basics of cancer genomics, cancer chromothripsis of chromosomes 1, 9, 11 and 17 was genomics susceptibility, and precision oncology (technolo- observed. Hypermethylation of MGMT and/or MLH3 gical and clinical applications) have been developed. promoter was detectedin 10/28 recurrent tumors. Podcasts and blogs are currently in development. Initial Conclusions: Our study proved heterogenous pattern of user testing has been very positive with users rating the clonal evolution in gliomas which is characterized by platform as relevant to practice (x̄=4.57/5), with appro- acquisition of new genomic aberrations and leads to high priate length (x̄=4.29/5) and pace (x̄=4.14/5). genome instability. We proved, that recurrences are Conclusions: Nucleus can facilitate scalable cancer genetically/epigenetically different from their primaries genomics education and is well-received by clinicians. and may arise from one major tumor clone or by one or Modules will be combined with face-to-face teaching in a more subclones presented within primary tumors. Sup- blended learning course to be piloted in June 2020. ported by RVO-VFN64165 Subsequent expansion of further modules is planned over L. Lizcova: None. D. Vesela: None. K. Svobodova: the next 18 months. None. H. Cechova: None. H. Lhotska: None. L. V.Tripathi:None.A.E.Coulson:None.E.Cox:None. Pavlistova:None.L.Hodanova:None.Z.Krejcik:None. Z.Beydoun:None.V.Reeve:None.J.Malawana:None. S. Ransdorfova: None. F. Kramar: None. D. Netuka: A. Kulkarni: None. None. P. Hrabal: None. K. Michalova: None. Z. Zemanova: None. 
P12 .068.A Using genetics to understand the relationship between 
P12 .067.C non-cancerous gynaecological diseases and endometrial Development of a novel, online training platform for cancer risk genomics education in cancer care; preparing health- care professionals for "Generation Genome" T.A.O’Mara1,P.Kho1,S.Mortlock2,G.W.Montgomery2, A. B. Spurdle1, D. M. Glubb1 V. Tripathi1, A. E. Coulson1, E. Cox2, Z. Beydoun3, V. Reeve3, J. Malawana2, A. Kulkarni1 1QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia, 2The Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Uni- 1South East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Guy’s and versity of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United King- dom, 2Medics.Academy, London, United Kingdom, 3Guy’s Endometriosis, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United uterine ﬁbroids are three prevalent non-cancerous gynae- Kingdom cological diseases, affecting women of reproductive age, with unclear effects on endometrial cancer risk. Using Introduction:GenomictestingintheUKischanging,with GWAS summary statistics for each of these diseases (n morecliniciansorderinggenomictestsforpatientcare.The cases: 14,949 endometriosis; 4,890 PCOS; 20,101 uterine UK Government has called for improved education to ﬁbroid; 12,906 endometrial cancer), we performed genetic appropriately order and interpret tests. Existing evidence correlation, genetic causal inference (latent causal variable highlightsthebeneﬁtsofonlinelearning,aswellasthoseof and Mendelian randomization analysis) and gene-based blended delivery approaches, and initiatives need to be analyses (fastBAT analysis) to understand the relationship scalable to the wider workforce. We developed an online between these three non-cancerous gynaecological diseases platform (Nucleus) to address this need across for cancer and risk of endometrial cancer. We found positive genetic healthcare professionals in our region. correlation between endometrial cancer and PCOS Materials and Methods: Collaborating with healthcare (r =0.37, P=2×10−3) and endometrial cancer and uterine g technology company, Medics.Academy, Nucleus was ﬁbroids (r =0.24, P=7×10−3). There was no evidence of g developed based on face-to-face education delivered by genetic correlation between endometrial cancer and endo- Guy’s Hospital. Scoping exercises, literature reviews and metriosis.Asbodymassindex(BMI)isasharedriskfactor recommendations from national healthcare and govern- for PCOS, uterine ﬁbroids and endometrial cancer we mentalbodiesidentiﬁedtargetaudiences,trainingneedsand adjusted genetic correlation results for BMI. Upon this the utility of online training. Content was developed and adjustment, the signiﬁcant correlation between uterine reviewed by genetics clinicians. User testing data of an ﬁbroids and endometrial cancer remained; however, the initial Nucleus module was collected. genetic correlation between PCOS and endometrial cancer512 J.delPicchia was attenuated. Despite the signiﬁcant genetic correlation ddPCR. Associations between prom A/B, pathological observed, we did not ﬁnd evidence supporting a causal characteristics and mutations were explored through Fish- relationship between any of the three non-cancerous er’s exact test and Mann–Whitney test. gynaecological diseases and endometrial cancer develop- Results: Aromatase inhibitors were the main ET back- ment. Gene-based analyses prioritized seven endometriosis bone (70.83%). Median met_promA was 38.5%, met_- and ﬁve uterine ﬁbroids-associated genes that overlapped promB was 33%. Lower met_promA was observed in pts with endometrial cancer-associated genes, highlighting with liver metastases (P=0.0211) while for met_promB no potential shared pathways affecting risk of these diseases. differences were observed among sites, with the exception No PCOS-associated genes overlapped with endometrial of numerically higher levels in pts with soft tissue cancer-associated genes. Our study provides insights into involvement. Met_promA was signiﬁcantly lower in pts the shared relationship between PCOS, uterine ﬁbroids and withESR1mutations(median41vs25forESR1wild-type endometrialcancer,andavenuesforfutureresearch.Funded and mutated; P=0.0091) and numerically lower in pts with by NHMRC grants to TOM, ABS, GWM a PIK3CA mutation (median 40.5 vs 24 for PIK3CA wild- T.A.O’Mara:None.P.Kho:None.S.Mortlock:None. type and mutated). Three clusters were deﬁned by G.W. Montgomery: None. A.B. Spurdle: None. D.M. combiningmet_promAandB,withasigniﬁcantassociation Glubb: None. between PIK3CA mutations and Cluster1 (P=0.0025). Conclusions: The study showed the feasibility of a 
P12 .074.A ctDNA-based epigenetic evaluation. Intriguingly, differen- Prooﬁng the concept of a circulating tumor DNA-based tial methylation levels were observed across baseline clinically scalable workﬂow focused on ESR1 epigenetic features, suggesting a broader impact of epigenetic modiﬁcation in hormone receptor positive Metastatic modulation of ESR1 in breast cancer biology. Breast Cancer A. Franzoni: None. D. Basile: None. L. Allegri: None. D. Viotto: None. C. Corvaja: None. L. Bortot: None. E. A. Franzoni1, D. Basile2, L. Allegri3, D. Viotto4, C. Bertoli: None. S. Buriolla: None. G. Targato: None. L. Corvaja2, L. Bortot2, E. Bertoli5, S. Buriolla2, G. Targato5, Da Ros: None. S. Russo: None. M. Bonotto: None. L. L. Da Ros6, S. Russo7, M. Bonotto7, L. Gerratana2, B. Gerratana: None. B. Belletti: None. G. Baldassarre: Belletti4, G. Baldassarre4, F. Puglisi2, G. Damante8 None. F. Puglisi: None. G. Damante: None. 1Institute of Human Genetics-ASUFC Udine, Udine, Italy, 
P12 .075.B 2DAME-University of Udine, Department of Medical Identiﬁcation of modiﬁer and dependency genes for Oncology-IRCCS CRO Aviano, Udine/Aviano, Italy, human hereditary cancer syndromes using CRISPR/ 3DAME-University of Udine, Udine, Italy, 4Department of Cas9 mediated genome editing in Xenopus tropicalis Cancer Research and Advanced Diagnostics-IRCCS CRO Aviano,Aviano,Italy,5DAME-UniversityofUdine,Depart- T. Naert1, D. Dimitrakopoulou1, D. Tulkens1, S. ment of Oncology-ASUFC Udine, Udine, Italy, 6Depart- Demuynck1, K. Vleminckx1,2,3 ment of Medical Oncology-IRCCS CRO Aviano, Aviano, Italy, 7Department of Oncology-ASUFC Udine, Udine, 1Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent, Italy, 8Institute of Human Genetics-ASUFC Udine; DAME- Belgium, 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, University of Udine, Udine, Italy Belgium, 3Cancer Research Institute Ghent, Ghent, Bel- gium Background: ESR1 genomic alterations have been largely explored in Metastatic Breast Cancer (MBC) but little is CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome editing allows gene dis- knownabouttheirepigenetics.Aimofthestudywastotest ruption experiments in a multitude of organisms. Xenopus the feasibility of a circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA)-based tropicalis shares with zebraﬁsh an aquatic habitat and easy workﬂow focused on ESR1 mutations and promoter manipulations associated with its external development. methylation in MBC patients (pts) treated with endocrine However,uniquefeaturesmakeitafavorableandpowerful therapy (ET). organism for human disease modeling. Unlike zebraﬁsh, Methods: overall, 49 pts eligible for ﬁrst line ET were Xenopus tropicalis has a true diploid genome. Hence, gene prospectively enrolled. Mutations were evaluated through disruption studies are not suffering from redundancy. Its NGS, while the methylation of ESR1 promoter A and B genome shows high synteny with humans, assisting iden- (met_promA/B) was assessed through methylation-speciﬁc tiﬁcation orthologs of human genes. Targeted injection ofAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 513 individual blastomeres allows manipulations of speciﬁc of panels were analyzed for some patients, depending on tissues and organs. We generated the ﬁrst genetic cancer personal and/or family history. In 270 patients (18%) a modelsinXenopustropicalis.Uponmosaictargetingofthe variant (Class V, Class IV) was detected in the requested tumor suppressor gene Apc using CRISPR/Cas9, tadpoles panel. Our diagnostic yield increased with 3% (n = 47) rapidly(<1.5 months)and efﬁciently developed a range of compared to what we would have obtained if we had neoplasia characterizing Familial Adenomatous Polyposis applied our previous panels for these indications. This (FAP), including intestinal neoplasia, desmoid tumors and increaseismainlyattributabletotheexpansionofthepanels medulloblastomas. Similarly, Rb1/Rbl1 double mosaic withmoderateriskgenes,likeATM(19pathogenicvariants mutant tadpoles rapidly develop retinoblastoma. Most detected), BRI
P1  (7 pathogenic variants) and CHEK2 (6 recently we documented the generation of Tp53 hetero- mutations other than c. 1100delC) in our HBOC panel. zygous and homozygous mutant animals that develop sev- Interestingly, we also identiﬁed several variants in genes eral neoplasms characterizing Li-Fraumeni Syndrome, associated with rare syndromes - like NTH
L1  (homo- including leukemia and sarcoma. The rapid kinetics of zygous),BA
P1 ,POT1,MITF,RAD51D,CDH1,HOXB13, tumordevelopmentinthetadpoles/frogletspavethewayfor STK11andBMPR1A.Thetechniquealsoallowedtodetect their use as pre-clinical models. These cancer models pro- severalmosaicpatients(T
P53 )orpatientsdisplayingclonal vide unique possibilities for identiﬁcation of modiﬁer and hematopoiesis in their lymphocytes (T
P53 , ATM). Further dependency genes using multiplexed CRISPR/Cas9 gRNA validations include CNV detection and expansion with injections (e.g. tumor suppressor gene + candidate depen- additional genes allowing to analyze all patients with a dency gene). We present our results with multiplexed gene presumed predisposition for cancer in a uniform workﬂow. targeting in a FAP associated desmoid tumor model iden- K. De Leeneer: None. T. Rosseel: None. R. De Putter: tifying EZH2 as a druggable dependency factor. These None. I. Vandernoot: None. D. t’Kint de Roodenbeke: genetic Xenopus tropicalis models offer a unique experi- None.L.Wilderoo-VanWouwe:None.C.Kumps:None. mental platform in the ﬁeld of human cancer research and B. Poppe: None. K.B.M. Claes: None. medical genetics. T. Naert: None. D. Dimitrakopoulou: None. D. 
P12 .078.B Tulkens: None. S. Demuynck: None. K. Family HealthLink:A web-based family history triage Vleminckx: None. tool 
P12 .077.A K. M. Sweet Diagnostic yield of a comprehensive panel for cancer predisposition genes Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States K. De Leeneer1,2, T. Rosseel1, R. De Putter1,2, I. Although family history remains an essential tool for Vandernoot3, D. t’Kint de Roodenbeke4, L. Wilderoo-Van assessment of risk, diagnostics and prevention, it is often Wouwe1, C. Kumps1, B. Poppe1,2, K. B. M. Claes1,2 not systematically collected or assessed in clinical settings. Thus, individuals at increased risk for common diseases 1CMGG Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Can- such as cancer and/or coronary heart disease (CHD) might cer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium, notbeidentiﬁedorreferredappropriately.Aweb-basedtool 3Centre de génétique humaine - ULB, Brussels, Belgium, knownasFamilyHealthLinkwhichassessesfamilialcancer 4Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels, Belgium and CHD risk was made available for the general public (2010-2018) and as part of patient registration (2014-2018) We validated and implemented a custom panel of 66 genes with over 200,000 users. A one-page anonymous user sur- associated with familial cancer syndromes. Target enrich- veywasmadeavailableonthewebsiteduringaone-month mentwasdonebySeQCapEZHypercap(Roche)followed period (Jan-Feb 2018). Of 502 survey participants, 460 by sequencing on a Miseq or a Novaseq (Illumina) instru- (91.6%) found FHL easy to use; 476 (94.8%) felt the ment. Data analysis was performed with an in house assessmentwaseasytounderstand;and365(72.7%)found developed pipeline, allowing to limit the analysis to sub- the assessment accurate and complete. 337 (67.1%) felt the panels speciﬁed by the clinician. In total, 1522 patients program helped the user to learn more about cancer and referredtoourhospitalforclinicaltestingwereinvestigated. CHD disease risk; 421 (83.8%) would encourage a family Weanalyzedthefollowingsubpanels:melanoma(n=113), member to use the program, and 377 (75.1%) planned to colon cancer (n = 437), HBOC (n = 1026). Combinations talktotheirhealthcareproviderabouttheirrisk.Qualitative514 J.delPicchia researchonpatientusersshowedthatcertainaspectsofFHL describe the detection of a potentially novel biomarker that could be executed more effectively, to include increased canbeusedbothasamarkerforearlydetectionandatarget opportunityforpersonalizationofthewebinterfaceandrisk for individualized therapy in CRC patients. messaging.FHL version3.0isunder developmentandwill M. Staninova Stojovska: None. N. Matevska Gesh- allow for 1) automatic integration and updating of profes- kovska: None. B. Angelovska: None. N. Mitreski: None. sional guidelines (e.g. NCCN guidelines for hereditary M. Panovski: None. A.J. Dimovski: None. cancer);2) expansion asa mobileapplication and for EPIC electronic health record integration; and 3) capacity to 
P12 .084.B deliver tailored, evidence-based risk messages. Investigating the role of CD44v6 in Gastric Cancer: K.M. Sweet: None. development of exon-v6 skipping models by CRISPR/ Cas9 
P12 .080.A Two novel APC deletions resulting in a hybrid APC- S. Lobo1,2, C. Pereira1,2,3, C. Oliveira1,2,3, G. Almeida1,2,3 SR
P19  transcript with high sequence homology to U2AF35 splicing factor 1Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (I3s), Porto, Portugal, 2Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia da M. Staninova Stojovska1, N. Matevska Geshkovska1, B. Universidade do Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal, Angelovska2, N. Mitreski2, M. Panovski3, A. J. Dimovski1 3Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto (FMUP), Porto, Portugal 1Faculty of Pharmacy, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University Clinic for Radiotherapy Introduction: Gastric cancer (GC) isthe5th mostcommon and Oncology, UKIM-Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Mace- cancer and 3rd with highest mortality. Standard of care for donia,TheFormerYugoslavRepublicof,3UniversityClinic advanced disease is conventional chemotherapy. CD44v6- for Digestive Surgery, UKIM-Faculty of Medicine, Uni- containingisoformsaredenovoexpressedinGC,areoften verstity "Ss Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia, The correlated with cancer aggressiveness, and may predict Former Yugoslav Republic of chemotherapy response in vitro. Whether expression of CD44v6-containing variants, or presence of exon-v6 per se Germline mutations in the APC gene are the underlying in these isoforms, determine tumor behavior and therapy cause of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an auto- responseisunknown.Thisisrelevantfortherapeuticdesign somaldominant syndromecharacterized by thepresenceof and constitutes our main aim. multiple colorectal (CRC) adenomatous polyps. Although Materials and Methods: Using CRISPR/Cas9, we truncatingmutationsintheAPCgenearethemostcommon speciﬁcallydeletedexon-v6,whilstmaintainingthereading defects in FAP patients, recent papers indicate that in a frame, from two GC cell lines endogenously expressing signiﬁcant number of cases the disease develops due to CD44v6. Edited cell lines were characterized and treated large deletions that cannot be detected with routine testing. with cisplatin and 5-ﬂuorouracil. Cell survival was Here we describe two novel germline large deletions of the compared to wt controls. APC gene detected in 4 unrelated families presenting a Results: We obtained homozygous edited cell lines severe FAP phenotype. The deletions were characterized lacking exon-v6 that maintained expression of remaining usingMLPA,high-resolutionarray-CGHandbridging-PCR CD44 variant portions. Edited cells’ transcripts resulted in followed by Sanger sequencing methodologies. Both dele- frame v5-v7 splicing, mimicking complete exon-v6 skip- tions (123.466bp and 139.889bp) had a 5’ breakpoint in ping. Drug treatments’ results demonstrate that removing intron4oftheAPCgeneanda3’breakpointinintron4of speciﬁcally exon-v6 does not affects GC cells chemother- the SR
P19  gene, indicating that these regions are prone to apy response, however, skipping exon-v6 is sufﬁcient to recombination errors and might also be frequently affected impair GC cells self-renewing and decrease proliferation by somatic rearrangements in sporadic CRC. RT-PCR levels.Moreover,CD44v6-containingisoformsknockdown analysisshowedthatthedeletionsresultedintheproduction modulates cell survival in GC cells. ofahybridAPC-SR
P19 transcriptwithanORFof550AA, Conclusions: We successfully designed exon-v6 skip- with ~92% sequence homology with the ZRSR2 gene. The pingmodelsinGCcellslines.Theseexonskippingmodels ZRSR2 gene codes for the U2 small nuclear ribonucleo- areextremelyimportanttodiscloseexon-v6speciﬁcrolein protein auxiliary factor 35kD subunit-related protein-2, GC chemotherapy response. We conclude that CD44v6- which plays an important role in RNA splicing. Mutations containingisoformsmodulatecellsurvivalinGCcellsand, in this gene have been found in various hematological furthermore,exon-v6iscapableof,byitself,alteringoneof malignancies associated with poor overall survival. WeAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 515 cancerhallmarksbydecreasingtheproliferationcapacityof 
P12 .087.B GC cells. Microsatellite instability and Epstein-Barr Virus status Funding: FEDER/COMPETE:2020/POCI/Portu- in Russian gastric cancer patients. gal;2020/FCTproject-POCI-01-0145-FEDER-007274); NORT
E2020 /PORTUGA
L2020 /ERD project-NORTE-07- A. Danishevich1,2, N. Pospekhova1, A. Stroganova1, D. 0124-FEDER-000029;TDC/CTM-AN/120958/2010;SFRH/ Golovina1 BD/113031/2015(CP);iFCT/POPH-QRENType4.2,EDF, MCTES(IF/00615/2013;GMA) 1Federal State Budgetary Institution «N.N. Blokhin S.Lobo:None.C.Pereira:None.C.Oliveira:None.G. NationalMedical Research Center ofOncology», Moscow, Almeida: None. RussianFederation,2MoscowClinicalResearchcentern.a. A.S. Loginova, Moskow Helthcare Department, Moscow, 
P12 .085.C Russian Federation ARID1A and FAT4 genes are frequently mutated and deleted ina cohort of Omani patients with gastric Introduction: According to the The Cancer Genome Atlas adenocarcinoma (TCGA) Research Network classiﬁcation the Epstein-Barr Virus-associated (EBV +) and Microsatellite instability- Y.Tamimi1,A.Al-Abri1,F.A-Kindi1,M.Al-Riyami2,M.Al- associated (MSI) tumors are the molecular subtypes of Moundhri2 gastriccancer.Thesemarkersareusedasprognosticfactors and prediction of chemotherapy and immunotherapy 1SQU, Muscat, Oman, 2SQUH, Muscat, Oman efﬁcacy. Materials and Methods: FFPE tumor samples and Background: Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most clinicalinformationfrom150gastriccancerpatientstreated common diseases worldwide. The composition of the in N.N. Blokhin NMRCO in 2010-2019 have been molecular proﬁles of this disease is still not fully under- investigated.Fivequasimonomorphicmononucleotidemar- stood. ARID1A and FAT4 were identiﬁed as novel driving kers were used for the detection of MSI status. EBV status genes withapivotalroleinGCpathogenesis.Inthisstudy, has been determined by the quantitative Real-time-PCR. we used Sanger and gene panel exome sequencing (GPES) Results:The clinicopathological characteristics of the to assess the incidence rate of somatic mutations in FAT4 gastric cancer patients and their association with the and ARID1A in a cohort of Omani patients with GC and presence of EBV and MSI status are shown in Table 1. compared results to the TCGA and GEPIA databases. The majority of EBV-positive (n = 12, 92,31%, p < 0,05) Methods:DNAfrom75samplesweresubjectedtoGPES and MSI-High tumor samples (n = 6, 54,55%, p>0,05) as well as Sanger sequencing to screen for alterations in weredetectedinmales.EBV-associated(61,54%)andMSI- ARID1A and FAT4. In addition, we used different High (63,64%) gastric cancer cases were more often bioinformatics tools to retrieve TCGA data for 117 and diagnosed among patients over 55 years old. Half of 119 cases mutated in FAT4 and ARID1A, respectively. malignancies(n=7,53,85%ofEBV+andn=5,45,45% Mutations and deletions were subsequently correlated with of MSI-High) were located in the gastric body. Diffuse or clinical-pathological features and survival data. mixed subtypeswere frequently (61,54%) revealedin EBV Results: GPES data revealed that 44.2% of patients + samples, whereas 77,00% MSI-High were intestinal. displayed deletions within the ARID1A gene, and 27.9% There were no samples with both MSI-high and EBV+ in carried mutations. Samples from 20.9% of patients were our research. found to have deletions in FAT4, and 37.2% displayed variations. Sanger sequencing analysis of FAT4 identiﬁed Table 1. novel missense mutations in 8% of cases and genomic EBV- EBV- MSI- MSI-stable deletionsinexon-17in21.3%ofsamples.Insilicoanalysis positive negative High of tertiary protein structures, predicted alterations in two n(%) 13(8,67) 137(91,33) 11(7,33) 139 domains that contained mutations. (92,67) Gender Conclusions:Amarkedlyhigherfrequencyofmutations/ Male 74(49,33) 12(92,31) 62(45,26) 6(54,55) 68(48,92) deletions in ARID1A and FAT4 genes were found in GC Female 76 1(7,69) 75(54,74) 5(45,45) 71(51,08) patients from the Middle East region, reﬂecting the (50,67) Age(yr) importance of genetic background component variation ≥55 94 8(61,54) 85(62,04) 7(63,64) 88(63,31) among different ethnic groups. (62,67) Y.Tamimi:None.A.Al-Abri:None.F.A-Kindi:None. <55 56 5(38,46) 52(37,96) 4(36,36) 51(36,69) (37,33) M. Al-Riyami: None. M. Al-Moundhri: None.516 J.delPicchia median 55,05 54,46 63,31 57,50 64,18 panels. We detected low frequency mutations in the range Localization of 1%-24.5% across multiple reference standards with the Cardia/fundus 42 5(38,46) 37(27,00) 2(18,18) 40(28,78) (28,00) cancer panel, and observed high correlation in allele Body 58 7(53,85) 51(37,23) 5(45,45) 53(38,13) frequencywithexpectedvalues(R2>0.99).Similarresults (38,67) wereobtainedwiththeIonAmpliSeqCancerHotspotPanel Pylorus/antrum 20 1(7,69) 19(13,87) 0 20(14,38) (13,33) v2.Wholeexomesequencingandpancancersequencingof >1 30 0 30(21,90) 4(36,36) 26(18,70) clinicalFFPE,freshfrozenandbloodsamplesshowedhigh topographicarea (20,00) Subtype concordance (F1-score 95% - 99%) of SNV mutation Intestinal 70 5(38,46) 65(47,45) 7(77,00) 67(48,20) calling with industry standard technology. Thus, we (46,67) demonstrate that the GenapSys Sequencing Platform is an Diffuse/Mixed 80(53,33) 8(61,54) 72(52,55) 4(44,00) 72(51,8) accurate, scalable, and low cost solution for oncology Stage I 20 2(15,38) 18(13,14) 0 20(14,38) research on a wide range of sample types and NGS assays. (13,33) M. Fallahi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- II (2188,67) 4(14,28) 24(17,52) 2(18,18) 26(18,70) niﬁcant; GenapSys. S. Paliwal: A. Employment (full or III 55 5(38,46) 50(36,49) 6(54,54) 49(35,25) part-time);Signiﬁcant;GenapSysInc.A.Nabi:A.Employ- (36,67) ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GenapSys Inc. S. IV 47 2(15,38) 45(32,84) 3(27,27) 44(31,65) (31,33) Bagchi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GenapSys Inc. M. Jouzi: A. Employment (full or part- time); Signiﬁcant; GenapSys Inc. A. Thomas: A. Employ- Conclusions: The received results correspond to the ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GenapSys Inc. M. worldwide data and provide new possibilities for the Barmi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; treatment of Russian patients with gastric cancer. GenapSys Inc. S. Sankar: A. Employment (full or part- A. Danishevich: None. N. Pospekhova: None. A. time); Signiﬁcant; GenapSys Inc. H. Esfandyarpour: A. Stroganova: None. D. Golovina: None. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GenapSys Inc. 
P12 .089.A 
P12 .091.C Oncology research applications on the GenapSys high The role of miR-375 in the pathogenesis of gastrointest- accuracy sequencing platform inal stromal tumors M. Fallahi, S. Paliwal, A. Nabi, S. Bagchi, M. Jouzi, A. U. Gyvyte1, J. Bekampyte2, G. Gudoityte2, S. Juzėnas1,3, G. Thomas, M. Barmi, S. Sankar, H. Esfandyarpour Streleckiene1, R. Lukosevicius1, R. Inciuraite1, P. Ruzgys4, L. Kupcinskas1, J. Skieceviciene1 GenapSys Inc, Redwood City, CA, United States 1Institute for Digestive Research, Lithuanian University of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies have HealthSciences,Kaunas,Lithuania,2InstituteofOncology, revolutionized basic biological and clinical research, espe- Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithua- ciallyinoncology.NGScancerassaysareusedtodetermine nia, 3Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian- cancer predisposition, identify tumor mutations, monitor Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany, 4Biophysical treatment response and develop personalized therapies. Research Group, Vytautas Magnus University, Kaunas, Here, GenapSys presents a scalable, low cost, and high Lithuania accuracy sequencing platform based on electrical impe- dancedetection. WedemonstratethatChips with 1M,16M Introduction: Deregulated miRNA proﬁles and their con- and 144M sensors can be run on the same GenapSys tribution to carcinogenesis have been observed in virtually instrument, with greater than 99% raw accuracy and an all types of cancer. However, their contribution to the average read length of about 150bp. We highlight its pathogenesisofraregastrointestinalstromaltumors(GISTs) applications for oncology research, using diverse cancer isnotwelldeﬁnedyet.Inthisstudy,weaimedtoinvestigate panels on reference and clinical samples. the role of miR-375 - a well-known tumor-suppressive We tested hybrid-capture and multiplex PCR-based miRNA - in the pathogenesis of GIST. cancer panels on a range of DNA sources, including Materials and Methods: MirVana miRNA mimic and oncology reference standards derived from cell line DNA, negative control were transfected to the GIST-T1 cell line cfDNA standards, clinical samples: FFPE, fresh frozen using the lipofection technique. Target gene and protein tumor tissue, and blood. For hybrid-capture libraries, we expression were detected by RT-qPCR and Western Blot, used the IDT xGen Pan Cancer and Exome Research respectively.Alterationsincellviability,migrationrateandAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 517 apoptotic cell counts, as well as miRNA-target gene most likely representing neuroﬁbromas and several pale interaction, were evaluated by MTT, Wound Healing, café-au-lait spots. Annexin V FITC and Dual-Light Luciferase assays, It is remarkable that the syndromic condition of this respectively. Statistical analysis was performed using the patient was missed until the genetic diagnosis was made. computing environment R. Thediagnosisinsuchpatientsiscomplicatedbythehighde Results: Overexpression of miR-375 reduced levels of novomutationrateofabout50%.Thereforeitisimportant, KITgenemRNA(1.9-fold,p<0.05)andprotein(1.4-fold, to consider neuroﬁbromatosis type I also upon the p < 0.05) in GIST-T1 cell line. Further functional analysis apparently sole appearance of rare manifestations. Finally, revealed a signiﬁcant effect of miR-375 on cell viability patients with a subtle cutaneous phenotype are still at high (reducedby47%,p<0.05)andmigrationrates(reducedby risk of developing severe tumours. upto28%indifferenttimepoints,p<0.05).GIST-T1cells B.S.Küchler:None.W.Heinritz:None.A.Bier:None. withKIT3’UTRconstruct(pos855-861)showeddecreased S.Reif:None.C.Jänecke:None.M.Großmann:None.J. luciferase activity down to 76% when miR-375 was Plaschke: None. S. Krüger: None. overexpressed. Conclusions: Our ﬁndings indicate that miR-375 could 
P12 .095.A suppress GIST by targeting KIT and contribute to the Identiﬁcation of predisposing germline variants in pathogenesis of GIST. This study was funded by the familial glioma Research Council of Lithuania (Grant No: MIP-006/2014). U. Gyvyte: None. J. Bekampyte: None. G. Gudoityte: R. Nurminen*1,2, E. Afyounian*1,2, J. Tuominen1,2, M. None. S. Juzėnas: None. G. Streleckiene: None. R. Scaravilli1,2, M. Saarinen1,2, M. Annala1,2, N. Paunu3, H. Lukosevicius: None. R. Inciuraite: None. P. Ruzgys: Haapasalo4,5, M. Nykter1,2,6, K. J. Granberg1,2,6, * None. L. Kupcinskas: None. J. Skieceviciene: None. contributed equally 
P12 .092.A 1BioMediTech, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technol- Massive GIST as ﬁrst manifestation of neuroﬁbroma- ogy, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland, 2Tays Cancer tosis type I Center, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 3Department of Oncology, Tampere University Hospital, B.S.Küchler1,W.Heinritz2,A.Bier2,S.Reif2,C.Jänecke2, Tampere, Finland, 4Fimlab Laboratories Ltd, Tampere, M. Großmann2, J. Plaschke1, S. Krüger2 Finland, 5Department of Pathology, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland, 6Science Center, Tampere University 1MEWIGEN,Dresden,Germany,2ÜBAGfürHumangenetik Hospital, Tampere, Finland Oberelbe/Spree, Dresden/Cottbus, Germany Introduction: Although gliomas are generally sporadic, Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are the most there are families with several members affected by these commonmesenchymaltumoursinthegastrointestinaltract. tumors. With exception of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, little is The incidence is estimated at 4.3 - 22 cases per million. known about predisposing factors underlying familial GISTsareprimarilysporadic(85-90%)causedbysomatic aggregation of glioma cases. In this study, we aim to activating mutations in the KIT or PDGFRA genes, or less identify rare glioma predisposing variants for familial commonly BRAF or RAS. SDH gene inactivation is glioma. involvedinabout2%.MutationsintheNeuroﬁbromingene Materials and methods: We performed exome sequen- (NF1) were found in 6 - 9%. Clinicians should always cing of 13 individuals (8 affected and 5 unaffected family consider a germline condition, as our illustrative case members) from four Finnish glioma families with 50X demonstrates. coverage using blood-derived DNA. We called germline Here we report a patient (55y) who suffered from weight variants by using an in-house developed and GATK loss, intermittent sweating at night and postprandial pipeline. Variants were ﬁltered based on population allele abdominal pain. Computer tomography revealed a massive frequency and functional annotation. Variants, which were duodenal tumour (14x9x9 cm). The excised GIST was shared by all genotyped affected members in at least one tested negative for mutations in KIT, PDGFRA and BRAF. family, were validated by targeted sequencing in 15 Nopathogenicgermlinemutations wererevealedinSDHB, additional glioma families. A total of 115 known glioma- SDHC, SDHD, FLCN and PRKARA1A. However, the relatedvariantswerealsocoveredwithtargetedsequencing. pathogenic mutation c.6006+1G>T (NM_001042492.2) We are currently analysing targeted sequencing data. was identiﬁed in the NF1 gene. Subsequent clinical Results: A total of 470 variants were identiﬁed in four examinations revealed multiple nodular skin alterations glioma families after exome sequencing. Majority of518 J.delPicchia variantswereprivatemutationswithinonefamily(86%).A Results and conclusions: We found a new MM risk total of 8 variants were shared between affected cases and associated locus at chromosome 13. Further analysis using present in two to four families. No familial glioma- bloodandplasmacelleQTLdataidentiﬁedseveralpotential associated DNA copy number variants were detected. candidate genes at the locus, as well as a likely causal Preliminary analysis of targeted sequencing revealed that variant mapping to a regulatory element that is selectively 24% of variants were shared between two or more families open in plasma cells. Our study increases the number of and 41% were not detected in any family. known MM risk loci to 25. Conclusions: Our results indicate that Finnish glioma Grants and fellowships: Swedish Research Council families carry both private mutations and mutations which (2018-00424), Swedish Cancer Society (2017/265), Nordic are shared between families. The role of variants as Cancer Union (R217-A13329), Canfaster (EU-H2020- predisposing factors of glioma will be further evaluated. MSCA-COFUND-2016-754299). R. Nurminen*: None. E. Afyounian*: None. J. L. Duran-Lozano: None. G. Thorleifsson: A. Employ- Tuominen: None. M. Scaravilli: None. M. Saarinen: ment (full or part-time); Modest; Amgen Genetics. A. None.M.Annala:None.N.Paunu:None.H.Haapasalo: LopezdeLapuentePortilla:None.E.Johnsson:None.I. None. M. Nykter: None. K.J. Granberg: None. Turesson: None. N. Abildgaard: None. U. Mellqvist: None. N. Andersen: None. A. Waage: None. A. 
P12 .096.B Vangsted: None. M. Hansson: None. U. Thorsteinsdót- Meta-GWAS of multiple myeloma patients fromthe tir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Amgen NordicRegionidentiﬁesanewrisklocusinchromosome Genetics. T. Rafnar: A. Employment (full or part-time); 13 Modest; Amgen Genetics. K. Stefánsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Amgen Genetics. B. L.Duran-Lozano1,G.Thorleifsson2,A.LopezdeLapuente Nilsson: None. Portilla1, E. Johnsson1, I. Turesson3, N. Abildgaard4, U. Mellqvist5, N. Andersen6, A. Waage7, A. Vangsted8, M. 
P12 .097.C Hansson3,9, U. Thorsteinsdóttir2, T. Rafnar2, K. Impact of NGS in management of haematological Stefánsson2, B. Nilsson1,10 malignancies: experience after one year of routine in Euroﬁns-Biomnis laboratory 1Hematogenomics Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 2deCODE Genetics, V. Geromel1, P. Mouty1, C. Chal1, J. delaunay2, S. Sadot Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Lund University Hospital, Lund, Labouvier2, R. Kaphan3, B. Rossignol4, K. Le Dû5, J. Sweden, 4Department of Haematology, AgeCare, Odense Vigvari6,J.Coadic7,E.MarinLaMeslee7,R.Boutault8,O. University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 5Sodra Alvsborgs Roualdes9, C. Bourdin9, A. Petit9,1, M. Roumiguières9, L. Sjukhus Borås, Borås, Sweden, 6Department of Haematol- Raymond1, B. Quilichini9,1 ogy, Åarhus University Hospital, Åarhus, Denmark, 7St Olavs Hospital and Norwegian University of Science, 1Molecular genetics department of Euroﬁns-Biomnis Trondheim, Norway, 8Department of Haematology, Uni- laboratory,Lyon,France,2Haematologicalclinicaldepart- versity Hospital of Copenhagen at Rigshospitalet, Copen- ment, L’hôpital Privé du conﬂuent, Nantes, France, hagen,Denmark,9Myelomaresearchgroup,Departmentof 3Internal-oncology medicine department, Hospital center Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, of Cannes, Cannes, France, 4Haematological clinical 10Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States department, la Dracénie hospital center, Draguignan, France, 5Haematological department, Jean Bernard Le Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is a common Mans center, Le Mans, France, 6Internal medicin depart- hematologicalmalignancy,characterizedbyanuncontrolled ment, Sémur en Auxois Hospital Center, Semur-en-Auxois, expansion ofplasma cellsin thebone marrow. First-degree France, 7Labm, Bioloire laboratory, Nantes, France, relatives of MM patients have 2 to 4 times higher risk of 8Labm, Labomaine Laboratory,, Le Mans, France, 9Cellu- MM. Previous studies have identiﬁed 24 genomic loci lar haematology/cytogenetics department, Euroﬁns- associated with MM risk. However, these loci only explain Biomnis laboratory, LYON, France 15 to 20% of the heritability, indicating that the molecular basis of MM predisposition is incompletely understood. The biological management of haematological malignancies Materials and Methods: To identify MM risk loci, we requires close collaboration between cellular hematology, performed a genome-wide association study in the Nordic cytogenetics and molecular biology. In contrast totraditional region totalling 5,320 cases and 422,289 controls from single-gene methods, next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a Denmark, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. molecular diagnostic methodology that can study multipleAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 519 regionsofgenomictumorDNAinasingleassay.Since2019, expressed after histone acetylation. MiR-129-5p has been over 500 analyses were routinely performed with a com- showntoacttumorsuppressiveinseveraltumorentitiesand mercial panel allowing the analysis of 30 genes (Myeloid we aimed to investigate its role in HCC tumorigenesis. solution™ by SOPHiA GENETICS). Our experience is pre- Materials and Methods: After transfection of HCC cell sentedhere.Someclinicalcaseswereselected,forwhichthe lines (HLE, HLF, Huh7, HepG2) with miR-129-5p, tumor- results of the NGS analysis have contributed either to an relevant functional effects were analyzed using in vitro improvement in patient management, or to call into question assays and a xenograft mouse model. Luciferase reporter thediagnosticorprognosticvalueofthemolecularanomalies assays were performed to validate hepatoma-derived observed.Inparticular,thediagnosticvalueofCHIPs(Clonal growth factor (HDGF) as a direct target of miR-129-5p. Hematopoiesis of Indeterminate Potential) and the impact of HDGFexpressionandsurvivaldataofpublicHCCdatasets double mutations JAK2/CALR and JAK2/MPL in the pro- were analyzed. Cancer-related functions of HDGF were gression of myeloproliferative neoplasia are reviewed. In examined after siRNA-mediated knockdown. addition,theCNVinformationprovidedbyNGSisusefulfor Results: MiR-129-5p increased apoptosis and decreased the characterization of these diseases and complements the proliferation and migration in vitro and tumor growth cytogeneticresult.Inchronicmyeloidmalignancies,thelatest invivo.DirectbindingofmiR-129-5ptotheHDGF-3’UTR WHO classiﬁcation includes only mutations of the JAK2, via a noncanonical binding site was validated. HDGF CALR, MPL, CSF3R and SF3B1 genes in strict diagnostic knockdown increased apoptosis and attenuated cell viabi- criteria. However, the current OMS classiﬁcation of these lity,migration,andWnt/β-cateninsignalingactivityofHCC haematological malignancies will certainly be redeﬁned by a cells.OverexpressionofHDGFcorrelatedwithpooroverall more exhaustive molecular approach based on recent NGS survival, especially in Wnt-inactive HCCs. contributions. Conclusions:HDACinhibitioninducesexpressionofthe V. Geromel: None. P. Mouty: None. C. Chal: None. J. tumor suppressor miR-129-5p which plays an important delaunay: None. S. Sadot Labouvier: None. R. Kaphan: role in hepatocarcinogenesis by regulating HDGF. In the None. B. Rossignol: None. K. Le Dû: None. J. Vigvari: future, direct transfer of miR-129-5p or inhibition of its None. J. Coadic: None. E. Marin La Meslee: None. R. target genes may be considered for HCC therapy. In this Boutault: None. O. Roualdes: None. C. Bourdin: None. context, inhibition of HDGF may be particularly beneﬁcial A. Petit: None. M. Roumiguières: None. L. Raymond: in Wnt-inactive HCCs. None. B. Quilichini: None. N. Huge: None. M. Sandbothe: None. T. Reinkens: None. M. Decker: None. A. Stalke: None. R. Buurman: 
P12 .098.A None. B. Vajen: None. V. Schäffer: None. M. Eilers: EpigeneticallyregulatedmiR-129-5pfunctionsastumor None. O. Dittrich-Breiholz: None. F. Kühnel: None. B. suppressor in liver cancer by directly targeting HDGF Schlegelberger: None.T.Illig: None.B.Skawran:None. N. Huge1, M. Sandbothe1, T. Reinkens1, M. Decker1, A. 
P12 .099.B Stalke1,R.Buurman1,B.Vajen1,V.Schäffer1,M.Eilers1,O. Characterization of somatic copy number variations in Dittrich-Breiholz2, F. Kühnel3, B. Schlegelberger1, T. head and neck squamous cell carcinomas Illig1,4, B. Skawran1 N. Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3, J. L. García3,1, J. Fernández- 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical Mateos1,2, P. García-Vallés2, D. Iglesias-Corral3,1,2, A. School, Hannover, Germany, 2Research Core Unit Geno- Martel-Martel1,2, E. Del Barco4,1, M. A. Gómez Muñoz5,1, mics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, A. B. Herrero2,1,3, R. González-Sarmiento2,1,3, J. J. Cruz- 3Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endo- Hernández4,1,2,3 crinology,,HannoverMedicalSchool,Hannover,Germany, 4Hannover Uniﬁed Biobank, Hannover Medical School, 1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Hannover, Germany Salamanca, Spain, 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, Introduction: In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) an 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer overexpression of histone deacetylases (HDACs) has (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, become evident. This results in chromatin compaction and Spain, 4Medical Oncology Service, University Hospital of silencing of microRNAs (miRNAs). To identify epigeneti- Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 5Service of Pathol- cally regulated miRNAs we analyzed global miRNA ogy, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, expression after HDAC inhibition in HCC cell lines. Spain Amongst others, we identiﬁed miR-129-5p to be re-520 J.delPicchia Background: Most Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carci- acute lymphoblastic leukemia as part of a fusion gene. The nomas (HNSCC) are diagnosed in locally advanced stages functional regulation of HLF is poorly understood. From and, despite advances in treatment, survival rates are still previous studies, we were led to hypothesize that taranis very low. The aim of this study was to identify recurrent (tara) regulates HLF ortholog. tara has four orthologs: somatic alterations in HNSCC that could be relevant in CDCA4 (Cell Division Cycle Associated 4), SERTAD2 cancer initiation, progression or stratiﬁcation. (SERTA Domain Containing 2), SERTAD3 (SERTA Patientsandmethods:Tumoursamplesfrom98patients Domain Containing 3), and SERTAD1 (SERTA Domain included in clinical trial TTCC-2007-01 were used. All Containing 1). The ﬁrst three tara orthologs are associated patients presented locally advanced epidermoid carcinomas with diseases. (non-metastaticstagesIIIandIV)atdifferentlocations;oral MaterialsandMethods:GenomiceditingwithCRISPR/ cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx and larynx. Tumours Cas9, protein quantiﬁcation through western blotting, wereanalysedbyOncoScan®assayandbioinformatictools protein co-immunoprecipitation, transcriptional activity (Bioconductorpackage,GISTICandWebGestaltsoftware), assays in heterologous cell lines, and statistical analysis. to detect genome-wide copy number variations and loss of Results: TARA enhances the transcriptional activity of heterozygosity. HLF ortholog. In the nucleus, HLF ortholog levels are Results and discussion: We identiﬁed genomic regions affected by tara. TARA forms a physical complex with recurrently ampliﬁed (1q, 3q, 5p, 8q and 12p) and deleted HLF ortholog. More speciﬁcally, of the four conserved (3p, 9p and 11q) in HNSCC. We considered the ampliﬁca- domains present in all four tara orthologs, the SERTA tion in 1q21.3, identiﬁed in 58% of the samples to be domain is the only domain required for the transcriptional particularly interesting. Gene enrichment analysis in this activity of HLF ortholog. region revealed a signiﬁcant association with processes Conclusions: In this work, we shed new light into the related to epithelial development. Region 1q21.3 contains molecular mechanisms that regulate the transcriptional FLG, IVL and LOR genes, that codify proteins highly activity of HLF ortholog. Plausibly, CDCA4, SERTAD2, expressed in the epithelium. Germinal mutations in these SERTAD3,and/orSERTAD1mayregulateHLFtroughan geneshavebeenassociatedwithgenodermatosissuggesting identical molecular mechanism. that their somatic alteration could also be involved in the D. Silva Afonso: None. O. Akpoghiran: None. K. pathogenesis of HNSCC. Koh: None. Conclusion: The chromosomic region 1q21.3, that containsFLG,IVLandLORgenes,isrecurrentlyampliﬁed 
P12 .101.A in HNSCC. The present study brings new data to HNSCC Argonaute-RIP-Sequencing identiﬁes new microRNA- research widening the spectrum of changes that could help 449a target genes in hepatocellular carcinoma to identify critical regions for tumorigenesis. Funded by FIS-FEDER:PI18/01476. T. Reinkens1, N. Huge1, A. Stalke1, B. Vajen1, O. Dittrich- N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. J.L. García: None. J. Fernán- Breiholz2, B. Schlegelberger1, T. Illig1, B. Skawran1 dez-Mateos: None. P. García-Vallés: None. D. Iglesias- Corral: None. A. Martel-Martel: None. E. Del Barco: 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical None. M.A. Gómez Muñoz: None. A.B. Herrero: None. School, Hannover, Germany, 2Research Core Unit Geno- R. González-Sarmiento: None. J.J. Cruz- mics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany Hernández: None. Introduction: MicroRNAs are important transcriptional 
P12 .100.C regulators that target multiple molecules affecting disease Identiﬁcation of a novel regulator of the hepatic development. The regulatory potential of tumor suppressor leukemia factor HLF ortholog miRNAs represents an interesting option for cancer ther- apeutics. It has been shown that overexpression of miR- D. Silva Afonso1,2,3, O. Akpoghiran3, K. Koh3 449a reduces tumor growth of hepatocellular carcinoma in vivo and in vitro. However, only few direct target genes 1Centro Hospitalar Universitario de Coimbra, Coimbra, of miR-449a have been validated to date. Therefore, we Portugal, 2ICVS/3B’s - PT Government Associate Labora- analyzed the targetome of miR-449a to decipher the large tory, Braga, Portugal, 3Department of Neuroscience and networkoftargetgenesandinvolvedsignalingpathwaysin the Farber Institute for Neurosciences, Thomas Jefferson order to understand its role in hepatocellular carcinoma. University, Philadelphia, PA, United States Methods: HLE cells transfected with miR-449a were used for Argonaute-RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) and Introduction: HLF is associated with precursor B-cell subsequenthigh-throughputsequencing.LuciferasereporterAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 521 assays were performed to validate PEA15, PP
P1 CA and between 2017-2019. A BOADICEA risk score was TUFT1 as direct targets of miR-449a. Expression of these calculated to determine the risk of a second breast cancer genes in correlation with survival data in public HCC in these women. datasets was analyzed. Cancer-related functional effects Results: We present ﬁndings that highlight a lack of were examined after siRNA-mediated knockdown of correlation between the used risk stratiﬁcation sources, PEA15. including BOADICEA and Reiner et al. (2013 and 2018). Results: Ago-RIP-Seq identiﬁed 183 genes as direct Conclusions: We conclude that clinicians can utilise targets of miR-449a. Seven genes were selected for further scenario-basedguidancetoassistinmakingdecisionsabout investigation, as they are potential tumor suppressors RRM in affected individuals for speciﬁc high-risk family according to manual literature search. Reduced mRNA histories, which is derived from the use of validated tools expression following miR-449a overexpression was con- such as BOADICEA and also prospective data from the ﬁrmed in all of these genes. Direct binding of miR-449a to literature. the3’UTRofPEA15,PP
P1 CAandTUFTwasvalidated.In Outcome: We propose using an audited categorised HCC datasets overexpression of PEA15, PP
P1 CA or approachtosurgicalRRMdecision-makinginwomenwith TUFT1 correlated with poor overall survival. unilateral breast cancer, which incorporates personal and Conclusions: Ago-RIP-Seq is a promising method to family history based guidance. decipherthenetwork ofmicro-RNAtargetgenes. Here,we A. Kerr: None. A. Kulkarni: None. L. Izatt: None. A. identiﬁedseveralnewmiR-449a targetsprovidingpotential Shaw: None. B. DeSouza: None. D. Ruddy: None. S. targets for cancer therapy. Rose: None. J. Cameron: None. V. Tripathi: None. This project is supported by the German Cancer Aid funding. 
P12 .104.A T.Reinkens:None.N.Huge:None.A.Stalke:None.B. CanVaS: A national registry of Greek cancer patient Vajen: None. O. Dittrich-Breiholz: None. B. Schlegel- genetic variation berger: None. T. Illig: None. B. Skawran: None. D. Kalfakakou1, F. Fostira1, P. Apostolou1, A. 
P12 .103.C Papathanasiou1, I. E. Gavra1, V. Dellatola1, I. S. A categorised approach for women with a diagnosis of Vlachos2,3, Z. G. Scouras4, E. Drosopoulou4, D. breastcancerandanegativebreastcancersusceptibility Yannoukakos1, I. Konstantopoulou1 gene test requesting risk-reducing mastectomy 1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, INRaSTES, National A.Kerr1,A.Kulkarni1,L.Izatt1,A.Shaw1,B.DeSouza1,D. Center for Scientiﬁc Research “Demokritos”, Athens, Ruddy1, S. Rose1, J. Cameron2, V. Tripathi1 Greece, 2Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pathol- ogy, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center / Harvard 1Clinical Genetics Service, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Broad Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2School of Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom States,4DepartmentofGenetics,Development&Molecular Biology, School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessa- Introduction: Making an evidence based decision about loniki, Thessaloniki, Greece risk-reducing mastectomy (RRM) is complex. We devel- oped and audited an algorithm for women with a diagnosis Introduction: Recent advances in sequencing technologies ofbreastcancer,anegativebreastcancersusceptibilitygene have allowed the integration of large genetic variation test and a high-risk breast cancer family history requesting datasets in public resources, providing the foundation for RRM. This incorporates current National Institute for precisionmedicine.Theyhavealsointroducedthenecessity HealthandCareExcellence(NICE)FamilialBreastCancer for inter- and intra-population genetic/genomic data Clinical guideline [CG164] (2013) and the ﬁndings from recording, in order to capture variation between and within Reiner et al. (2013 and 2018) who found that women populations. National genetic variation registries could diagnosed<45yearshadahighriskofdevelopingasecond serve both ends by vastly increasing the level of detail for primary breast cancer when they had a ﬁrst degree relative therelevantpopulation,whiledirectlyaffectinglocalpatient (FDR) with breast cancer. management. Methods and materials: 39 women with breast cancer Methods:WereportCanVaS,aCancerVariationreSource diagnosed <45 years old, a negative breast cancer suscept- aimingtodocumentthegeneticvariationofcancerpatientsin ibility gene test and a FDR with breast cancer were Greece. Currently, CanVaS comprises germline genetic data identiﬁed out of 213 women who had genetic testing522 J.delPicchia from ~11,000 Greek cancer patients, analyzed for the CRC cases may be attributed to the accumulation of low presence of variants in 1-94 cancer susceptibility genes. risk alleles for CRC. Results: The dataset incorporates ~3,700 functionally Materialandmethods:Aweightedpolygenicriskscore annotated coding variants and ~3,000 variants in non- (wPRS) based on 95 CRC risk alleles identiﬁed and codingloci.Foreachvariant,allelefrequencyfortheGreek validated through genome-wide association studies population, clinical signiﬁcance interpretation and anon- (Huyghe et al. Nature genetics 2018), was determined in ymized family, segregation information, and phenotypic 421 familial/early-onset unrelated CRC patients (fCRC), traits of the carriers are included. Moreover, it provides 1,077 sporadic CRC patients, and 1,642 cancer-free information on the geographic distribution of the variants controls. Logistic regression was used to model the risk. across the country, enabling the study of Greek population Two-sided t-test was applied to compare means among isolates. Direct comparisons between Greek (sub)popula- cohorts. Additionally, we grouped individuals (fCRC and tions with relevant genetic resources issupported, allowing controls)into20quantiles.Oddsratios(OR)wereestimated ﬁne-grain localized adjustment of guidelines and clinical taking the quantile 10 as reference. decision-making. Most importantly, anonymized data are Results: The average wPRS was statistically higher in available for download, while our ﬁrst priority is integra- fCRC patients compared to either controls (P =2.2e-16), t-test tion/interconnection with other resources, such as the withanORof22.8,orsporadicCRCpatients(P =0.004). t-test Leiden Open Variation Database. Familial CRC patients in the highest (20th) wPRS quantile Conclusions:CanVaScanbecomeastepping-stonefora were at a four-fold increased CRC risk than those in the countrywide effort to characterize the cancer mutation middle (10th) quantile. The frequency of high-wPRS fCRC landscape, concurrently supporting national and interna- patients who had developed multiple (synchronous or tional cancer research. metachronous) colorectal tumors and that had familial CRC Acknowledgments: Supported by Stavros Niarchos historywashigherthaninlow-wPRSpatients.Theheritability Foundation Industrial Research Fellowship Program. explained by the studied alleles was of 37.48% for fCRC. D. Kalfakakou: None. F. Fostira: None. P. Apostolou: Conclusions: The accumulation of low risk CRC alleles None. A. Papathanasiou: None. I.E. Gavra: None. V. may explain a relevant proportion of familial/early-onset Dellatola:None.I.S.Vlachos:None.Z.G.Scouras:None. CRC cases without germline pathogenic variants in known E. Drosopoulou: None. D. Yannoukakos: None. I. hereditary cancer genes. Konstantopoulou: None. L. Valle: None. P. Mur: None. N. Bonifaci: None. A. Díez-Villanueva: None. E. Munté: None. M. Alonso: 
P12 .105.B None. G. Aiza: None. M. Navarro: None. J. Brunet: Non-Lynch familial nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is None. V. Moreno: None. G. Capellá: None. partially explained by accumulation of CRC-associated low risk variants 
P12 .106.C Assessment of the causal association of recently pro- L.Valle1,2,P.Mur1,2,N.Bonifaci1,A.Díez-Villanueva3,4,E. posed candidate genes with colorectal cancer and Munté1, M. Alonso3,4, G. Aiza1, M. Navarro1,2, J. polyposis predisposition Brunet1,5,2, V. Moreno3,4, G. Capellá1,2 I.Quintana1,P.Mur1,2,E.Munté1,M.Terradas1,2,G.Aiza1, 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncol- M. Navarro1,2, J. Brunet1,2,3, G. Capellá1,2, L. Valle1,2 ogy;OncobellProgram,IDIBELL,HospitaletdeLlobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERONC, Madrid, Spain, 3Unit of 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncol- Biomarkers and Susceptibility, Cancer Prevention and ogy;OncobellProgram,IDIBELL,HospitaletdeLlobregat, Control Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology; Oncobell Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERONC, Madrid, Spain, 3IDIBGi, Program, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Girona, Spain Spain, 4CIBERESP, Madrid, Spain, 5IDIBGi, Girona, Spain Introduction:Apreviousinsilicostudyidentiﬁed49genes as the most-frequently enriched in rare damaging germline Introduction: Much of the genetic predisposition to col- variants in samples with putative somatic loss of hetero- orectal cancer (CRC) cannot be explained by pathogenic zygosity (LOH) in cancer patients, thus presenting as good variants in known high/moderate-penetrance cancer- candidates for cancer predisposition. Based on their func- predisposing genes. Here we aim to investigate whether tion,involvementinCRCcarcinogenesis andexpressionin part of the genetically unexplained familial/early-onset colonic mucosa, we selected six of those genes: NSD1,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 523 HDA
C10 , KRT24, BB
S1 , ACACA and T
P63 , to evaluate age of diagnosis, family history, and relevant phenotypic theiractualinvolvementincolorectalcancerpredisposition. features. Materials and methods: Germline mutational screening Results: A total of 757 patients met testing criteria for of the six genes was performed in 738 patients (465 state funding, and were offered panel testing relevant to familial/early onset CRC patients, 177 (attenuated) familial their cancer diagnosis and/or family history. Pathogenic adenomatous polyposis and 96 serrated polyposis patients) variantsweredetectedin13%(n=101).Individualpanel by using pooled DNA ampliﬁcation followed by targeted yield varied, with a trend suggesting that clear concomi- next generation sequencing. The impact of the identiﬁed tant phenotypic features, such as skin signs with renal missense variants was analyzed by using 13 pathogenicity cancer, increased the likelihood of a panel yielding a prediction tools. Co-segregation studies and second hit positive result. Positive results also varied by speciﬁc analysisintumorsorpolypsarecurrentlybeing performed. cancer pathology. Of patients presenting with a primary Results and conclusions: Twenty-four carriers of breast cancer (n = 335), 12% had a pathogenic mutation. disruptive or predicted deleterious variants in the studied The mutation pickup rate for a triple hormone-receptor genes were identiﬁed. Assessment of allele frequencies in negative breast cancer n = was 18%, but only 10% for controls compared to familial/early-onset CRC patients breastcancerswithatleastonehormone-receptorpositive showed an association of NSD1 disruptive variants with pathology result (n = 237). increased CRC risk, and no association was detected for Conclusions: This project demonstrates that ongoing ACACA. No conclusive evidence was found for HDA
C10 , review of publicly funded testing is warranted. KRT24, BB
S1  and T
P63 . Results from co-segregation and R.Sheridan:None.M.Bogwitz:None.P.James:None. secondhitanalyseswillprovidefurtherevidenceinfavoror I. Winship: None. against the association of those genes with CRC predisposition. 
P12 .110.A Grant:BES-2017-079701(Co-fundedbyEuropeanSocial Oncopanel screening for hereditary cancers: a retro- Fund. ESF investing in your future) spective review of a hospital-based experience I.Quintana:None.P.Mur:None.E.Munté:None.M. Terradas: None. G. Aiza: None. M. Navarro: None. J. E. Yilmaz1,2, E. Borklu Yucel2, S. Avci2, H. Azakli2, P. Brunet: None. G. Capellá: None. L. Valle: None. Saracoglu2, S. Eraslan2, H. Kayserili2 
P12 .108.B 1Research Center for Translational Medicine (KUTTAM), Clinical audit of multigene panel testing at the Royal Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Melbourne Hospital Genetics, School of Medicine, Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey R. Sheridan1,2, M. Bogwitz2, P. James3, I. Winship1,2 In the last decade, cancer, as a large group of diseases 1University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 2Royal described as an uncontrollable abnormal cell growth that Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 3Peter MacCal- canstartinalmostanyorganortissueofthebody,becomes lum Cancer Centre, Parkville, Australia the major health problem and the second leading cause of death globally. The leading types are lung, breast, color- Introduction:In2016theParkvilleFamilialCancerCentre ectal,prostateandstomach cancers.18.1millionnewcases at the Royal Melbourne Hospital introduced panel based were diagnosed globally in 2019 and only 5-10% of them genetic testing to screen for hereditary cancer syndromes. are attributed to hereditary factors. Genetic testing can be Multigene panel tests allow simultaneous screening for offerednotonlytoidentifytheindividuals’cancerrisk,but pathogenic variants in multiple cancer predisposition genes also to enable the possibility of molecular targeted thera- and replaced iterative single gene tests, which proved to be pies. Here, we report the retrospective analysis of a single slow,inefﬁcientandexpensive.Thisstudyseekstovalidate institution’s 3-year experience of oncopanel sequencing, the clinical testing criteria used by the Familial Cancer which targets94 genes and 284 SNPs, carriedout byusing Centre and to identify areas of improvement to increase peripheral blood samples. 125 unrelated patients with a overall clinical utility. male:female ratio of 1:4 (mean age 40(sd 6,51)) were Materials and Methods: This study used a tailored screened.Ourstudiesshowedthat72%ofthecaseshaveat databaseextractiontocollatepaneltestingresultsovera28- least one variant classiﬁed as pathogenic, possibly patho- month period, and these results were analysed in conjunc- genic or of unknown signiﬁcance in targeted regions. tionwithrelevantpatientdata,suchasprimarycancertype, Pathogenic variants were detected in 12%, and possible pathogenic variants were detected in 18% of the cases.524 J.delPicchia CHEK2 and ATM were detected as most common genes in guidelines (both applying the T
P53  rule speciﬁcations patients with pathogenic mutations. Although pathogenic (v.1) provided by the ClinGen T
P53  Expert Panel, and variantdetectionrateisrelativelyhigh,variantsofunknown automatically using PathoMan). signiﬁcance(VUS),whichwerefoundin42%ofthecases, Results: (Likely) pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in are also needed to be evaluated carefully, especially in 0.03% of controls and ~0.21% of CRC patients hereditary forms ofcancer. It is obvious that more research (p < 0.0001), none of whom fulﬁlled the clinical criteria on VUS and assessment of their effect on cancer develop- established for T
P53  testing. Loss-of-function/splice-site ment is essential to shed light to underlying pathogenicity variants were signiﬁcantly associated with CRC as and medical management. compared with controls (OR=19; p <0.001). Compared to E. Yilmaz: None. E. Borklu Yucel: None. S. Avci: LFS,enrichmentofthistypeofvariantsandofvariantswith None. H. Azakli: None. P. Saracoglu: None. S. Eraslan: nodominantnegativeeffectwasobservedinCRCpatients. None. H. Kayserili: None. Conclusions: T
P53  pathogenic variants should not be unequivocally associated with LFS. The association with 
P12 .111.B CRC risk may be explained by the absence of dominant T
P53 pathogenicvariantsincolorectalcancerpatientsin negative effects and/or the loss-of-function nature of the absence of Li-Fraumeni-associated phenotypes variants. M. Terradas: None. P. Mur: None. S. Belhadj: None. M. Terradas1,2, P. Mur1,2, S. Belhadj1, E. R. Woodward3,4, E.R. Woodward: None. G.J. Burghel: None. P.M. G. J. Burghel3, P. M. Munoz-Torres1, I. Quintana1, M. Munoz-Torres: None. I. Quintana: None. M. Navarro: Navarro1, J. Brunet1,5, C. Lázaro1, M. Pineda1, V. None. J. Brunet: None. C. Lázaro: None. M. Pineda: Moreno6,7, G. Capellá1, G. R. Evans3,4, L. Valle1,2 None. V. Moreno: None. G. Capellá: None. G.R. Evans: None. L. Valle: None. 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncol- ogy;OncobellProgram,IDIBELL,HospitaletdeLlobregat, 
P12 .112.C Spain, 2CIBERONC, Madrid, Spain, 3Manchester Centre Clinicalsigniﬁcanceofgenemutationsandpolymorphic for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester variants and their association with prostate cancer risk University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United in Polish men. Kingdom, 4Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of M. Heise1, P. Jarzemski2, A. Junkiert-Czarnecka1, A. Bąk1, Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Catalan Insti- M. Pilarska-Deltow1, M. Borysiak2, O. Haus1 tute of Oncology, IDIBGi, Girona, Spain, 6Unit of Biomarkers and Susceptibility, Cancer Prevention and 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, ControlProgram,CatalanInstituteofOncology,IDIBELL, Collegium Medicum, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 7CIBERESP, Madrid, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 2Department of Urology, Jan Biziel Spain University Hospital, Bydgoszcz, Poland Introduction: Germline T
P53  pathogenic variants cause Introduction: We tested the association of BRCA1, Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), an aggressive multi-tumor- BRCA2, CHEK2, CDKN2A, HOXB13, MLH1, NB
S1 , predisposingcondition.Duetotheimplementationofmulti- NOD2, PALB2, CY
P1 B1, PON1, 8q24 mutations and gene panel testing, T
P53  variants have been detected in polymorphismswithprostatecancer(PC)riskandanalyzed individuals without LFS suspicion, e.g. colorectal cancer the impact changes on disease clinical course, including (CRC) patients. We aim to decipher whether these ﬁndings overall survival time. are the result of detecting background population pre- Material: DNA from 110 men with PC from all over valence or the etiologic basis of CRC. Poland and from 110 men - healthy volunteers. MaterialsandMethods:T
P53 mutationalscreeningwas Methods: Sequencing, AS-PCR, RFLP-PCR, multiplex- performed in 473 familial/early-onset CRC cases. Our PCR. ﬁndings were analyzed together with results from ﬁve Results: The percentage of men with ≥1 change was additional studies that evaluated the prevalence of T
P53  higherinPCgroup(61,8%)thaninhealthymen(52,3%)(p germline variants in CRC patients (total n=6,200). Data = 0,15). The presence of at least two changes was from control population and LFS cases were obtained from associated with shorter patient survival than the presence gnomAD and the IARC T
P53  database, respectively. All of one or no change (p = 0,14). The G84E of HOXB13 variants were reclassiﬁed according to ACMG/AMP was detected in 2,9% of PC men and in no healthy manAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 525 (p=0,19,trend,OR=7,21).TheaverageageatPConsetof Amsterdam guidelines and analysed for other familial men with CY
P1 B1 432GG and PON1 55AA originated tumour syndromes. The results were compared to the self- from Hereditary Prostate Cancer Families (HPC) was assessment risk-score. signiﬁcantly younger than the age of men with Results: In 41/100 patients the questionary screening these variants from families without HPC (respectively: approach indicated a familial colorectal cancer risk p = 0,0077, p = 0,0350). compared to 22 patients by pedigree analysis. Into the Conclusions:Thepresenceofatleastonegeneticchange positive questionary group fell 16/22 of these patients. In 9 isan unfavorable factorin PC. The presence of≥2 changes cases the family trees identiﬁed criteria for other familial may be associated with shorter survival. The HOXB13 cancer syndromes. (G84E) are probably associated with PC development and Conclusions: The questionnaire is a valuable screening with hereditary form of the disease. The CY
P1 B1 (432GG) toolforidentifyingfamilyriskofcolorectalcancer.Inorder and PON1 (55AA) are associated with younger age at PC to exploit the full potential of the questionnaire, it is onset in men from HPC families. The HOXB13 (G84E), advisable to use it with a medical or professional NOD2 (3020insC) and PON1 (55AA) are assiciated with perspective and assistance, because sensitivity and speciﬁ- shorter overall survival. city is signiﬁcantly lower compared to pedigree analysis. This study was supported by the found of the Collegium S.I.Steiner:None.B.Denecke:None.U.Berger:None. Medicum. V.J. Scheble: None. A. Dufke: None. M. Heise: None. P. Jarzemski: None. A. Junkiert- Czarnecka: None. A. Bąk: None. M. Pilarska-Deltow: 
P12 .115.C None. M. Borysiak: None. O. Haus: None. Immune checkpoint genes expression vary among paediatric an adult glioblastoma models 
P12 .113.A Evaluation of the clinical impact of a questionnaire- R. Mehrian-Shai1, D. Rogachevsky1, P. A. Stempor2,3, A. basedself-assessmentfamilyhistoryofcolorectalcancer Toren4,1, P. Dobosz5,1 compared to a professional pedigree survey 1Paediatric Haemato-Oncology, Oncology Department, S. I. Steiner1,2, B. Denecke2, U. Berger2, V. J. Scheble3, A. Cancer Research Centre, Sheba Medical Centre Hospital, Dufke1 Tel Hashomer,, Ramat Gan, Israel, 2School of Life Sciences,GurdonInstitute,DepartmentofGenetics,Tennis 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Court Rd, Cambridge CB2 1QN, Cambridge, United University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 2Com- Kingdom, 3The Wellcome Trust/CRUK Gurdon Institute, prehensive Cancer Center Tübingen-Stuttgart, University University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Rd,, Cambridge, Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3Department of United Kingdom, 4Oncology Department, Sackler Faculty Internal Medicine I, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübin- ofMedicine,TelAvivUniversity,6997801,TelAviv,Israel, gen, Germany 5Department of Haematology, Oncology and Internal Diseases, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Introduction:The“GermanCancerSociety”isprovidinga Poland questionnaire-based risk-score to delineate persons at risk forfamilialcolorectalcancer,intendedforeasyusebynon- Introduction: Glioblastoma (GB) is the most aggressive geneticists in daily routine with colon cancer patients. The malignantprimarybraintumourinbothchildrenandadults. intention is to support therapists in detecting patients that Regardlessofage,GBisincurableandassociatedwithpoor should undergo a genetic counselling regarding hereditary prognosis. Because of its highly invasive nature, it is tumour predisposition syndrome. The monocentric study impossible to remove all tumour cells during surgical aimed to analyse and evaluate the value of this score resection, making relapse inevitable, thus, GB treatment compared with a standard three-generation pedigree presents one of the greatest challenges. Molecular data analysis. reveal signiﬁcant differences between the paediatric and Material and Methods: Starting in June 2018, 100 adultGBs,e.g.recurrentsomaticmutationsinsomehistone colorectalcancerpatientstreatedattheUniversityTübingen variants.Theaimofthestudywastodeterminedifferences were randomly picked over a 14 months period. After in gene expression among paediatric and adult GB, sug- patients completed the questionnaire, a pedigree and a gesting the possible reason for failures of immunotherapy survey on the comprehensibility of the questionnaire were in GB. conducted. Pedigrees and available histopathological data Materials and methods: GB cell lines: paediatric were then evaluated according to the Bethesda and (KN
S42 , SF188, SF8628), adult (U87, U251, T98G), and526 J.delPicchia normal human astrocytes were used as a reference. RNA of SGC to date. These ﬁndings are replicated by a Trp53- was harvested and the gene expression level was deter- Rad51c-double-mutant cis mouse-model, which develops minedusing RT-PCR. Selectedgenes with proven involve- SGCs, but suppresses the characteristic Trp53-associated ment for immunotherapy response have been analysed. tumor spectrum. Results: Of all 27 analysed genes, only a small fraction Methods: Variants were identiﬁed using tumor panel seems to be expressed in GB, some of which were not nextgenerationsequencing.Phasingofthetwovariantswas analysedinGBliteraturesofar.Expressionofthoseseemto done using short tandem repeat analysis. be higher in paediatric GB, e.g. BACH2 and IL-6R. Conclusions: In line with the observations in Trp53- Conclusions:Mostofthegenesinvolvedintheformation Rad51c-doublemutantcismice,weproposethatthehuman of immunological synapse are signiﬁcantly down-regulated in cis co-occurrence of pathogenic T
P53  and RAD51C or not expressed at all in GB, providing the potential variantssubstantiallytransformstheLi-Fraumeniphenotype explanation for many failures of checkpoint inhibitors to a predisposition to SGC. immunotherapy in GB. However, differences in gene J.Hentschel:None.D.LeDuc:None.S.Neuser:None. expression might favour paediatric GB over adult GB as a M. Stiller: None. C. Meier: None. E. Jäger: None. R. candidate for future research leading to the successful Abou Jamra: None. K. Platzer: None. A. Monecke: immunotherapy. None. M. Ziemer: None. A. Markovic: None. H. Bläker: R. Mehrian-Shai: None. D. Rogachevsky: None. P.A. None. J.R. Lemke: None. Stempor: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Smart 
P12 .121.C Immune Ltd.. A. Toren: None. P. Dobosz: E. Ownership Cellfree tumour DNA analysis detects copy number Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual alterations in gastrooesophageal cancer patients. property); Modest; Smart Immune Ltd. K. Wallander1,2, J. Eisfeldt1, M. Lindblad1,2, D. Nilsson1,2, 
P12 .119.A K. Billiau1, H. Foroughi1, M. Nordenskjöld1, A. Leiden1,2, T
P53 withincisRAD51Cpathogenicvariantsmodulates E. Tham1,2 the T
P53 -dependent tumorigenesis to sebaceous gland carcinomas 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden J. Hentschel1, D. Le Duc1, S. Neuser1, M. Stiller1,2, C. Meier1, E. Jäger3, R. Abou Jamra1, K. Platzer1, A. Background:Analysis of cell-free tumour DNA, a liquid Monecke2, M. Ziemer4, A. Markovic4, H. Bläker2, J. R. biopsy, is a promising biomarker for cancer. We have Lemke1 performedaproof-ofprinciplestudytotesttheapplicability in the clinical setting, analysing copy number alterations 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center (CNAs) in plasma and tumour tissue from 44 patients with Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2Institute of Pathology, Uni- gastro-oesophageal cancer. versity Medical Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, Methods:DNA was isolated from blood plasma and a 3Department of Endocrinology, Nephrology, and Rheuma- tissuesamplefromeachpatient.Array-CGHwasappliedto tology, University Medical Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Ger- the tissue DNA. The cell-free plasma DNA was sequenced many, 4Department of Dermatology, Venereology and bylow-coveragewhole-genomesequencingusingaclinical Allergology,University ofLeipzigMedicalCenter,Leipzig, pipeline for non-invasive prenatal testing. WISECONDOR Germany and ichorCNA, two bioinformatic tools, were used to process the output data and were compared to each other. Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the tumor suppressor Results:Cancer-associated CNAs could be seen in 59% T
P53 causeLi-Fraumenisyndrome,acancerpredisposition (26/44) of the tissue biopsies. In the plasma samples, a syndrome with high risks for childhood- and adult-onset targetedapproachanalysing61regionsofspecialinterestin malignanciese.g.breastcancer,softtissueorbonesarcoma, gastro-oesophageal cancer detected cancer-associated brain tumors and adrenocortical carcinoma. CNAs with a z-score >5 in 11 patients. Broadening the Case description: We describe a 43-year-old male with analysistoawhole-genomeview,17/44patients(39%)had germlinepathogenicvariantsinT
P53 andRAD51Clocated cancer-associated CNAs using WISECONDOR and 13 incisonchromosome17,whohassofarnotdevelopedany (30%) using ichorCNA. Of the 26 patients with tissue- tumors of the LFS-spectrum. Instead, he developed a veriﬁedcancer-associatedCNAs,14(54%)hadcorrespond- sebaceous gland carcinoma (SGC), without detection of ing CNAs in plasma. Potentially clinically actionable mismatch repair deﬁciency, which is the only known causeAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 527 ampliﬁcations overlapping the genes VEGFA, EGFR and theTNMstage(P<0.007andP<0.004),vascularinvasion FGFR2 were detected in the plasma from three patients. (P<0.03andP<0.01),lymphinvasion(P<0.02andP< Conclusions:We conclude that low-coverage whole- 0.04)anddifferentiation(P<0.01andP<0.02)respectively. genomesequencingwithoutpriorknowledgeofthetumour The area under the ROC curve for the prognostic value of alterations could become a useful tool for cell-free tumour FGF10 was about 0.84 (95% conﬁdence interval, 0.771- DNA analysis of total CNAs in plasma from patients with 0.912). The results of linear regression analysis conﬁrmed a gastro-oesophageal cancer. negativecorrelationbetweenFGF10ASexpressionandsense K. Wallander: None. J. Eisfeldt: None. M. Lindblad: transcript. (r = −0.02) None. D. Nilsson: None. K. Billiau: None. H. Foroughi: Conclusion: The relationship between the expression None. M. Nordenskjöld: None. A. Leiden: None. E. levels of FGF10 and FGF10AS in tumoral and adjacent Tham: None. normal tissues indicated that sense and antisense FGF RNAs could be remarkable prognostic biomarkers for 
P12 .123.B achieving effective treatment and higher survival rates. A novel long non coding RNA FGF10AS and sense L. Rejali: None. M. Hashemi: None. H. Asadzadeh transcript are correlated with poor prognosis in color- Aghdaei: None. E. Nazemalhosseini: None. S. ectal cancer Seyedna: None. L. Rejali1,2, M. Hashemi3, H. Asadzadeh Aghdaei4, E. 
P12 .124.C Nazemalhosseini2, S. Seyedna1 Intragenic deletions within the putative tumor suppres- sor LSAMP are rare in primary neuroblastomas but 1Department of Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, common in cancer cell lines from diverse origin Islamic Azad University, North Tehran Branch, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Gastroenterology and Liver L. Mösle1, H. Christiansen2, S. Ackermann3, A. Weber1 Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for Gastro- enterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University 1Institute of Human Genetics, Justus-Liebig-Universität, of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Giessen, Germany, 2Department of Pediatric Oncology, 3Department of New Sciences, Tehran Medical Branch, Hematology and Hemostaseology, University Children´s IslamicAzadUniversity,Tehran, Iran, IslamicRepublicof, Hospital, Leipzig, Germany, 3Experimental Pediatric 4Basic and Molecular Epidemiology of Gastrointestinal Oncology University Children’s Hospital, Cologne, Ger- Disorders Research Center, Research Institute for Gastro- many enterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Introduction:IntragenicdeletionswithintheLSAMP-Gene on human chromosome 3 have been described in osteo- Introduction: Natural antisense transcripts (NATs) are sarcomas and osteosarcoma cell lines before. We asked for inclusively predicted to play a leading role in cancer pro- thefrequencyofintragenicLSAMPcopynumbervariations gression. Growth factors contribute to cell growth, differ- (CNVs) in primary neuroblastomas, neuroblastoma cell entiation, angiogenesis, and most signiﬁcantly tumor lines and cell lines from other cancer origin. formation in many types of cancers. The present study Materials and Methods: Speciﬁc real time PCRs were aimed to evaluate the relationship of ﬁbroblast growth established for genomic regions of the seven exons of the factor 10 (FGF10) and FGF10AS expression with clin- LSAMP-gene (NM_002338.4) and six genomic control icopathological features in CRC advancement. regions.Genomiccopynumberoftheseven LSAMP-exons Methods&Materials:Thisstudywasnavigatedon100 was calculated according to the 2−ΔΔCt method, using n = CRC tumoral and parallel adjacent normal tissues. The 20 control DNAs for calibration. LSAMP-exon CNVs were expression levels of FGF10 and FGF10AS were evaluated deﬁned with a 2−ΔΔCt value below (deletion) or above by the q-RT PCR method. For ﬁndings validation, (duplication)the2ndstandarddeviation(SD)ofthemeanof expression levels were measured in HCT116 and SW480 the controls. In total we investigated genomic DNA from n cell lines. Immunohistochemistry analysis was performed = 54 primary neuroblastomas, n = 12 neuroblastoma cell systematically for FGF10 expression appraisal. lines and n = 17 cell lines of other malignancies. Results: Asubstantialincreaseanddecrease in expression Results: We found CNVs in LSAMP in n = 14 (26%) levels were perceived in FGF10 (P < 0.001) and FGF10AS primaryneuroblastomas.Theﬁndingsdidnotcorrelatewith (P>0.02)intumoraltissues,incomparisonwiththeadjacent tumor stage, age at diagnosis or survival. Furthermore, we normal tissues. Besides, upregulation of sense and down- found distinct CNVs of one or multiple LSAMP-exons in n regulation of antisense were strongly correlated with = 16 out of the n = 29 cell lines investigated (55%).528 J.delPicchia Conclusions: In primary neuroblastomas LSAMP CNVs CDKN2A were co-deleted at frequencies of ~30% in were found only in a minority of cases. The clinical NSCLC but at 4.5% only in LCs. relevance for primary neuroblastoma development remains Conclusions: Molecular proﬁles in NSCLC and LC are unclear. The common ﬁnding of LSAMP intragenic CNVs substantially different and this may have direct conse- incelllinesofneuroblastoma andother cancerorigingives quences in the therapy decision process. For example, further evidenceofatumorsuppressor functionofLSAMP preferential loss of the CDKN2A locus in NSCLC could andmakesusassume,thatalossofLSAMPfunctionmight impacttheresponsetoimmunotherapydrugs.Incontrast,as be relevant for growth progression of tumor cells. MDM2 is a negative regulator of T
P53 , MDM2 ampliﬁca- L. Mösle: None. H. Christiansen: None. S. Acker- tion in NSCLC could indicate therapeutic efﬁcacy of mann: None. A. Weber: None. MDM2 inhibitors in p53 mutant tumours. C. Domingo-Sabugo: None. E. Starren: None. A. 
P12 .126.B Mandal: None. A. Nastase: None. L. Hoang: None. M. Distinct Landscapes of Genomic Alterations between Edwards: None. D. Morris-Rosendahl: None. E. Lim: Lung Carcinoids and Non-Small Cell Lung Cancers None. A. G. Nicholson: None. M. Lathrop: None. W. Cookson: None. M. Moffatt: None. C. Domingo-Sabugo1, E. Starren1, A. Mandal1, A. Nastase1, L. Hoang1, M. Edwards1,2, D. Morris- 
P12 .127.C Rosendahl1,2, E. Lim3, A. G. Nicholson1,4, M. Lathrop5, W. A Novel High Multiplex and ddPCRTM Based Technol- Cookson1, M. Moffatt1 ogy for Lung Cancer MutationScreening 1National Centre for Mesothelioma Research, Imperial Z. Yang1, Y. Wang1, P. Jagiello2, V. Ruiz3 College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics and Genomics Royal Brompton and Hareﬁeld 1Atila BioSystems, Inc, Mountain View, CA, United States, NHSFoundationTrust,London,UnitedKingdom,3Depart- 2Fujirebio Europe N.V., Zwijnaarde, Belgium, 3Fujirebio mentofMedicine,RoyalMarsdenHospital,London,United Europe NV, Ghent, Belgium Kingdom, 4Department of Pathology, Royal Brompton and Hareﬁeld NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5Depart- Introduction: Genetic mutations have been found in many ment of Human Genetics, McGill University-Génome different genes, including EGFR, KRAS, HER2, MET and Québec Innovation Centre, Québec, QC, Canada BRAF in the cancer cells of NSCLC patients. Testing for these mutations and tailoring therapy accordingly are Introduction: Genomic proﬁling of tumours has become a widely accepted as standard practice. Recently a novel crucial component of precision cancer medicine. A com- technology that enables high multiplex ampliﬁcation reac- parison of the molecular alterations between Non-Small tions was developed by Atila Biosystems. With the droplet Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) and Lung Carcinoid (LC) digital (ddPCRTM) technology, the Atila iCARE (RUO) subtypes however is missing and might further improve Lungcancermutationscreeningkitidentiﬁesandquantiﬁes patient stratiﬁcation. 99 possible mutation sites in two reaction wells in a rapid Methods: We sequenced 216 paired tumour-normal and cost-effective manner. samples using a combination of whole-exome and targeted Materials and Methods: Artiﬁcially prepared DNA capture sequencing. Additionally, all samples underwent samples were used to evaluate analytical sensitivity and Illumina OmniExpressExome (v1.6) SNP genotyping. speciﬁcity. We used enzymatically digested normal human Results:Out of 108lung cancerpatients, 22had LCand genomic DNA as negative DNA samples and mutation 86 NSCLC. Those with NSCLCs showed lower survival bearing plasmid DNA as spike in positive DNA. A serial time compared to LCs (P = 0.0148). Recurrent mutations dilution of mutations at 0%, 0.1%, 0.2%, 0.5%, 1%, and werefoundinT
P53 (81%),KRAS(34%),STK11(23%)and 10% were used to evaluate assay sensitivity. KEA
P1  (21%) in NSCLC but none of these genes were Results:TheiCARELungcancerscreeningassaytargets mutated in the LC subtype. Similarly, Copy Number (CN) 42 mutations in EGFR, 41 mutations in KRAS, 1 mutation burden was also higher in NSCLC than in LCs, with 10% in BRAF, 13 mutations in HER2, and 1 mutation in MET. and 5% of genome respectively harbouring CN alterations. The assay differentiates mutations from wildtype targets Recurrent ampliﬁcations in MYC (35%), SOX2 (20%) and basedonclusterlocationsintheddPCRTMtwo-dimensional MDM2 (11%) were found in NSCLC but only 18% of LC graphs.Allmutationswere successfullydetectedinserially patients showed MYC ampliﬁcations and none were diluted samples containing from 8% to 0.1% spiked detected in SOX2 and MDM2. Furthermore, MTAP and mutations.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 529 Conclusions:TheiCARELungCancerMutationScreen- addresses unmet needs in this patient group. Other ing Assay kit allows quantiﬁcation and screening for 99 institutions are encouraged to adopt a coordinated MDC NSCLC mutations of multiple samples in a rapid and cost- service for LS. We will continue to evaluate the MDC’s effective manner. The assay has reached 0.1% sensitivity impact on disease-speciﬁc outcomes in future reports. for mutation detection in all 5 genes and showed no false B.DeSouza:None.V.Tripathi:None.A.Shaw:None. positive in wildtype DNA samples. L. Izatt: None. S. Demartino: None. G. Tritto: None. P. Z. Yang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Ross: None. G. Mehra: None. A. Schizas: None. M. Atila BioSystems, Inc. Y. Wang: A. Employment (full or George: None. C. Firth: None. K. Hilario: None. C. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Atila BioSystems, Inc. P. Jagiello: Reinholtz: None. A. Kulkarni: None. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fujirebio Europe N.V.. V. Ruiz: None. 
P12 .131.A Lynch syndrome: gene variants in 35 patients and 
P12 .130.C cascade screening of individuals at-risk Design and implementation of the ﬁrst one-stop multi- disciplinary clinic for Lynch syndrome in the United H. P. Saraçoğlu1, E. Börklü Yücel2, S. Eraslan2, E. Kingdom (UK) Yılmaz3,4, U. Altunoğlu2,3, H. Kayserili2,3 B.DeSouza,V.Tripathi,A.Shaw,L.Izatt,S.Demartino,G. 1Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Health Tritto, P.Ross,G.Mehra,A.Schizas,M.George,C.Firth, Sciences, Koç University, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Diagnostic K. Hilario, C. Reinholtz, A. Kulkarni Center for Genetic Diseases, Koç University Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Medical Genetics Department, Koç Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, UniversitySchool ofMedicine(KUSOM),İstanbul, Turkey, United Kingdom 4Research Center for Translational Medicine (KUTTAM), Koç University, İstanbul, Turkey Introduction: The clinical beneﬁt of a multidisciplinary clinic(MDC)modelhasbeenwelldocumentedforavariety Lynch syndrome (LS), or hereditary nonpolyposis color- of medical conditions. We designed and implemented a ectalcancer(HNPCC),isadisordercausedbyheterozygous novel MDCfor Lynchsyndrome(LS)patients, whichaims mutations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes; which are to improve treatment outcomes, participation in research MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PM
S2 , and EPCAM. Pathogenic trials, and patient satisfaction. variantsinMLH1andMSH2arelinkedto50%and40%of Methods: From January 2019, LS patients in our region the cases, respectively. It is estimated that 1 in 300-440 were invited to attend a bimonthly MDC offering gene- individuals have LS. Besides colon cancer, patients have speciﬁc evidence-based cancer risk management. Patients increased risks of rectum, endometrium and ovarian can- could choose to see the gastroenterology, colorectal, cers.GeneticdiagnosisreliesonpanelscreeningandMLPA gynaecology, medical oncology, research, and clinical of MMR genes. The aim of the study is to identify LS psychology teams. Clinical outcomes and patient satisfac- causalvariantsinasmallcohortof35patientsfromTurkey. tion were evaluated over 12 months. In 35 patients tested for LS by sequence panel comprising Results:Thirty-eightLSpatientswereseen(8MLH1,18 94 genes associated with hereditary cancers/cancer sus- MSH2, 8 MSH6, 4 PM
S2 ); mean age was 46y (range: 20- ceptibility, 24 (68.6%) had a variant. Out of 24, nine var- 69y);15patientshadcolorectalcancer(39.5%).Twenty-six iants (37.5%) were pathogenic or likely pathogenic. While (68.4%) patients were female; 6 (23.1%) had undergone 4/9 (44.4%) of the variants resided in MLH1, two (22.2%) prior risk-reducing gynaecological surgery, 7 (27%) under- in MSH2; and one each MSH2, MSH6 and PM
S2 . VUS went surgery at our institution (n = 4) or locally (n = 3), distribution of the cohort was, four (26.7%) in MLH1, one and 13 (50%) were too young for surgery. Eight patients (6.7%) in MSH2, ﬁve (33.3%) in MSH6, four (26.7%) in (30.8%) transferred their colonoscopic surveillance to our PM
S2  and one (6.7%) in EPCAM. The results of germline care due to concerns about local provision. Nineteen panel screening for LS prompted genetic counselling. patients (73.1%) accessed psychological support and 10 Screening at-risk individuals in LS families, cascade patients(38.5%)wererecruitedtoresearchstudies.Twenty- screening, provides opportunity for cancer prevention and six patients (68.4%) completed a post-clinic satisfaction early detection, through follow-up protocols, intensive questionnaire; 96.2% (n = 25) rated their clinic experience surveillance, and/or prophylactic surgeries. as excellent or very good. H.P. Saraçoğlu: None. E. Börklü Yücel: None. S. Conclusions: We have designed and implemented an Eraslan:None.E.Yılmaz:None.U.Altunoğlu:None.H. effective multidisciplinary model of care for LS, which Kayserili: None.530 J.delPicchia 
P12 .132.B 
P12 .133.C The prevalence of MMR gene mutations in Estonian WholeExomeSequencingapproachidentiﬁedcandidate general population genetic modiﬁers of Lynch syndrome penetrance L. Roht1,2, S. Pajusalu2,3, U. Šamarina3, T. Kahre2,3, K. E. Dámaso1, A. Castillejo1, A. Sánchez-Heras2, M. Õunap2,3 Castillejo1, J. Soto2 1Tartu University Hospital, United Laboratories, Depart- 1ElcheUniversityHospital-FISABIO,Elche,Spain,2Elche ment of Clinical Genetics, Tallinn, Estonia, 2University of University Hospital, Elche, Spain Tartu, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Department of Clinical Genetics, Tartu, Estonia, 3Tartu University Hospi- -Introduction:Lynch syndrome (LS) is an autosomal- tal, United Laboratories, Department of Clinical Genetics, dominant cancer-predisposing syndrome caused by muta- Tartu, Estonia tions in mismatch repair genes (MMR). Germline altera- tionsinMMRgenesshowsasubstantiallevelofcancerrisk Introduction: Lynch syndrome is an autosomal-dominant heterogeneity. Identifying genetic modiﬁers of risk could cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline muta- help to achieve a more precise cancer risk prediction and tions of mismatch-repair (MMR) genes (MLH1, MSH2, more efﬁcient personalized surveillance programs. We MSH6,PM
S2 )andEPCAMgene.Atthemoment,thereare aimed to identify new potential genetic modiﬁers of LS 76 Lynch syndrome patients in Estonia. penetrance using Whole Exome Sequencing (WES). Aim: To determine the prevalence of MMR gene -MaterialsandMethods:Twenty-threeindividualsfrom mutations in Estonian general population. 15familiescarryingMMRpathogenicvariantsinMLH1or Material and methods: Data from Estonian Genome MSH2 were sequenced by WES. Fifteen patients were Center, 2420 genomes and 2356 exomes, was analyzed to diagnosedofLS-spectrumcancersbeforeage45and8were calculate the estimated prevalence of MMR and EPCAM healthy carrier individuals aged over 55. WES was gene variants. performed using SureSelect-Human-AllExonV6+UTR Results: Genome sequencing detected disease-causing (AgilentTechnologies) libraries and sequencing on variants in following genes: one in MSH2, two in PM
S2 , Illumina-NovaSeq6000 at 100X. Alignment and variant three in MSH6 and none in MLH1 and EPCAM genes. callingwasperformedbySureCallandvariantﬁlteringbya Exome sequencing revealed one disease-causing variant in custom pipeline for cohort analyses on AlissaInterpret MLH1, MSH6 and EPCAM genes and none in MSH2 and software (AgilentTechnologies). PM
S2  genes. Altogether eight mutations were found and -Results: Among 254.316 total called variants, we only based on that the estimated prevalence of MMR gene consideredthosepresentinover80%ofcancerpatientsand mutations in Estonian general population is 1:597 (Poisson less than 20% of healthy carriers, and found 20 genetic 95% CI: 1:1384 - 1:303). In Estonian patient cohort MLH1 variants in 18 genes [RR=2.571; 95%CI: 1.05-6.15; wasthemostprevalentgenemutated(34patients)followed p = 0.023]. Four variants were located in coding regions by MSH2 (24), MSH6 (10), PM
S2  (3) and EPCAM (2) and 16 in UTRs or intronic sequences. Population genes. From MMR genes MSH6 gene variants were frequency of all variants is over 20% (GnomAD). detected most frequently in our general population. The Intriguingly,17ofthesehavebeenalsoreportedassomatic prevalence of MSH6 mutations was also higher than mutations in tumors, 9 of them in colorectal adenocarci- described in the literature in our patient cohort. noma (ICGC). Conclusions: We present Estonian general population -Conclusions: We identiﬁed 20 new variants as possible prevalence of Lynch syndrome associated MMR gene riskmodiﬁerforLS.FurtherstudiesinlargercohortsofLS variantsbasedonEstonianGenomeCenterdata.According patients are needed to conﬁrm their cancer risk impact. toliterature,MMRgenevariantsprevalence intheworldis -Grant_ID: PI17/01082(ISCIII_AES) 1:370-450, which compared to Estonian data is ~1.5 times E. Dámaso: None. A. Castillejo: None. A. Sánchez- higher. Heras: None. M. Castillejo: None. J. Soto: None. Funding: Estonian Research Council grants PRG471, PUTJD827. 
P12 .134.A L.Roht:None.S.Pajusalu:None.U.Šamarina:None. GERMLINE BIALLELIC MUTATIONS IN MCM8 T. Kahre: None. K. Õunap: None. ARE ASSOCIATED WITH EARLY-ONSET LYNCH- LIKE SYNDROMEAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 531 M. Golubicki1, L. Bonjoch2, J. G. Acuña-Ochoa2, M. Díaz- Mendez:None. D.Cisterna: None. S.A. Schubert: None. Gay2,J.Muñoz2,M.Cuatrecasas2,T.Ocaña2,S.Iseas1,G. M. Nielsen: None. T. van Wezel: None. Y. Goldberg: Mendez1,D.Cisterna1,S.A.Schubert3,M.Nielsen3,T.van None. E. Pikarsky: None. J. Robbio: None. E. Roca: Wezel3,Y.Goldberg4,E.Pikarsky5,J.Robbio1,E.Roca1,A. None. A. Castells: None. F. Balaguer: None. M. Antelo: Castells2, F. Balaguer2, M. Antelo1, S. Castellvi-Bel2 None. S. Castellvi-Bel: None. 1Hospital of Gastroenterology "Dr. C. B. Udaondo", 
P12 .135.B Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, Implementing mainstreaming genetic testing of BRCA1/ 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2 for cancer patients in a Portuguese tertiary hospital: 4Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 5Hebrew preliminary results University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel M. Soeiro e Sá, J. Dupont, A. B. Sousa Introduction: Lynch-like syndrome (LLS) refers to indi- vidualswithmismatchrepair(MMR)-deﬁcienttumors,with Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, nopathogenicgermlinemutationidentiﬁedinaMMRgene. Centro Hospitalar e Universitário Lisboa Norte, Centro Biallelic somatic inactivation or cryptic MMR germline Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, mutations not detected during genetic testing have been Lisbon, Portugal proposed to be involved, although germline pathogenic genetic variants in highly penetrant genes other than MMR Aim: To implement a similar programme to the original genes could also be causing this phenotype. “Mainstreaming Cancer Genetics” of BRCA1/2 testing in Material and Methods: Sixteen patients with non- our Hospital, extending the criteria to include prostate polyposis LLS colorectal cancer (CRC) diagnosed before cancer. the age of 40 were selected for germline and tumor whole- Methods: We deﬁned patient selection criteria and exome sequencing. A knockout cellular model for a designed a protocol for patient referral, informed consent, candidate recessive gene was generated by CRISPR/Cas9 sample collection, and genetic testing. We centralized the and genetic variants were produced by mutagenesis and process through Genetics, making sure we had knowledge ectopically expressed. Subsequently, DNA damage, micro- of all patients included and their results. We promoted satelliteinstabilityandmutationalsignaturesweremonitored. educational sessions for oncologists, prepared informative Results: Two potentially pathogenic recessive MCM8 brochures for patients, and produced standard clinical germlinevariantsweredetectedinanearly-onsetCRCLLS reports to accompany laboratory test results. Statistical male patient with infertility problems. Two somatic MLH1 analysis was done after codiﬁcation. pathogenic genetic variants were also detected. DNA Results:SinceSeptember2018,106patientswerereferred, damage was evident for MCM8KO cells and the analyzed of whom 94 were included. The most frequent inclusion genetic variants. Microsatellite instability and mutational criteriawasbreastcancer(BC)<40years(n=32),followed signatures in MCM8KO cells were compatible with an byovariancancer(n=18),andtriplenegativeBC(n=15). involvement of MCM8 in MMR. Of 86 available results, we identiﬁed 9 (10.5%) pathogenic Conclusions:Some LLS CRC cases may be caused by variants (8 germinal/1 somatic) and 6 VUS (5 germinal/ underlying germline mutations in genes different than 1somatic).Allpatientsinwhomavariantwasidentiﬁedhad MMR genes, especially in patients with an early onset. ageneticsappointmentwithinameantimeof17.9±15.8days. We suggest MCM8 as a new gene involved in germline Themeanresponsetimeofgenetictestingwas51.7±9.8days. CRC predisposition and infertility with a recessive Themeantimefrompatientreferraltoﬁnalresults(senttothe inheritance pattern. oncologist) was 67.7 ± 18.8 days. Funding: Foundation Nelia et Amadeo Barletta, FJCI- Conclusions: We decreased our waiting time for urgent 2017-32593, CIBEREHD, 2019FI_B2_00203, Argentinian patients and lessened the burden of extra appointments in Cancer Institute, FIS/FEDER (17/00878), CERCA Pro- our clinic, while providing faster results that might gram, GRPRE 2017SGR21, GRC 2017SGR653, Dutch inﬂuence patients’ treatment. In the future we will assess Digestive Foundation (MLDS F
P13 -13), COST Action impact on patients and their families, degree of satisfaction CA17118. with the protocol (both from patients and oncologists), and M. Golubicki: None. L. Bonjoch: None. J.G. Acuña- review the classiﬁcation of previously identiﬁed VUS. Ochoa: None. M. Díaz-Gay: None. J. Muñoz: None. M. M. Soeiro e Sá: None. J. Dupont: None. A.B. Cuatrecasas: None. T. Ocaña: None. S. Iseas: None. G. Sousa: None.532 J.delPicchia 
P12 .137.A off value based on this SNP could increase the accuracy of The single nucleotide polymorphism rs2235503 C>A SMRP in the diagnosis of MPM. leads to increased MSLN gene transcription and it is R. Silvestri: None. P. Pucci: None. C. De Santi: None. strongly associated with the levels of SMRP in vivo I. Dell’Anno: None. S. Miglietta: None. A. Corrado: None. V. Nicolì: None. D. Marolda: None. M. Cipollini: R. Silvestri1, P. Pucci2, C. De Santi3, I. Dell’Anno1, S. None. E. Pellegrino: None. F. Morani: None. M. Miglietta4, A. Corrado5, V. Nicolì6, D. Marolda1, M. Evangelista: None. A. Bonotti: None. R. Foddis: None. Cipollini1, E. Pellegrino1, F. Morani1, M. Evangelista7, A. A. Cristaudo: None. F. Gemignani: None. S. Bonotti8, R. Foddis6, A. Cristaudo6, F. Gemignani1, S. Landi: None. Landi1 
P12 .138.B 1University of Pisa, Department of Biology, Pisa, Italy, Pathogenic variants in cancer predisposition genes in 2The Open University, School of Life Health and Chemical patients with stage II melanoma Sciences, Milton Keynes, United Kingdom, 3Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Department of Molecular and S. Armeanu-Ebinger1, T. Amaral2, T. Sinnberg2, C. Cellular Therapeutics, Dublin, Ireland, 4IRCCS San Roggia1,F.Hilke1,3,H.Niessner2,I.Bonzheim4,T.Haack1, Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, San Raffaele Telethon Institute O. Rieß1, C. Garbe2, C. Schroeder1 for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), Milano, Italy, 5University of Milan,DepartmentofBioscience,Milano,Italy,6University 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, of Pisa, Department of Translational Research and of New Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of Dermatology, Tübin- Surgical and Medical Technologies, Pisa, Italy, 7CNR, gen, Germany, 3Department of Dermatology, Venereology Institute of Clinical Physiology (IFC), Pisa, Italy, 8Uni- and Allergology, Berlin, Germany, 4Institute of Pathology versity Hospital of Pisa, Preventive and Occupational and Neuropathology, Tübingen, Germany Medicine, Pisa, Italy Introduction: Melanoma is an aggressive cutaneous tumor Introduction: The “soluble mesothelin-related peptide” with an increasing incidence. Sun exposure is one of the (SMRP)isoneofthemostpromisingdiagnosticbiomarkers major risk factors. Recent studies indicate that 6-7 % of all for malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM). However, melanoma patients carry apathogenic germline variantina several factors can affect SMRP levels, hampering its cancerpredispositiongene(CPG)whiletheassociationwith accuracy and limiting its usage in the clinical practice. In melanomaisoftenunknown.Wescreenedalargecohortof the present work, we explored the hypothesis that genetic stageIImelanomapatientsforpathogenicgermlinevariants variants within the MSLN promoter could represent a con- in CPGs. founding factor able to affect SMRP levels. Materials and Methods: DNA from paired tumor and Methods: Blood samples from a cohort of 70 MPM and normalFFPEtissueof196patientswithstageIImelanoma 689 non-MPM subjects were analyzed to assess the was sequenced with a NGS custom enrichment panel association between the SMRP levels and four haplotypic covering693genes,selectedpromotorandintronicregions. variants of MSLN promoter: haplotype #1 (reference), #2, We used megSAP (https://github.com/imgag/megSAP) for #3, #4. Functional studies were carried out in Met-5A and NGSdataanalysisandgermlinevariantsin152CPGswere Mero14 cell lines using a ﬂuorescence reporter assay to ﬁltered for population allele frequency (AF < 1 %) and assess the differences between the activity of the four classiﬁed according to ACMG guidelines. variants of the MSLN promoter and to identify the SNPs Results: We detected pathogenic or likely pathogenic responsible for the observed differences. variants in recessive and dominant CPGs in 18 out of 196 Results: Carriers of haplotype #2 showed a signiﬁcantly patients(9.2%, including ATM, BRCA1, CHEK2,MSH2, higher level of SMRP when compared with the reference PALB2,SDHA).Asecondhitintumortissuewasdetected group (p-value < 10−5). The functional study conﬁrmed the in one patient carrying an ATM mutation. Tumors with role of haplotype #2, which caused a 41% increase in the germline pathogenic variants in MSH2 did not reveal reporterﬂuorescenceintensity(p-value=6x10−4).Theinvitro microsatellite instability. Besides relevance for surveillance analysisalsoledtotheidentiﬁcationofrs2235503C>Aasthe and families, ﬁve pathogenic variants affected DNA repair SNP responsible for the increased activity of haplotype #2 genes with potential relevance for therapy. (35% increase in the reporter intensity; p < 10−5). Conclusions: Pathogenic germline variants in CPGs in Conclusions:Therarevariantofrs2235503C>Aleadsto stageIImelanomapatientsarefrequentandofrelevancefor an increase of SMRP levels through the enhancement of surveillance, families and potentially therapy. Further MSLNexpression.Theestablishmentofapersonalizedcut- studies are needed to investigate whether pathogenicAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:Interactivee-Posters 533 variants in CPGs that are not known to be related to DNA repair, telomere maintenance, pigmentation, nevus melanoma contribute to melanoma development. count and hereditary predisposition to other cancers and S. Armeanu-Ebinger: None. T. Amaral: B. Research subsequently expand our analysis to the whole exome. The Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and family history isre-examined according to results. pendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant; Results: We have analyzed data from 10 patients. In 1 Novartis. T. Sinnberg: B. Research Grant (principal patient we have identiﬁed one novel pathogenic variant in investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants CDKN2A. Aggregate data per gene, family of genes and as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Novartis. C. pathways are catalogued and studied. Roggia: None. F. Hilke: None. H. Niessner: None. I. Conclusions: The present study is ongoing, and we aim Bonzheim: None. T. Haack: None. O. Rieß: B. Research to deﬁne the prevalence of known high penetrance genes Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and andtoidentifypotentialcandidatevariants/genesimplicated pendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant; in cases of early onset of melanoma. Novartis. C. Garbe: B. Research Grant (principal investi- E. Chatziioannou: None. K. Kypraiou: None. G. gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellas Vatsellas: None. M. Plaka: None. T. Loupis: None. D.M. grantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;Novartis.C.Schroeder: Vrachnos: None. D. Polydorou: None. D. Chatzopoulos: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or None.V.Chasapi:None.G.Champsas:None.D.Thanos: consultant and pending grants as well as grants already None. A. Stratigos: None. P. Makrythanasis: None. received); Signiﬁcant; Novartis. 
P12 .140.A 
P12 .139.C Patients with germline pathogenic variants in DNA Whole exome sequencing of patients with early onset repair genes show increased susceptibility to asbestos- melanoma (age < 40 years) induced malignant pleural mesothelioma E.Chatziioannou1,K.Kypraiou2,G.Vatsellas1,M.Plaka2, M.Sculco1,M.LaVecchia1,E.Casalone2,D.Ferrante3,A. T. Loupis1, D. M. Vrachnos1, D. Polydorou2, D. Aspesi1, S. Brossa1, M. Clavenna1, A. Allione2, F. Grosso4, Chatzopoulos1,V.Chasapi2,G.Champsas2,D.Thanos1,A. R.Libener5,A.Muzio6,O.Rena7,C.Casadio7,G.Baietto7, Stratigos2, P. Makrythanasis1,3 S.Parini7,D.Mirabelli8,9,C.Magnani3,G.Matullo2,9,10,I. Dianzani1,9 1Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2First Department of Dermatology 1Department of Health Sciences, Università del Piemonte and Venereology, National and Kapodistrian University of Orientale,Novara,Italy, 2Department ofMedicalSciences, Athens,MedicalSchool,AndreasSyggrosHospitalforSkin Università di Torino, Torino, Italy, 3CPO-Piemonte e Unit and Venereal Diseases, Athens, Greece, 3Department of of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, Università del Genetic Medicine and Development, Medical School, PiemonteOrientale,Novara,Italy,4MesotheliomaUnit,AO University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland SS Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy, 5Pathology Unit, AO SS Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Introduction:Cutaneousmelanoma developsfrequentlyin Alessandria, Italy, 6Division of Medical Oncology, Ospe- people over the age of 50 and can arise sporadically or in dale Santo Spirito, Casale Monferrato (AL), Italy, 7Thor- the setting of a germline predisposition in approximately acic Surgery Unit, AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, 10% of cases. During the last years high penetrance genes Italy, 8Unit of Cancer Epidemiology, CPO-Piemonte e have been discovered and genes related to nevus count and Università di Torino, Torino, Italy, 9Interdepartmental pigmentationhavebeenlinkedtomelanoma.Howeveronly CenterforStudiesonAsbestosandotherToxicParticulates 50%ofthepatientsthatdemonstratepositivefamilyhistory “G. Scansetti”, Università di Torino, Torino, Italy, 10Med- carry germline mutation in the above-mentioned genes, ical Genetics Unit, AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza suggestingthatothergenesoraninterplayofgenesmaybe di Torino, Torino, Italy implicated in its carcinogenesis. Additionally, the pre- valence of pathogenic variants in these genes in cases of Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a early onset of melanoma is poorly studied. rare and aggressive cancer caused by exposure to asbestos. A Materials and Methods: We performwhole exome roleforinheritedpredispositionwashypothesizedsincethe10- sequencingofDNAextractedfrombloodof80patientswith 17%ofindividualsexposedtohighlevelsofasbestosdevelop earlyonsetmelanoma(diagnosisoccurringbefore40yearsof MPM and some families present multiple MPM cases. age). We ﬁrst assess a panel of genes containing genes Materials and Methods: We investigated 107 cancer- hitherto associated with familial melanoma, genodermatoses, predisposing genes in 144 MPM patients (16 familiar,534 J.delPicchia 128 sporadic) by NGS. Lifelong asbestos exposure was for the development of ALL in a cohort of Tunisian quantiﬁedin131patients.Moreover,weperformedWESin children. two families, each with three MPM cases. Methods: This study was conducted in 28 children with Results: We identiﬁed 17 pathogenic truncating variants ALL treated with the EORTC 58951. Clinical and (PTVs, in PALB2, BRCA1, FANCI, ATM, SLX4, BRCA2, biologicaldatawererecorded.GenomicDNAwasextracted FANCC, FANCF, PM
S1 , XPC, SBDS, CDKN2A, VHL, from whole venous blood and genotyping were carried out BRI
P1 ) and 27 rare missense variants (evaluated as with restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). pathogenic by 6 in silico prediction tools), mostly in genes Results: The allelic frequency of MTHFR 677T and involved in homologous recombination repair that repairs A1298C was 14.3% and 42.8% respectively. A particular double strand breaks in DNA caused by asbestos. PTVs history of relapse and toxicity during methotrexate therapy carriers represent 11% of the patients and show a was reported in ALL patients with the MTHFR 677T statistically signiﬁcant lower asbestos exposure in compar- variant. ison tonon-mutatedpatients (p=0.0003). Only oneofthe Conclusions: Despite the limit of this study; our ﬁnding six patients analyzed by WES, showed a PTV in PM
